freeman.dyson

Freeman Dyson (1923-2020), who was born in England, moved to Cornell University after graduating from Cambridge University with a BA in Mathematics. He subsequently became a professor and worked on nuclear reactors, solid state physics, ferromagnetism, astrophysics and biology. He published several books and, among other honours, was awarded the Heineman Prize and the Royal Society's Hughes Medal.

So I grew up in a middle class family in England, which meant in those days we had four servants, a cook, a housemaid, a nurse maid and a gardener, and our friends all belonged to that class of society. Looking back, it's extraordinary how comfortable we were. And all our families were school teacher families. My father was a school teacher, and we lived in this little community in Winchester. It was a private school but the teachers were of amazingly high quality and lived in what would now be considered rather lavish style, but in those days they didn't have all that much money, the servants mostly got very little wages, but they got free board and lodging and it was a little bit like the ante-bellum South, the slaves knew their place but we considered them to be happy.

I was born '23, and I... the earliest memory, I would say, is probably '26 or '27. I do remember the total eclipse of the sun in 1927 which was an important event because my father was so mean he wouldn't actually drive north to Yorkshire to the track of totality, so we saw it only three quarters total, for which I was profoundly angry at him and vowed that I would see the next one in 1999, which is now just coming up. So that's perhaps my first memory of something of scientific interest. My father was a musician and my mother was a lawyer and... but they both of them were very much interested in current events, including science. My father had a lot of popular science books on the shelves which I read avidly, and there was a joke in Punch which I never understood why it was so funny; it was of a little kid lying engrossed in a book and  the mother says to him: 'Where's your sister?' and the little kid says: 'Oh, somewhere in the absolute elsewhere' and that was a quote from Eddington's book which I happened to be reading at the time. That was the kind of life we led, pretty... on the whole a very supportive environment for a young kid who was interested in all sorts of things.

My sister is three years older and we were always very close and still are, so... and since my mother was 43 when I was born, it was more... my mother was more like a grandmother and my sister was more like a mother. That's also remained true ever since that... the real warmth I had from my sister; the intellectual stimulus I had from my mother. But I remember it was my sister's bed that I crawled into in... when I was feeling lonely at night.
[Q] And your father was a professor of music at Winchester or what...?
Yes, we didn't call him a professor, he was just the... he was in fact the head of the music department, but he was just... the teachers at that school were called dons, so he was just a don like the others and he made £1000 a year. I remember the fact that his salary was £1000, which in those days was a very good salary, but nothing on my uncle who was a lawyer, and made £5000, so we were not at all wealthy as compared with lawyers and doctors.

We actually were very well off during the Depression and the town of Winchester was very much protected from any sort of... cold winds from the outside. It's a very ancient town. It was the ancient capital of England, so the chief local industry was archaeology. We were constantly being dug, and people found wonderful prehistoric and historic remains. It was an old Roman town and...
[Q] With a beautiful cathedral.
Yes, it has this grand cathedral which is from the 11th and 12th centuries, and many of the buildings in the city are medieval, and the school itself has been there for 600 years and the buildings are still the old buildings. So we lived in these wonderful medieval buildings.

I was reading at four and... I... of course the schools were quite unlike American schools, we... the little school I went to at four years old was actually a serious school, it wasn't just kindergarten, so we were expected to be reading at four. And we went ahead very fast. It was a delightful school. It was about six or seven children all together with a lady called Miss Turner in charge, and she was just superb. That was the kind of teaching that every four year old should have.
[Q] And your proclivity in mathematics showed itself already at that stage?
Yes, I was always fascinated with numbers and I used to sit down calculating powers of two, and just enjoying calculating, from a very early age. That's something that's never left me, just this joy of playing around with numbers.
[Q] And your father and mother recognised this?
Yes. They were very supportive and it was particularly lucky that I didn't inherit their particular tastes. So I... I was never a question of my becoming a musician or becoming a lawyer. It was clear I was something different from them, and so they never tried to push me into their own mould.

The name Freeman comes from?
My uncle Freeman who died in World War I. That was the big tragedy in the family. He had been a classical scholar ­– also a schoolmaster – but a... really a high level classical scholar who... wrote about Hesiod. Hesiod was his particular author and he... I think he'd written a book about Hesiod or at least an edition of Hesiod. He was a serious scholar and he loved teaching kids Latin and Greek classics.
And this is your mother's brother?
That was my mother's brother, so... and so he and my mother were very close friends, and he was also a colleague of my father's and... so that's how they were brought together. After my... after Uncle Freeman died they got married and... so that's how we got... that's how we originated. So the memory of Freeman... the memory of Uncle Freeman was very strong in the family. And I did a lot of Latin and Greek in school and also enjoyed it. It was... I had a... a keen interest in languages, not a... particularly as spoken languages but as literature. So I never was much good at spoken languages, but I loved to read Latin and Greek and... of course, they were taught purely as literary languages, not as spoken languages.

Then I went to what, in England, is called a prep school, which is a boarding school. Which was a very... this was the worst period of my life; from the ages eight till 12, I was at this school which was modelled on Dicken's Dotheboys Hall, which was a... really a brutal place. 
[Q] Away from home.
That was away from home, and so I was boarding there and I was utterly miserable for most of the time, and being tortured more by the boys than by the teachers. I think the teachers on the whole liked me and the boys hated me because I was smarter than they were. So I was a member of a small group of intellectuals who were persecuted. So that's also part of my life and I learned at that point that most people are very stupid and brutal and one shouldn't expect too much. 
[Q] And it's traumatic because you were wrenched from your home at this early age, I mean you're eight and...
Yes. I don't say it was all that traumatic because it was the normal thing and most of the boys at the school were in the same situation. We were... it was... it grew up during the 19th century I suppose, because so many of the British families were living in India and such places so they sent their kids home to be educated in boarding schools. So the boarding school was accepted as very much... the natural order of things for middle class families, and so though... it was ... it wasn't expected that one would enjoy it. I mean the whole point was, in fact, to toughen you up, and so the bullying and brutality was not actually regarded as particularly harmful, it was just building your character.

[Q] Prep school meant it really literally prepared you to...
It was preparing you for then... for what the English call the public school which is really the private school, which was where my father was teaching and which happened to be where we lived and... so when I came home to Winchester, as a boarder in the... at the school in Winchester, I wasn't living at home, but I was with a family close by. And Winchester was, of course, an intellectual hot house. We were the... the boys were highly selected, there was a very stiff competitive exam to get in, the intellectual standards were very high, and so we just enjoyed ourselves enormously there. That was for me... also a very lucky thing.

I'm always good at exams, and I'm happy some of my kids inherited that. It's a great... it's a very useful skill just to be able to sail through exams. My youngest daughter just took her medical boards, and others... all the other young doctors were struggling and apprehensive and she just was not taking it particularly hard and sailing through. So it's something we seem to be born with. So I've been adaptable in that way. And then at Winchester the teachers were wise enough to leave the kids very much alone. We had rather few hours in class and we learned more from each other than we did from the teachers, especially in math and science.
[Q] And you had some fairly able people who made likewise illustrious careers.
Yes, there was a gang of four, which... which I was particularly lucky to be one of, and there was myself and, now, Sir James Lighthill who is a very distinguished aerodynamicist; and there's Christopher and Michael Longuet-Higgins who were brothers. Christopher became a theoretical chemist and Michael Longuet-Higgins is an oceanographer, and all four of us became Fellows of the Royal Society and had distinguished careers. So that was a tremendous piece of luck. We're all very different. No two of us have been doing similar things, but we did have the enormous stimulus of growing up together.

[Q] By then mathematics was the primary passion among the four of you or...?
It was primary passion for Lighthill and me and then... the Longuet-Higginses I think were rather broader, and of course Christopher was a very, very capable musician and his passion was really music more than anything else. And... and Michael was a great artist with building models. He... he's extremely good with his hands. Still is. So we... we built models of mathematical figures and polyhedra and... which still are to be found in the museum in Winchester. And we had just intense interests also in literature and politics and everything else.

Somehow I fell in love with Russian because there was a teacher at the school - that was something that I did get from one of the teachers - a man called Leslie Russon who was primarily a French teacher, but he happened also to have a Russian wife and he knew Russian pretty well, so he gave Russian classes as part of the school curriculum, which only a few boys took. So I got interested in that and then I got... just really I fell in love with the language, and met a lady who had grown up in St. Petersburg, and so she gave me private conversation classes in Russian, which I found just fascinating and she told endless stories about St. Petersburg. Of course at that time St. Petersburg - we considered it as something very remote and historic, never dreamed that we would hear that name spoken again as attached to a living city.
[Q] And... you actually sit down and translate Vinogradov. Am I right?
That's right. Vinogradov was a Russian number theorist who wrote a book on number theory which I translated into English just for my own amusement - I still have it somewhere here on the shelf - and with loving care I went through the whole book. So I was always delighted to have not too demanding tasks to do. Just as today I love to fold pages for the Running Club newsletter, which is what I was doing this morning - it was the same with translating Vinogradov. I'd never imagined that I would publish it: it was just for fun.
[Q] But, the fact that you're now, what, 14, 15 years old, studying Vinogradov by yourself. 
That was a little later. I think the Vinogradov was probably when I was 16.

We had this library at the school which is - I visit there from time to time - the library is still excellent. It's in an old building with the right kind of musty smell of old books and there was there a great treasure house of books which, as far as we knew, nobody was aware of except us, I mean just the four boys. And Lighthill actually discovered this Cours d'analyse, which is a classic textbook of analysis written by a French mathematician, Jordan, about 1900 I suppose, in three volumes and they are still there in the school library - I verified that recently - and nobody knows how they got there. It seems very strange for anybody to put such a heavy textbook, all written in French, for English schoolboys - but anyway, it was there and Lighthill discovered it, and so we worked our way through the three volumes, one after the other. And that was opening the gates of mathematics in a way that very few people had that chance. And only many, many years later we found out that Hardy [Godfrey Harold Hardy], the great mathematician whom we afterwards got to know in Cambridge, had also read Jordan's Cours d'analyse as a young man and been inspired by it, and it also happened that he was a boy in the same school. So almost certainly it was he who put the books there, because, typical of Hardy, he did that anonymously. There was no record in the library that he had given it. There was also the Principia Mathematica of Whitehead and Russell which was not so illuminating but also great fun to go through. And that's also three fat volumes, and it's trying to reduce the whole of mathematics to logic. It's extremely pedantic, just full of enormously complicated constructions to reduce complicated things to the simplest components. And it was a monumental failure. It was demolished in the end, of course, by Gödel's theorem [Kurt Gödel]. The idea was that one could construct a consistency proof for mathematics by reducing it to logic, and Gödel proved that that is impossible. The whole thing was based on an illusion, but nevertheless it was fun to go through. So it gave us a feeling for what the foundations of mathematics were all about.  And with an inkling that this is probably not the way to do it?  Yes. We certainly understood that, I think, after going through the three volumes. There was clearly a difference between Whitehead and Russell on the one hand, and Jordan on the other. Jordan was really doing real mathematics, and Whitehead and Russell were not.

We did have classes in physics and chemistry at the school and there was a good physics teacher who was very pedestrian, but still I mean quite sound; and a chemistry teacher who was a genius, who never taught us any chemistry but read poetry instead, because he said you get the chemistry out of books and we didn't really have enough apparatus to do real chemistry. I mean the kind of the experiments we could do would be only Mickey Mouse experiments. So he decided just to use the time to read us all the modern poetry which he was in love with, and I remember especially he was in love with Cecil Day Lewis and he read us the poems of Day Lewis which I still love. His name was Eric James, and it was extraordinary luck to have him as a teacher, because he afterwards became a great man and in fact he ended his life in the House of Lords as Baron James of Rusholme and he was the founder of the University of York and did enormous public service. But at that time he was a humble schoolmaster; because of the Depression, no doubt, he couldn't get an academic job, but he loved teaching and he gave us everything he had, which was poetry. And so my taste for literature comes very largely from him. And in the meantime, I learned chemistry from Christopher Longuet-Higgins who was already much more of an expert and more excited about chemistry than Eric James. And I remember Christopher bringing to Winchester some crystals of stannic iodide which he had made, which is the most marvelous stuff. It is a brilliant scarlet colour and it makes these beautiful scarlet crystals, and they're also extremely heavy. If you have a little bottle full of it, it feels like lead. So that kind of chemistry I found delightful, just the sort of details of the actual stuff, rather than the theory that lay behind it. I remember the joy when, here in Princeton, Willard Libby came on a visit once and brought along another little bottle of chemicals, which also was very heavy, and that was barium xenate, which was barium xenon oxide, which of course was an absolute revelation because nobody imagined that xenon could have compounds, being an inert gas. And it was sometime in the 1950s these compounds were discovered, and barium xenate is just such an ordinary stuff. It's a sort of heavy white crystals which are completely stable, they don't show any signs of anything strange and there it is. If you heat them up of course the xenon comes bubbling off.

I was going to say about chemistry that Roald Hoffmann I got to know quite recently, who is a chemist who writes poetry and is a great character, he has the same attitude toward chemistry that I do. I mean it is the beauty of the details rather than any over-arching theory. In that way it's very different from physics, and I had a taste for it. My taste is always more for the details than for the big picture.
[Q] And this will be true for astronomy and...?
Yes, and biology too. So I was interested in biology, rather as a feeling that I would like to be a doctor. I had an uncle who was a medical doctor whom I was very close to, and he was my favourite godfather and he had been a medical officer in the Sudan in the days of the British Empire and had an enormous scope for his activities there. He had a country the size of Texas or, I forget, twice as large as Texas - I mean it's a huge country - and he was in charge of all the medical services for the whole country, which meant, in fact, that he created the medical services more or less himself. And so he inspired me with the idea that being a doctor was a great idea.  So I had very often the ambition of becoming a doctor and of course for that I needed to know biology, and I went so far as to collect crayfish from the local river and dissect them, and that convinced me that I wasn't really cut out to be a biologist. I had a very hard time dissecting these creatures and finding out which piece was which. But I read a lot of biology and particularly the huge Science of Life book which is sixteen hundred pages long, by Wells, Huxley and Wells. That's a marvelous book; it has the whole of biology in one volume, and again it's all about details and not about theory. It has everything in it from the smallest bacteria to human society and ecology and... the whole thing. So that was a very serious interest, but I discovered that my talents were perpendicular to my interests, that's always been true, so my talent was for mathematics; my interests were much broader, but in the end I always came back to mathematics because that's what I could do and everything I really could do was mathematics.

I certainly read Jules Verne at the prep school. They had a quite decent library; although it was such a barbaric place, the library was good and I could always escape to the library, and so in a way the more barbaric it was, the better the library seemed to be. And so I read a lot of Jules Verne there, and they had a good encyclopaedia there which was actually a wonderful source of knowledge. I remember in the encyclopaedia there I learned about electrons and protons. They had an article about electrons and protons, and I was very frustrated because it turned out... I mean, they had this long article all about electrons and protons they told us everything about electrons and nothing about protons, and I decided right then that I should find out more about protons. I mean it was clear that in fact at that time almost nothing was known about protons, so that was clearly the way to go. So that came very early, that feeling that there was something unknown; that electrons were really to a great extent done and protons clearly were not. Which, of course, was true at that time. So that library had in it, certainly Jules Verne and probably - I don't know whether they had Wells, but certainly I discovered Wells pretty soon afterwards and I read the classic Wells books, Tono-Bungay and The Time Machine and The Island of Doctor Moreau, all these marvelous books which are great as literature as well as being...
[Q] imaginative
Well, rather mediocre science.  I mean Wells was a far greater writer than he was a scientist.

The Winchester system was very good, especially for me, because every term - they had three terms in the year - each term you had exams at the end of the term, and the boy with the highest marks in the exams would get a prize, which meant I always got a prize, each time, so three times a year. And you were free to choose. The prize was fifteen shillings which was probably worth something like thirty dollars at present day prices, and it had to be spent on books, but otherwise you were free to choose. It meant you could buy a couple of very good books for fifteen shillings at that time. And so I bought these books which I still have on the shelves and they were a great collection. We had fortunately a bookshop just by the college which could get anything you asked for, and they supplied me with book catalogues. So I had all the catalogues from the various book publishers and I went through them very carefully picking out what looked good, and then the books would arrive. So from those I got Eddington...
[Q] Relativity?
General theory of Relativity, yes - that was later. I think the first thing I got from Eddington was The Nature of the Physical World, I mean the more popular things, and certainly the... I don't remember them all but in any case, the most important perhaps was Joos Theoretical Physics, and that was translated from German, an excellent text book of theoretical physics which I was very lucky to get hold of because it wasn't normally used - I mean it was a rather unusual book for that time - but it actually covered theoretical physics extremely well because it had actually been written around 1930 or so and it had a good deal of the more modern stuff in it. So that was where I learned theoretical physics, in fact it was mostly where I learned physics altogether. So it gave me, I think, a very good taste of what physics is about.

The head of the maths department at Winchester was a man called Clement Durell who had really a very good understanding of the situation. I mean he was a good mathematician himself, he had done some serious work, and he'd written a marvelous little text book called Readable Relativity, which is relativity for schoolboys and is probably the best elementary text on relativity that was ever written, because it's written for schoolboys and he knew schoolboys very well, so it's full of little exercises that you could test whether you'd actually understood what the book was saying. So it's a very good learning book, and he published a lot of text books, he was famous for his text books, but he wasn't a great classroom teacher and his lectures were very dull. I mean the classes were dull, and he never was particularly interested in the bright kids. He was most interested in teaching the kids who were harder to reach, which was certainly his job. So he left us - the bright kids - he left alone, but he did understand that we needed something more, and so he imported a young mathematician from University College in Southampton which was only twelve miles down the road. University College, which is now the University of Southampton, had a fairly good math department, and the young man that he persuaded to come was Daniel Pedoe, who's remained a lifelong friend. He's unfortunately in bad health now in Minnesota, but he was a very important influence. He was a really high class mathematician; in fact, he had been at the Institute for Advanced Study here in Princeton before he came to Winchester. He was here at the Institute in the 1930s. He was a good geometer and he had a passion for geometry. So he came to Winchester once a week to give me private tuition, and so I learned a tremendous lot from him, and the book he gave me to study was Severi's Algebraic Geometry  which was originally written in Italian and translated into German. So I had to struggle through Severi in German to learn algebraic geometry, so it was good for my German as well as for my mathematics. That was just the finest introduction to mathematics. Severi was a very imaginative kind of mathematician. He had no use for rigour, and all the theorems he proved weren't really proved and had to be done over again by other people, but nevertheless they were right, and so he had this marvelous imagination for complex varieties in high dimensions. And he was also an out and out fascist. He was a personal friend of Mussolini and a great tyrant in Italy. Afterwards he was kicked out because he had been one of the leaders of the fascist movement in Italy, so he was kicked out of his high positions at the end of his life. But still, he was a great man for all that. It's an example of the fact that you can be a great man and also a bastard.

I was really very lucky. Of course I hated the class, well, the snobbery of the place. It was a very, very intensely intellectual place and there was in an intense intellectual snobbery there and a social snobbery as well. I mean we were all essentially middle class kids and we looked down not only at the working class, we looked down at the business class as well. In England the antagonism has always been very strong between the intellectual middle class and the business middle class. That's one of the causes of social problems in England. It's probably why Margaret Thatcher was always so down on the universities, because she came from the business middle classes. But in any case, we were in this very narrow intellectually snobbish surroundings, and surrounded with high medieval walls, literally, and so I always felt an intense hatred for the system, although I loved a lot of the people and I loved the life in the college, but nevertheless I had a very bad conscience about it and wanted to tear it down and let in some daylight from outside. So I always had this very ambivalent feeling about it. I hated a great deal of this sort of "old school tie" atmosphere that surrounded it, and I found only about fifty years later I've started to lose this hatred for it because, I mean, I've just become mellowed with time.

Another of the school prizes which I chose was Piaggio's [An Elementary Treatise On] Differential Equations, which was again an extremely useful book because it taught us about differential equations but with the help of a lot of exercises, so that every chapter had a huge list of exercises at the end which you had to go through if you really wanted to understand the stuff, which for me was just great because I can't learn without actually doing something myself. So I actually worked through this book in the school vacation. I did seven hundred of these exercises, working night and day all through the holidays and my mother was quite anxious about me, she thought I was becoming too deeply involved in this and she tried to persuade me that there were other things that I should get interested in life besides mathematics. But I was so passionately involved, so I continued until I got through the seven hundred exercises and then I listened to her.
[Q] And you went through the exercises while on vacation with them, on the sea shore?
Well, we had a little house, a summer house that my father actually had built, which was down on the south coast of England in a very muddy and secluded place. He liked to be alone because he was a composer and he didn't get much time to compose during the school terms, so the holidays were for him the main time when he could compose music and he needed really peace and quiet for that. So we had this very quiet and secluded time during the school holidays. And it was lucky for me that I had Piaggio to keep me happy. There wasn't much else to do at this little place on the sea shore, it wasn't a sandy beach, it was just mudflats. So it was the kind of place where crowds wouldn't be likely to come.

My father was always a much more remote figure in a way. I mean, he enjoyed having a bright son and he would boast about all my exams and all the prizes I won and so on but I was for him more of a source of pride but not so much a personal friend. But my mother was very close and she taught me a lot about life and, of course, she taught me that friendship and human relationships were more important than books, and that if I buried myself in books all the time and did nothing but mathematics, I'd miss out on what was most important in life, and in the end I would be sour and disappointed if I discovered too late that I had missed out on love and affection and all the other things. And so she taught me about other kinds of literature, and in particular she was very fond of quoting Goethe's Faust; that was for her one of the main sort of sources of wisdom, this fellow who makes his pact with the devil for knowledge and power and neglects his friends and his girlfriend in particular and just uses people instead of understanding them. So he, Faust, was held up to me as what I should not become, which was quite appropriate. So anyway from her I got, I think, the best kind of education in the human aspects of life.

I was at Winchester from '36 to '41 and in '36 the Spanish Civil War was still going on and everybody was either Communist or else close to it. I mean that in general all intellectuals essentially were deeply involved in the Spanish war, and if you had any sense you joined the Communist Party and so many of my friends did, and my uncle Oliver, in fact, used to send me left books. He belonged to the Left Book Club, or he enrolled me as a member in the Left Book Club.
[Q] And this is from your father's side?
No, that was my mother's brother. He was the doctor, but he was also a red hot Communist - which at that time was quite compatible with being a faithful servant of the empire. So once a month these bright, brilliant red books would arrive telling me about what was going on in the world from the point of the view of the extreme left, and so I was very much surrounded with this extreme left politics, I think. That was the time when the Cambridge spies were being recruited by the Party - I was fortunate to escape that and I might easily have become a spy if I'd been five years older. But I got disillusioned with communism and decided that wasn't going to solve the problem. What we were faced with at that time was war, and that Hitler was clearly out to make war on the rest of the world, and that communism wasn't the answer to that.  Communism was a kind of a distraction and what we really ought to be worrying about was just to save the world from war, and that we had already just barely survived World War I, and World War II was coming up and it was going to be ten times worse.  And so I decided the only possible hope for coming through this was pacifism rather than communism. So I became a pacifist, and pacifism was also strong after 1936... '37, '38, this was the high tide of pacifism in England, when people saw the war approaching, and what could you do? The only thing you could possibly do was - the war clearly wasn't going to solve any problems, if we got into it we were probably all going to die anyway. People were very much aware of biological weapons; we weren't aware of nuclear weapons, but of course the anthrax bombs were in Aldous Huxley's book, Brave New World, so everybody was aware of anthrax bombs at that time and that's what we expected World War II to be: we would all die of plague, probably anthrax or something worse. So that was not a hopeful way out. So the best way out was to have total repudiation of war, and there was then a powerful political movement in England called the Peace Pledge Union which I joined and that was just uncompromising pacifism, it just said, 'I pledge I will not bear arms or take any part in military activities.' And if you joined the Peace Pledge Union that was what you had to pledge. So I did that, I became a pacifist and we had a little group of pacifists in the school. We were always a minority so we were determined we would actually be able to overcome the forces of evil just by quiet conversation, and if you were up against anybody who was unreasonable you just had to talk to them for six hours and convince them that they were doing it in the wrong way, and then problems would be solved.  And so the ultimate goal was to talk to Hitler for six hours and convince him that he should also be a man of peace! So that was where I put my heart and soul, and it was, I think, a not unreasonable point of view at that time, and it might even have worked - but of course the reality of World War II turned out to be so ludicrously different, when we got into World War II and the anthrax bombs didn't materialise and the bombing that did happen was a hundred times less than we had imagined. So World War II turned out to be not as bad as World War I, in fact, as far as England was concerned.

[Q] In many ways you were an outsider in many things. In terms of talents, you stand aside from the majority of the boys; in terms of concern for literature, languages, politics, you were somewhat different from most of the boys.
Indeed, that's true. I mean I've almost made a profession of being in a minority. That's true in science, of course, as well. But I always feel uneasy if I happen to be joining the majority.

So then I come to Cambridge in 1941 as a 17 year old and before then, I mean, I'd always been interested in physics and applied mathematics of all sorts, and one of the text books that I bought as a prize was a text book in aerodynamics which I think was because of James Lighthill and so I'd thought of myself as becoming an aerodynamicist, as a serious possibility - that seemed to be a field where mathematics could really be helpful, and flying of course was exciting. But anyway, I arrived in Cambridge and all the applied mathematicians were gone. There was nobody there except pure - and all the applied mathematicians and physicists were fighting the war and they'd gone to do radar or crypto-analysis or various other things. So they'd all disappeared and all that was left were the pure mathematicians, so I just had a wonderful feast of pure mathematics for the two years that I was in Cambridge. I had the great luck to have Besicovitch as my tutor, who was a great mathematician as well as being also a Russian so I could talk Russian with him, and we became very close friends, and so with him I actually did serious mathematics and I got, again, deep into problems which I never solved but which gave me enormous satisfaction. I remember Besicovitch gave me problems which would have been too hard for a graduate student, but nevertheless they taught me a tremendous lot.
[Q] And he was primarily interested in measure theory and such problems?
Yes, he was, and also geometry. I mean, I suppose it was metrical geometry rather than algebraic but the kind of the problem he gave to me was to understand the properties of measurable sets in fractional dimensions. Well, it's hard enough in one dimension or two, but when you come to fractional dimensions it gets worse. Anyway, so I had a great time struggling with that, but of course nothing much came out of it, except just a taste for his style, and Besicovitch's style has stayed with me all my life and it's the way I do science in all fields. It's a very distinctive style, which is kind of an architectural style in which you take very simple components and then build hierarchical structures which become stage by stage bigger as you build one storey on another until finally you get the key stone at the top. So you have this hierarchical structure which played a big part in all Besicovitch's work. And so out of these simple components you get this very powerful structure, and then the theorem you want to prove falls out as a consequence of the overall structure. So it's a kind of architectural style of reasoning which is very powerful and I used that in quantum electrodynamics.
[Q] And you were conscious of that at the time in interacting with Besicovitch, that this is an approach of how he does mathematics?
I'm not sure whether I was conscious of it, but certainly I absorbed it, and it's very visible in everything that I do.
[Q] And so Besicovitch is an important resource for you?
Yes, I mean certainly the tools that I use are basically Besicovitch tools.

He was very, very fond of me, I think it's true to say. He loved to play billiards. He had a billiard table in his room, and I wasn't particularly fond of playing billiards but he would always insist that I come and play and so we would play endless games of billiards, and I think that was just a way of getting me to be in his room. I mean it was - he wanted to, he just loved to have me around and I was certainly very happy because he talked so beautifully about Russia. He was a tremendous patriot. Although he had left Russia somewhere about ten years after the Revolution, he stayed in Leningrad after the Revolution as professor and had been thoroughly in sympathy with the Revolution and wanted the Revolution to work, but then found it was impossible because they imposed all kinds of political conditions on his work. So after ten years he quarreled with the local Communist Party and had to leave the country. But he was always a loyal Russian and even a loyal Soviet supporter. I mean during the war especially he was violently supporting the Soviet government, and he was terribly unhappy because the Western countries weren't doing enough, and the Russians were doing all the fighting in those years.

With [GH] Hardy and [JE] Littlewood I wasn't personally close, but I went to all their lectures and the lectures were wonderful because they were so small. The number of students then was tiny. I mean the University was almost closed down because of the war, and so we had these lecture-classes in a room which was smaller than this office where we're now sitting, with a little table  in the middle and four or five chairs, so Hardy would sit at the end of the table and four or five students around the table, and that was it. So we were just a few inches away from him. So it was very intimate but both Hardy and Littlewood never opened up as individuals, and I only learned since that they both of them were going through great psychological turmoil and Hardy was in fact himself a pacifist, which I only learned later, and we never talked about that.
[Q] Nor about the fact that you had Winchester as a common background?
No. But he gave these superb lectures which were works of art and very, very polished, about Fourier series and Fourier integrals mostly. And Littlewood gave lectures which were totally different. They were extemporised and he would always get stuck in the middle of a proof and then try to find his way through, and that was in a way more fun. So I loved Littlewood's lectures too, and each of them in their own way, but he also didn't open up and we only learned later that he had gone through big psychological...
[Q] Turmoil...
Well, more than turmoil, he'd actually... I mean he had really bad depressions and had to be hospitalised from time to time. And when he was 80 years old he came to Princeton and we were talking about his health problems, and he said that it was funny that all his life he had thought that he was very unhealthy, and was worried about getting sick and dying, and only when he reached the age of 80 he discovered he was actually quite healthy.

He wrote this marvelous paper  about the Tauberian theorem, the (1/n) theorem, which tells that a series that is summable in the Abel sense, and has terms bounded by a constant times (1/n) is also convergent. So that was the big Tauberian theorem which Littlewood proved, and his way of proving it was again a tour de force done by invoking a completely unmotivated new parameter which turned out to be the key to the proof. And then in my existence as a physicist one of the things I did was to prove the existence of a ferromagnet in one dimension, which was something that hadn't been done before, and I constructed this ferromagnet - this was a very 'Besicovitchy', a sort of Besicovitch construction of the ferromagnet as a hierarchical array of spins which has a ferromagnetic transition from order to disorder in spite of being one dimensional. And then... but in order to prove the long range order - what I proved was that the long range order is discontinuous at the transition, that it goes discontinuously from having a spontaneous magnetisation to being disordered, so it means the ordered phase has a magnetisation which remains finite away from zero right up to the transition point. And to prove that, I used Littlewood's trick of bringing in a unmotivated new parameter - so it was a proof; although the construction was Besicovitch, but the proof was Littlewood. Anyway, so I dedicated this paper to him and it was written just, I think, 60 years after Littlewood's proof had been published and so I dedicated it to the 60th anniversary of Littlewood's proof.  And I got a very nice letter from Littlewood in response, saying that as far as he knew that was the only time that a mathematician had actually celebrated the 60th anniversary of a proof.
[Q] But he also said very complimentary things; I mean it was the most complimentary statement made to him by anyone, am I right?
Yes, something like that which I doubt whether that was true, but anyway it was a very gracious acknowledgment. No, I was delighted that he was still around when this happened. Whereas with Hardy - of course Hardy died much younger, I was never able to thank Hardy for the Jordan's Cours d'analyse which I'm sure he actually put in the library, but he died before we could thank him for it.

Yes there were several, actually, other people I had lectures from. [Paul] Dirac's lectures were a terrible disappointment. He just read verbatim from his book, and when anybody asked him if he could explain it more clearly, he would say, well, it's already explained clearly in the book, so what more do you want? So it was very unsatisfying and so I learned quantum mechanics only much later. I mean, I did not learn it from Dirac. It was his... that way of reaching quantum mechanics, just... to me was incomprehensible. He took... he takes, so much for granted. So I had no concept of the physics which led to quantum mechanics.
[Q] And you had not read Dirac before?
Oh, I had read his book, that's why it was so disappointing. So I learned absolutely nothing new and even Dirac's book is a very bad way of learning quantum mechanics, at least for me. It didn't work.
[Q] There were no problems? 
Exactly! It didn't give you any idea of what you had to do. So I finally learned quantum mechanics from [Leonard] Schiff, which is a much more practical textbook. I also went to the lectures of [Harold] Jeffreys which were great fun; he is a geophysicist who was still there - he was quite old. So he was there and he gave a course of lectures on geophysical dynamics in which I was the entire audience, and I found that wonderful, that he would take the trouble to give these lectures, and so I faithfully turned up every time and he would appear in cap and gown and stand at the blackboard and lecture. And there was Eddington, who was also exciting. He taught general relativity; although I'd also read his book, but his lectures were more interesting because he went beyond his book and talked about all sorts of crazy things that he was doing himself.
[Q] And this was now - he was beyond fundamental theory and things like that? 
Yes. So we heard about his crazy stuff, but he was very fair. He always said, you know, he made a clear distinction between what was generally accepted and what wasn't. So he would say, 'Now, what I'm going to tell you now is my own stuff, but it's not part of general relativity as normally understood.'
[Q] Was he a pacifist?
Yes, he was a Quaker so for him it was sort of just a normal part of life. It wasn't so much a political pacifism; it was religious pacifism.
[Q] And anyone else that comes to mind in terms of....
Of lectures, no. I think those were the six that I remember. There may have been others. But it was a great time, but quite brief because we really were only there for a year and a half, then in summer '43...
[Q] You go to...
I went to Bomber Command.

Lighthill came up to Cambridge with me and so we remained friends, but we were not so close in Cambridge as we had been at Winchester. And my best friend at Cambridge was Oscar [Hahn], who is a great man in his own way but, again, totally different. He was a student at Trinity College, Cambridge. We were both students at Trinity, and he was a cripple. He had been a polio victim, I think, at the age of twelve or so, so he was always in a wheelchair, so he needed a lot of help. And I just loved him and used to push him around in the wheelchair quite a bit when he needed pushing and generally enjoyed his company. And he introduced me to the world of Judaism. He was a- he came from a very wealthy German Jewish family. His uncle was Kurt Hahn, who ran the Gordonstoun School in Scotland, and Oscar himself had been at the Gordonstoun School. Kurt  Hahn, of course, was a great character, and a sort of revolutionary force in education; and his mother was Warburg, Lola Warburg, who had also been a mistress of Chaim Weizmann in her early days, and had all kinds of high level connections among the Jewish aristocracy. And they had a wonderful place where they lived in Warwickshire where they preserved all the sort of manners and style of the English gentry, long after the English had given it up. So I would go there to dine on a wonderful polished table with silver candlesticks, and that was how they lived in the middle of the war, or rather toward the end of the war.

They were not religious Jews, but they were, sort of, in a sense practising Jews in that they had their family seder which I was invited to, which to me was deeply impressive. And the general - just this tremendous coming and going of the family. And in addition to that, Lola, his mother, had adopted about 5000 Jewish kids who were without parents who came over from Europe. When the parents couldn't get out, there was an organisation that brought the Jewish children to England, and so there were huge numbers of these Jewish children who were essentially orphans, separated from their parents, and so her life was devoted to these kids. They all called her 'Tante Lola' and she would go around these camps where they were living and make sure everything was done right. She was a tremendous person.

Oscar had the idea that when we had to go home - we both of us lived in London at that time - this was 1943, and when we finally left Cambridge for the last time and we had a certain amount of luggage, and he had his wheelchair, so he thought it would be a sensible thing just to take a walk in the wheelchair with our suitcases from Cambridge to London, which was 55 miles. And so we did that, and it was a glorious day, and of course we'd practised a lot, we used to out for early morning walks, we did 10 miles before breakfast several times to get in training. And on the big day we started at 3 o'clock in the morning and I put my suitcase on the wheelchair and in exchange I pushed him up the hills. And we made it; we arrived at our homes in London at 11 o'clock that night in a state of tremendous exultation and it was a wonderful day. And of course, it could never be done again because it was only possible because there was no traffic on the roads, so it was a record that's likely to stand.

[Q] When you came to your house, it was business as usual. Nobody asked you about, 'Had you...'
That's true, yes. I was... of course it was a point of honour to me also, I mean that I wouldn't make a big deal out of this, so I just arrived there and of course they all imagined I'd come on the train and - so, I didn't talk about it until a few days later. But in any case, I mean my family was also quite supportive, but we didn't have this sort of the ritualised family life which I found so attractive. And I believe one reason why I've married a German wife - because these Jews were really Germans, although I thought it was sort of specifically Jewish, but a lot of this warmth was actually more German than Jewish in a way, because the German people who are not Jewish are just the same - and so I have this German wife who organises the family in the same sort of way.

[Q] Your father has moved from Winchester to London?
Yes. He became Director of the Royal College of Music in London, very soon after I came to Winchester as a schoolboy. So it was, I think, in '38 he moved. So he was Director all through the war, and we had our home in London most of the time and remained there and saw to the rebuilding after the war. So his reign as Director was roughly from '38 to '58, about 20 years. And so during those years I was a guest at the college very often and enjoyed the musical life of London. So it was a great time for him and for me in a way.

It was Laval who made it impossible, because when the French surrendered in 1940, Laval, who had been more or less a pacifist, took over the French government, and he was a clearly evil character and he was just exploiting the situation for his own aggrandisement, and he made pacifism impossible. Because it was clear when France was occupied by the Germans that there were only two alternatives: either you were a collaborator and you joined Laval; or you were a resister and you went and fought with the Maquis, and there was no middle way - and that pacifism just didn't work under those circumstances. And so it was obvious to me that if England were ever occupied, I mean if our pacifism was put into practice and the German soldiers came to England, it was clear the same thing would happen; there would be only collaborators and resisters and we would obviously have to be resisters and so you had better then shape up and join the Army. So that's what I did essentially. In 1940 I joined the Officers Training Corps, which was the organisation of schoolboys training for the Army, which until then I had refused to have any part in.

That was called a war degree. I mean everybody had a degree, even one year in college was enough: you automatically got the BA. So I got an automatic BA at the end of that year and a half.
[Q] And just to orient ourselves, by that time you actually had already written a few mathematical papers already.
Right. And these were all in number theory, and number theory was what I actually ended up doing because... although it wasn't Besicovitch's interest, but I got interested in number theory mostly from reading books, particularly Hardy and Wright's book, Introduction to the Theory of Numbers. The Hardy and Wright is a wonderful textbook and so I took problems from there, and so it wasn't so much that I worked with Hardy but I just learned from his books. And also one of the school prizes was Ramanujan's collected papers, which are wonderful, just works of art, and of course Ramanujan was a number theorist of the very most elegant kind. So I was trying to prove things that Ramanujan conjectured and so I managed, in fact, to do a couple of publishable pieces of research in number theory. Those were the first two things I did.
[Q] And you did them essentially by yourself, picking the problem as well as the solution?
Yes. That was really independent from Hardy and Littlewood.

[Q] '43 you get your degree from Cambridge and the decision to have you go to Bomber Command is made by...?
CP Snow, the man himself. He was, of course, a famous novelist, but he was actually a Civil Servant whose job it was to put technical people into the appropriate positions. So he had a long list of these young men who were coming out of the Universities, and he had slots to put us in. Some of us went to Bletchley to do crypto-analysis; some of us went to Malvern to do radar; and some of us went to High Wycombe to analyse bomber operations, and he decided that I should go to High Wycombe. And that was fine - I mean, I would go wherever I was sent - but he wanted to make it sound beautiful and so he gave me an interview where he told me more lies in twenty minutes that I ever heard anywhere else about all these wonderful things I would be doing.  	
[Q] Was this the first time you had met him?
Yes. He was just... as far as I was concerned, he was just a functionary. I'd never read any of his books, but he described to me this wonderful job I was going into and I would be able to fly with the crews and to have this glorious adventure of taking part in the hardships of the bombing campaign and seeing what was really going on and so on. So I was just bamboozled totally, and I think it was just his novelist's imagination got the better of him. He can't have believed that, he must have known better. But anyhow, I was very happy I was going to such an exciting job. When I got there of course I found that it was nothing but sitting in a dingy office all day long, and I never got anywhere close to flying in an operational bomber.

The place was a collection of Army huts hidden away in a forest on a hill outside High Wycombe, and that's where the Bomber Command Headquarters was. Sir Arthur Harris was our chief. We saw him driving by every morning in a big limousine while we struggled up the hill on our bicycles, so we were very lowly worms in the organisation. I was then 19 years old when I arrived there, and during the week when I arrived there we bombed Hamburg, and that was the first really successful bombing operation Bomber Command did. 	
[Q] Successful in the sense that...?
We really destroyed a lot of Hamburg and there was a firestorm and about 40,000 people were killed. So it was the first real success in the sense of - I mean Bomber Harris, who was our chief, whom we always called Bert - Bert had this idea that we would just put the fear of God into the Germans by burning down their cities. That was the idea of the whole campaign. He was just very single-minded that you wouldn't try to go for military objectives but just burn the place down, and it worked in Hamburg. For the first time, we actually created a firestorm, which meant that it was a fire of really apocalyptic dimensions, quite different from a normal fire. It meant there were winds of a hundred miles an hour and tremendously strong circulation of the flames going hundreds of feet up into the air. For the people who survived it, it was a really terrifying experience, and so it burnt people to death, even in shelters, or asphyxiated them, which otherwise would never happen. So if you had a fire storm you killed tens of thousands of people; if you didn't have a fire storm, with the same tonnage of bombs you'd only kill a few hundred. So it was an absolutely qualitative difference. So it was Harris' intention to make fire storms all over Germany. In point of fact we only did it twice: there was just this one time in Hamburg in '43 and then Dresden in 1945 when the war was almost over, and in between we had hundreds of bombing attacks, none of them produced fire storms. But at the time when I arrived, of course the Command was in great joy because finally things worked and we never really found out why it worked in Hamburg and nowhere else. It seems to have been a sort of meteorological accident that you had to have an unstable atmosphere to start with and the bombing was a trigger which set in motion some sort of a big instability which was there already before.  I don't know - I mean, I don't think anybody understands it to this day. But the failure of the campaign was that we never could do this in Berlin, for example, which was obviously the prime objective.

Operations Research Section was about fifty people at the peak. It was quite a sizeable group and the chief was a man called Basil Dickens, who is, I think, still going strong and is now Sir Basil, and... so he was quite a young man at the time, but a very spineless character. He never would say anything to Sir Arthur Harris that Sir Arthur Harris didn't want to hear, so it meant in fact that he was useless. I mean, Basil Dickens - the only... the only function of the Operational Research Section was to find out what was really going on and tell the Commander in Chief what he was doing wrong - but Basil Dickens never did that.
[Q] So you were introduced to Operations Research by reading Blackett and what these people had done or...?
Much later I read Blackett.
[Q] But not at the time...
We had absolutely no communication with Blackett, and that was clearly not accidental, because Blackett had started Operations Research in the Navy and been extremely successful and done all sorts of good things for the Navy, and then it spread from there to Coastal Command, where they also did very well. In both places they were highly critical of what Bomber Command was doing. Blackett, of course, was a man of great character and he had no hesitations in speaking the truth, no matter how unpleasant the truth might be. And in Bomber Command it was totally different and it was clear that people of Blackett's calibre were just not going to get their nose in the door. We never were visited by Blackett or by anybody of that quality.  All the famous people of Operations Research could never penetrate... this Bomber Command secrecy was mostly against people like Blackett rather than against the Germans. So, it was a tragedy. So we were there doing the best we could. My job was understanding bomber losses. We had two main sections. One section was effectiveness of operations, which of course was a misnomer, it should have been called ineffectiveness of operations; and the other section was bomber losses. So I belonged to the bomber losses section, and my chief was a man called Reuben Schmidt, who in the beginning of the war changed his name to Reuben Smeed - at the time we knew him he was Reuben Smeed, but there were still some papers lying around with the name Reuben Schmidt on them. He was a German Jew who had anglicised himself, and was an absolutely delightful character, and he kept us sane, and he was a very great analyst, I mean he had a very good eye for statistics. And I think we did a good job as far as circumstances allowed. We did understand quite a lot about what was going on. We collected all the information from the crews that we could.

What the Command needed, of course, was somebody to tell them that their basic strategy was wrong and that they should stop and start doing something else. That nobody ever did. That's what Blackett would have done.
[Q] And this was part of the... during World War II, the notion of strategic bombing and winning the war through aerial warfare?
Yes. And of course it worked in Japan and it didn't work in Germany, and there are many reasons for that, but primarily the reason it worked in Japan was that it was very, very sudden. In Japan the strategic bombing started in March 1945 with overwhelming strength. The B29 force was already very big. 
[Q] Would be thousands.
Not thousands, it was only a few hundred - but still the B29 of course carried many more bombs than a Lancaster, and... and so Japan was saturated with bombs within three months. I mean essentially all the Japanese cities were not completely destroyed but very severely damaged in three months. And that really worked. It meant the society was really disorganised and demoralised to a great degree, and then the coup de grace of course, was Hiroshima, but in Germany it was much more gradual. The bombing started seriously in '41 and built up over four years, and the Germans just made very good use of opportunities to build defences which were very good, and the German defences, both passive and active, were just too strong. We never could do what we needed to do. Of course originally we intended to bomb Germany in daylight, but the defences were so strong that we just got shot to pieces, and so then the Command turned to night bombing and the night bombing could never be accurate enough to be particularly harmful. I mean the total damage we did to the Germans was roughly half of what it cost us to build the airplanes, and so it was clearly a waste of resources as far as we were concerned. Apart from 40,000 young men got killed in the planes; and 400,000 got killed on the ground. So it was a total tragedy.
[Q] And you were fully aware of it?
So by the end we were fully aware. I mean, it was Hamburg was... gave us a false impression at first, for a few months after Hamburg I still believed that something like this could work, but it became clear in the winter of '43 we had the Battle of Berlin which was the equivalent of the Battle of Britain. We had repeated heavy maximum effort attacks on Berlin, about twelve attacks, over and over again, with maximum force, and the losses just went up and up and up; each time we'd lose more, and the bombing was more and more scattered on the ground as the defences got better. So by the winter of January, February of '44 it was clear that we had failed and if we couldn't make a fire storm in Berlin then what was the point of the whole thing? And we certainly weren't hitting the factories and the German weapons' production was going up constantly all through those times. And so we became, I think, completely aware of this by about March 1944, and from then on it was simply, you did what was the sort of - my job was to save the lives of the bomber crews and that was all I could do. I wasn't really contributing to the war.
[Q] And you were frustrated in that too...
Right. I mean that was in addition: frustrated by the bureaucracy. One of the reasons we were killing so many of the air crew was that the escape hatches in the bombers were too small, and it was extremely hard for them to crawl out of the escape hatches after they'd been shot, after they had been seriously damaged. So bailing out was in fact very rare. The fraction who successfully bailed out of the planes that were shot down was something like 12%; whereas the Americans, who bombed in daylight, and had larger escape hatches, were saving about 50%; something like 50% of the crews could bail out. So we were losing something like 40% of the crews just because their escape hatches were too small. So a friend of mine, Michael Lochlan, whom I shared the office with, discovered this and he fought a hopeless battle to try to get the escape hatches enlarged and never succeeded before the end of the war.

That was our own stupidity. That wasn't the fault of the Command. The fact was that we discovered only after the war that the Germans had upward firing guns in their fighter planes, that the German fighters were equipped with these vertically firing guns so the fighter pilot just had to fly directly underneath the bomber, push the button and the bomber would never see the fighter at all.
[Q] But that you were not aware of...
And we weren't aware of this. That was our fault; we should have understood that. It was an obvious idea. And the Japanese had them too in fact; the Japanese shot down quite a lot of B29s that way, and the Americans never discovered that either. So that was a failure of the Operational Research Section, that we didn't discover this. In fact these attacks from below were so lethal that the bombers never knew what hit them.

We worked a 60 hour week at Bomber Command, so we were pretty heavily engaged - but still there were some times left in the evenings when I did mathematics just to keep myself sane. And then I did my first actual, I would say, serious contribution to pure mathematics, which was the alpha-beta theorem, which was a theorem about the sum sequence of sequences of integers. If you take a couple of sequences of integers, then you can make another sequence by summing them in pairs, and you add together an A and a B and you put together all the A + B, it makes a new sequence, C. And the theorem says the density of C is at least as great as the sum of the densities of A and B. And that theorem was proved by Henry Mann in 1942, during the war. He was at Ohio State, and he's still around, I think. He was a very young student at the time. It was a very difficult and beautiful piece of work.
[Q] And you read that paper while you were at Cambridge?
Yes. So I read that paper while I was at Cambridge, and it was obvious that it would be nice to extend that to more than two sequences, and it wasn't obvious that one could do that. And so I set myself that as a problem and I solved it, so that the theorem I proved was the extension of Mann's theorem to more than two sequences. So if you have several sequences and you add one term from each, then the sum has a density which is at least the sum of the densities. And that was one of the most satisfying things I ever did. It's a really beautiful piece of work. The proof is elegant. It's not at all obvious and it's just a sort of demonstration of how beautiful mathematics can be, with just the most simple and elementary materials, nothing but integers, all finite arguments, and of course a bit of a Besicovitch flavour to it because it involves a hierarchical construction very much in the Besicovitch style, although it was quite different from the problems that Besicovitch was interested in. So that I actually wrote during the war and it was published in the Journal of the London Mathematical Society.
[Q] During the war?
No, I think only afterwards, but anyway it's my first substantial published work. And it was very helpful because it got me a Trinity College Fellowship.

I should say, Bomber Command gave me a lifelong commitment to making sure this sort of tragedy doesn't happen again. I mean it turned me into a - I'm no longer a pacifist but I'm a passionate fighter for sanity as far as military questions are concerned. We need a military, but we should have a military that is sane and does sensible things and talks to the outside world. So I've always maintained communication with the military all my life. I belong to this JASON Group, which is a group of physicists working for the government. We do a lot of military consulting, and it's always seemed to me one shouldn't avoid talking to generals, but on the contrary, one should take every chance to talk to generals, to let them see that there are other points of view. And so I've kept to that all my life.

Hermann Bondi, of course, is the example of somebody who did that. I mean, Hermann Bondi was a close friend of mine in England and he was very similar to me in many ways. And he's an astrophysicist by profession but he became a high level adviser in the government. I mean, he was in fact adviser, Chief Adviser to the Ministry of Defence in England, and then afterwards became, I think, adviser to the Prime Minister, and so he has been very effective as a military adviser in England, and he is certainly no more British than I am. I mean, if I'd stayed behind I could have been a Bondi, I think.

We were then going to have a strategic bombing force in Okinawa to bomb Japan. It was an arrangement between Churchill and Roosevelt that Britain should have a share in the bombing of Japan which Arthur Harris was very anxious to do. And so we were going to fly to Okinawa and have everything there, the Headquarters and the Operational Research and everything else. This was called Tiger Force, and it was all ready to fly in August 1945 and we were going to fly with it; and then of course Hiroshima came and so we didn't go - lucky for us - and so I welcomed Hiroshima, of course. It was clear, if we had gone to Okinawa, we would have killed more people in a couple of months than died at Hiroshima, so from our point of view Hiroshima was pure gain and put an end to the whole bloody nonsense. So, after that, the Command disbanded very rapidly, so the Operational Research section disintegrated within a few weeks.

So I then, through Smeed's - he was my boss, he was very efficient in finding his people jobs - he found me a job at Imperial College in London. Within a couple of weeks I was there as a demonstrator in mathematics, and had a good year at Imperial College, nominally teaching mathematics, actually doing essentially anything I wanted. It was really a sinecure, because  Imperial College was still more or less dead. There were hardly any students and... so I did some grading of papers. I never gave any classes, and in the meantime...
[Q] And who was there in mathematics at that stage?
Well, my nominal boss was Hyman Levy.
[Q] Probability?
No, not the same, that's a French Levy. Hyman Levy was also a communist who was famous more for his politics than his mathematics, and he believed in mathematics for the workers, and he was a very sweet fellow, but he never gave me anything to do.
[Q] So you could do what you wanted.
Yes; I mean he said, quite frankly, I was there simply because there was nothing more useful that I could do; it was better staying there than sitting around at Bomber Command.

So I was actually still working in pure mathematics during that year, and during that year I did my second major piece of mathematics which was because I got to know Davenport. So the year 1945 to '46 was really the high point of my career as a pure mathematician, when I was at Imperial College, because I spent a lot of the time at Birkbeck College.
[Q] Which was where Davenport was? 
Which was not where Davenport was, but was where Davenport and I could meet, because he was professor at University College which had been more or less bombed out.
[Q] I see, OK, and Birkbeck is nearby.
And Birkbeck was a convenient meeting place and so we had a lot of seminars at Birkbeck, and I became effectively a graduate student working with Davenport. And he gave me an excellent problem to do, which was the Minkowski conjecture in four dimensions, which was my second main piece of pure mathematics.
[Q] And the Minkowski conjecture in one and two dimension is... are?
Well it was proof by... in one dimension is trivial and what it says... the conjecture says if you have a inhomogeneous linear form, that means just a form of the type, sort of, a1x1 + a2x2 + a3x3...+ anxn + b, so  it's a linear expression in n variables with a constant term b at the end - and you have n such forms and you multiply them all together and consider what values that can take for integer values of the x's; then the theorem says, or the conjecture says - it's still not proved in general - the conjecture says that the minimum value that that takes for integer values of the x's is not greater than 2-n  times the determinant of the coefficients.  And it's a nice theorem, but it's of no importance whatever. The only reason it's famous is because it was the work of Minkowski, I would say. I mean, of course Minkowski was famous for other reasons and it happened to be his conjecture. Anyway, so he proved it for two dimensions, and then Remak, who is a German mathematician, proved it in three dimensions, and there it stuck for about 20 years, and so it was a famous unsolved problem. And so Davenport said, 'Why don't you try doing it for four dimensions?' and so I did it during the year at Imperial College. And that was a lovely piece of work again. It was in a certain way my most sophisticated piece of work.
[Q] And the reason that you call it sophisticated?
Well, because it used topology as well as algebra, and it brought together several different branches of mathematics, so one of the main tools was actually algebraic topology, which nobody before had managed to use in connection with number theory. So it was a more original proof than the one that I had done for the alpha-beta theorem. And it was, in fact, a kind of intellectual tour de force. I mean the proof was much more exciting than the theorem.

Davenport was a very, very friendly and delightful person to work with. He was like Hans Bethe, he always had problems that were just very well suited to the student. He could tell somehow, he had this intuition that a particular student could do something that wasn't too difficult and so almost everybody got interesting things to do which they could actually finish, which is a great gift.
[Q] And the initial contact with Davenport came about how?
It was purely just because I happened to be at these seminars at Birkbeck College where he came and, so it was quite accidental and I don't think there was any planning involved, but we immediately took to each other and, well, Davenport was a very generous fellow and it just worked out. And it was the same thing with Hans Bethe, there just are a few people like that who just have a wonderful inexhaustible supply of problems, which is what students need in order to get started.

So I did the case n=4 which was a great triumph, and since then about 20 years went by, and then somebody in Russia solved the case n=5 - and the proof was so long I never really got through it, I'm sorry to say. And since then I think nothing has happened, I don't think anybody's gone beyond 5. So there it stays. It's not a problem that mathematicians are particularly excited about, but it got me the Fellowship at Trinity, which was my objective. So I went on from London to Cambridge in the fall of '46, and arrived then at Trinity College as a Fellow, which was a very happy situation. It meant I could do whatever I liked, and I got a reasonable stipend, I could live in Cambridge quite comfortably with a Fellowship.
[Q] And eat at High Table?
Even if I wanted to, I didn't eat much at High Table because it wasn't my kind of food. It was too elegant for me. I needed calories and at that time food was pretty scarce in England, it was still rationed, and I found I could do better with the food ration, cooking it myself, than they did at the High Table. So that's what I did, and next door to me there was Wittgenstein, who lived on the same staircase, and he always cooked for himself too, and so I used to cook my supper with the smell of fish from Wittgenstein's room next door.
[Q] And you got to get to know him?
A little bit. Of course, Wittgenstein was a man who loved to torture people and so he invited me into his rooms one day - this was the closest contact I ever had with him, in fact. I mean, we passed each other very often on the stairs without speaking, but once he suddenly invited me into his rooms and said, 'Would you like to come and have a cup of coffee?' So I was thrilled, I said, 'Yes, I'll certainly come.' So I came in there and there was one chair, and he invited me to sit down in it, and it was a canvas deck chair which meant I was practically lying horizontally on this canvas chair, and he was standing uncomfortably waiting for me to say something, and so I found it acutely embarrassing, but in any case, I'd come in and so I thought I might as well try, and so eventually I decided I would start a conversation. So I said to him, 'Well, you know, I read the Tractatus and I'd be interested to know whether you still believe the things you said in the Tractatus or have you changed you mind?' And so Wittgenstein looked at me in a very, very hostile fashion and he said, 'Tell me please, which newspaper do you represent?' That was the end of the conversation. So there was another long silence, and then I drank the coffee and left. So I didn't get much out of Wittgenstein. I had the impression he was simply a charlatan. He loved to torture people and he was of course always extremely insulting to women. He couldn't tolerate women coming to his lectures, and he would just simply be so rude that they had to leave. So a thoroughly disagreeable character, and apart from the Tractatus I never read any of his stuff, so I shouldn't judge him but - I think I consider him anyway overrated as a philosopher.

I decided, at the end of the year at Imperial College, there was one more problem that I tried to solve as a mathematician, which was the Siegel conjecture, and that was a very famous conjecture in the theory of numbers about approximability of irrationals. And it said if you have any algebraic number which is not rational, so simply a root of an algebraic equation with integer coefficients, a real algebraic number, and you have a rational p over q, then the theorem says that the difference between the irrational and the rational approximation can't be smaller than 1 over q 2, independent of the degree of the algebraic number. So that was the Siegel conjecture, and it was finally proved by Roth about 10 years later, for which Roth got a Fields Medal, I think. Anyway, it was a major accomplishment. So that was what I set myself up as a goal, to prove that conjecture, and I failed and I didn't find the way, and that was what persuaded me that I wasn't really a mathematician. I couldn't solve that problem which would have been really an important contribution to mathematics. It was clearly crying out for somebody to prove it, and in that year in London I didn't prove it. I managed to make only a slight improvement on what was already known. So I decided, well, I might as well do physics and which is at least as interesting and more important.

So I decided to go to physics and at Trinity I would start a fresh life. So I arrived in Trinity and the person I met there - I've always been lucky in people I come across - the person I met there was Nicholas Kemmer, who was just the ideal person to learn physics from at that time. He was originally from Russia, an emigrant who had spent some years in Switzerland and then come to England just before the war. Then he'd spent the war years - at least some of the war years - at Chalk River in Canada doing nuclear energy, and then he came back to Cambridge at the end of the war, and he was the most generous person. He was just always willing to take time to teach and to just talk to students and to encourage students. He had lots and lots of people he was supposed to be supervising, and supervising was a big part of his job in Cambridge, so he had these students one or two at time, all day long, and because everybody knew he was good, so the students came to him in great numbers and he never could say no to anybody. So he also used up a lot of his time on me and taught me a tremendous lot. It was extremely helpful to me, In a way, I mean, it was a tragedy that his research career was interrupted in just the worst way by World War II. Just before World War II he had done a brilliant piece of work, symmetrical meson theory, which was a really imaginative construction - and he postulated three kinds of mesons, positive, neutral and negative, with essentially the SU(3) [Editor's note: this should be SU(2)] symmetry and he had it all in a way. And it was completely untested by experiment at the time - in 1938 I think he published this - and it was a major contribution as a speculative idea of how the particles might interact. He had these three mesons interacting with protons and neutrons in a symmetrical fashion. Well, everything he said was right and it was all verified ten years later by Jack Steinberger amongst others and, and but it was too late for Kemmer. I mean Kemmer's reputation somehow never took off. He was forgotten by the time that his theories were confirmed, and in the meantime he had this rather miserable teaching job at Cambridge to which he was too conscientiously attached - and so he never got back into the mainstream of research.

The book I read during that year in London was Heitler, Quantum Theory of Radiation, that was the main thing. That was an excellent book. It described quantum electrodynamics as it existed in the 1930s with all the loose ends and unsolved problems. So it was a book that taught you everything that had been done in the '30s and made it absolutely clear that there was still a mess to be cleaned up, so it was a very good start for me to read this Heitler book. That's the one I remember the best.  And it showed you the sorts of things which could be calculated.  It had in it, amongst other things, Hans Bethe's calculation of the pair production which is a marvellous calculation. It had the classical, quantum and electrodynamics all there, and of course it was an introduction to the style of Hans Bethe - a lot of the stuff in Heitler's book, actually, is Bethe's work.

Well, Kemmer gave two courses which were both excellent. One was nuclear physics and one was quantum field theory, and quantum field theory was at that time very much of a continental subject. It hadn't been done much in England, even less in America. It was essentially a German monopoly almost. I mean, it was invented by Heisenberg and Pauli and a few other people, Wigner, and it had all been developed more or less in Germany and Switzerland, and the classic book on the subject was Wentzel, Zur Quantentheorie der Wellenfelder, which was published in Vienna in the middle of the war and was completely inaccessible to anybody in England or America. So Kemmer had brought this book with him, or had a copy of it in Cambridge, and so he gave me that to read. And that was, of course, a tremendous advantage because that contained quantum field theory set out very clearly in a very orderly fashion, explaining just what was known and what was not known, and that was the tool that I needed, actually, for quantum electrodynamics. It had not been put together. There was Heitler's book which was very phenomenological, describing the calculations that had been done; and Wentzel's book which gave you the general mathematical framework very nicely, but the two had never really been combined. Anyhow, so I had those two things very fortuitously put together, and that was exactly the right preparation then for what I did in America.

Kemmer gave me a lot of good advice, and one of the things that I asked him was what should I do next after being in Cambridge, and he said, 'Go to America,' because he had come back from Chalk River and he knew pretty well what was going on in America, so that was the initial impetus. And the next thing he said was, 'You should go and talk to Peierls. He knows even more about what is going on.' And so at that time I had a motor bicycle and I remember very vividly going on the motor bicycle from Cambridge to Birmingham and finding Peierls, spending an afternoon talking to Peierls. That was my first meeting with Peierls and asked him what I ought to do. And he said specifically, 'Go to Cornell,' and that was because, of course, he had been very close to Hans Bethe at Los Alamos, he knew that Bethe had gone to Cornell, and so he said, 'You should try that, and that's where you could really get the kind of guidance that you need.' And in addition I talked to Sir Hugh Taylor - I mean, not Sir Hugh, Geoffrey Taylor, who was a hydrodynamicist at Cambridge and an experimenter, and I asked him the same question and he gave the same answer, he said also Cornell is the place. He had been at Los Alamos too.  So I had this very excellent advice, otherwise I would never have known where to go, and I'd never heard of Cornell, I think, apart from just being told about it by these two people. In England it wasn't so well known. Everybody had heard of Harvard and Yale but nobody had heard of Cornell, and Cornell, of course, was exactly the right place. So I then got - I don't know exactly how it happened - I asked how I could actually make the arrangements to go to Cornell, and they said the thing to do is to get a Commonwealth Fellowship. Probably Peierls suggested that. So I applied for a Commonwealth Fellowship, which in those days was a standard way for graduate students to come to America from Europe - and I got an interview in London and they gave me the Fellowship.

I arrived at Cornell in the fall of 1947, really in a very painless fashion, supported with this rather lavish Fellowship which gave me the money to live on at Cornell, plus a stipend for summer travel. They encouraged you to spend three months in the summer travelling around the 'States, and so it was intended for the sons of the aristocracy. We were supposed to be ambassadors rather than just students.  There was a rather snobbish aura attached to these Fellowships. I found it rather strange, because I came to Cornell from this very impoverished country, Britain, and found that I was better off than the American students. Most of them, the American graduate students, were really struggling and I was, compared with them, very well off. And I came across in great style on the Queen Elizabeth and I was met at the dock in New York by Hermann Bondi, who showed me around New York City.
[Q] And you had known Bondi from Cambridge?
Yes. And so every step of the way was sort of made easy for me. And later, when I got to Cornell, I read the autobiography of Michael Pupin who had come as a penniless immigrant - what was it? - 70 years earlier, and fought his way up the hard way and there was rather a glaring contrast.

So I came... actually it was the middle of September, and I remember very well arriving at Cornell on an exceedingly hot day and it was blazing hot outside and I came into this ice cold physics building where the air conditioners were running full blast. It was my introduction to the American way of life, and I introduced myself at the Department Chairman's office, and there was the secretary sitting huddled over an electric heater. So I found it all rather shocking coming from the austerities of war time England. But one soon gets used to it.

[Q] The Newman lab was already built?
No. This was Rockefeller.
[Q] So you went to Rockefeller.
It was the good old wooden building and I always like the Rockefeller building. The beauty of it was, there were six graduate students who shared a big office, which for me was again a wonderful thing, because in Cambridge I had been very isolated. In Cambridge there was really no place where you could meet people, and so I had my room in college where I was all alone, and there were lots of interesting people in Cambridge whom I actually never met because I only discovered later they had been there. Dick Dulles was one of those. He was actually my contemporary but I never met him. I didn't know he existed. Well, in Cornell that wouldn't have happened. In Cornell we were all stuck, thrust together and so in the Rockefeller building we had this rather large and shabby office with iron radiators that clanked all day long. It was a very friendly place, and six of us sharing the office, and so we really became very close friends, and that was again something that meant a very great deal. So I got immediately thrown into the American style.

In Cornell I took a course, of course, from Bethe. There was, I think, an advance quantum mechanics course, which was excellent and it talked about what he knew about the Lamb shift, I mean things that he had already done, so it brought us up to date with what was going on in quantum mechanics. And I went to an experimental physics course of Wilson's.  He was, of course, a wonderful experimenter, and besides that...
[Q] And this was the first time you had hands-on experience in physics, in a laboratory?
Well, yes. Actually Wilson's course was not a lab course. Wilson's course was just describing experiments, but there was also a lab course which was taught by Lyman Parrott which I took, where I for the first time got my hands on real apparatus, and so I learned a tremendous lot from that, and almost killed myself doing the Millikan oil-drop experiment. That was end of my career as an experimenter. I was laid out on the floor having put the high voltage through myself.
[Q] And so they requested you not to continue in the course?
I don't think it was that bad. I think I did actually more or less finish the course, but it was clear I wasn't cut out to be an experimenter. Because I'd always sort of had dreams that maybe I could do experiments like Fermi, and Fermi did both - but that wasn't for me. There was an excellent relationship there which also pleased me very much, between the old guard and the new. I mean, at Cornell there were a lot of old teachers who had been there for a long time and did by far the biggest share of the teaching. Lyman Parrott was one of those - and there were several others of his generation. And then there were us brilliant young guys who were brought in, who were doing all the exciting stuff, and had hardly any teaching load, and there was never slightest resentment from the old people, as far as I could tell.
[Q] And the young people were Morrison and...
Well, Morrison did a lot of teaching. But no, I mean the people who I was thinking of were more the post doc types who were really just encouraged just to do their own thing and not to have to take any responsibilities.

Bethe had done the Lamb shift calculation, non-relativistically, that spring, so that was already published and we knew about it. And then it was clear that that was a makeshift calculation and it was a fudge, but the physics was obviously right and it was a question whether one could make it mathematically correct, and it had to be relativistic, it had to be precise. Bethe got the right answer within 40 megacycles - the total Lamb shift was at that time a thousand and forty, and he got it right, I mean his rough calculation gave a thousand. But the question of whether you could really explain it precisely was open, and it was clear you needed a much more high powered approach. So that was the problem that Hans gave me to work on, only he said, 'Try the spin zero case first, because that's likely to be easier' - so it meant you had relativity, but you didn't have all the complications of the Dirac equation.
[Q] There was... was there actually another student working on the spin one half?
Yes. There was Richard Scalettar who was doing the spin one half. He was my very close friend, and it was sort of painful because he's very slow - he's a good guy, I've kept in touch with him over the years but he just didn't have what it took really. I mean it was a very tough assignment. I think that was a mistake on the part of Hans to give it to him. And so I was racing ahead with the spin zero, which was the unphysical case, which was fine for me because it gave me the sort of experience I needed and I was very happy with it. But for Hans it was actually unsatisfying, because what Hans wanted was to get the right answer for spin one half, which is the physical case. And there was Richard Scalettar struggling and struggling and not getting it, and I was doing a different problem, so for Hans it was rather frustrating, I think. But anyway, I mean we all felt we couldn't snatch it away from Scalettar, it was Scalettar's problem so we kept our hands off it. But it was not all that easy a situation. And Scalettar and I were, both of us, sort of aware of the situation but we were determined to remain friends and we did, so we never stepped on each other's toes.

I immediately heard people talking about Dick. I mean Dick was - everybody called him Dick, 'What did Dick say?' and 'What did Dick think of that?' and so on and so it very quickly became clear that this was somebody noteworthy. And then, the first time I actually got to know him was we went to a seminar at Rochester. At that time the Rochester Department was led by Marshak, and Weisskopf I think was also there, maybe at that time, I'm not sure.
[Q] I think he was at MIT already. 
No, maybe he was - yes, it was Marshak was at Rochester... anyway. So every second week we had a seminar at Rochester and then a seminar at Cornell and people would drive back and forth. So I drove up with Feynman to the Rochester seminar one day, and that was when I first got a real chance to talk with him and it was very exciting in both the conversation, and the driving. He was a reckless driver and I was...
[Q] Scared?
Well. I was wondering whether we'd get there alive. I don't know that I was actually scared because I had faith in Feynman, but... Anyway, and he talked, of course, a lot about Los Alamos and about the things he had done with his life. He loved to talk, and he was also interested in me and on what was going on in England. So we hit it off right from the beginning. And then, as the year went by, I became a sort of just an interested spectator, watching him work out his version of quantum electrodynamics, as he was in the middle of that and he was just getting it together and struggling himself to understand what was going on. He had these amazing ways of calculating with diagrams, where you didn't have to have equations but you simply wrote down the answers, and instead of solving equations the way other people did, he just wrote down the answers by looking at the pictures. So it was all very incomprehensible, but it gave the right answers. So that was a big challenge for me, and I decided fairly soon that this was the most interesting thing that I could be doing - was to make sense of Feynman.
[Q] And your own way of doing mathematics and physics was not visual up to that point?
It never was, and I mean I was always analytical in my style, and of course quantum field theory is highly non-visual too. I mean quantum field theory is purely analytical. So I came to Feynman definitely like an anthropologist trying to see what the natives were doing. I mean, I was clearly not his kind of animal.
[Q] And the language was strange.
It was totally strange, and of course, but I found it all very fascinating and the amazing thing was that it gave the right answers. It had some physical basis. I mean, it came originally from Dirac, his style of doing things, but of course he had transformed it totally. Dirac never had pictures in the way he did. He didn't understand it himself, at that time. I mean it all became systematised fairly soon afterwards, but he was still making up the rules as he went along, and was sort of guided by the answers. And one of the big questions which he never really settled was closed loops. When you had diagrams involving electrons going around in circles and coming back on their own tails, what do you do with those? So he had rules for doing that, but there was essentially an ambiguity in whether they should be plus or minus, and so he made up rules so that the answers would come out right, but without any real physical motivation. So we talked a lot about these questions. The general rule was if Feynman was sitting in his office he would keep the door open and anybody could walk in, and then if he wanted to talk he would say, 'Fine, let's talk.' And if he didn't want to talk he'd say, 'Get out!'  But you didn't take it personally.  No, you never took it personally, and the nice thing was then, if he said, 'Let's come and talk,' you knew he meant it and, and wasn't just being polite. So we got along.
[Q] And he didn't know any field theory either?
He wasn't even interested in learning. He said, right away, you know, he said, 'That stuff isn't for me. That's a hard way of doing it, but I can't do it that way.' He knew his way was better.

[Q] And... so you finish this Lamb shift calculation for spinless particles?
Yes, that... I finished that some time around January as far as I remember. And then I went to a meeting of the American Physical Society to talk about it, and that was sort of my introduction to the public and...
[Q] This was in New York?
Yes.
[Q] At Columbia even?
Probably; I mean I don't remember in detail.
[Q] It's the New York meeting.
In any case, that was where I became known. 
[Q] You first met people like...
People like Oppenheimer and Schwinger and such people were all there and, so I became a person at that point and they recognised that here was somebody.

Then I went back to Cornell and, of course, I didn't work on the spin half problem because of Scalettar and so I tried to find problems then in strong interaction, because I learned the strong interaction stuff from Kemmer - his course in nuclear physics. So I thought maybe I could do something with strong interactions, and I worked on that, and the main thing I did, I suppose, was just the equivalence between scalar and vector interactions for scalar mesons, and that was a little note in the Physcial Review. This was my introduction to strong interaction physics, and that was about all I did during that year. But I learned, of course, I was going to classes and learning a tremendous lot.

But mostly I was just sitting with the graduate students learning from them. There was a very good group of graduate students. Besides Scalettar there was Ed Lennox who became a biologist and did actually very well; and there was...
[Q] Brown, Laurie Brown, was he there already?
I don't know whether he was there at that point, but Leonard Egis was, who was actually also a very close friend, and Paul Hough who became an experimenter; and Walter McAfee who was my first introduction to the black world. He was a black American and from an entirely different world, but I loved him dearly.  He died a few years ago. But he'd had a hard time getting established, but it was lucky he to go to Cornell because of the GI Bill. He'd worked for the Army during the war in the Signals Corps, I think, but he was much older than the rest of us, and he already had a wife and couple of kids, so he lived in town, not in the dorms.
[Q] And this was an introduction to the world of discrimination in the United States?
Well it wasn't so much discrimination, because he was not discriminated against.
[Q] No, not at the University, but in town? 
I don't think so. I think he was treated pretty well. I mean my impression of him was that he was in no way complaining. I mean he was very happy with his life and he wasn't full of anger in any way, he was just a different kind of person. I mean he was fanatically interested in baseball. He was much more of a sort of a real American than most of the others. And he had made it, I mean he was obviously on his way up and afterwards he went went back to the Army and worked in the Signal Corps at Fort Monmouth.

[Q] You really get an introduction to the new social world of the United States at Cornell and it's radically different from what you had experienced previously.
Yes, it was much more egalitarian than England; although England was supposed to be socialist, America was supposed to be capitalist, but it was really the other way round. England was still very snobbish compared with Cornell, and Cornell I had the feeling - of course, it was a very different America from today, just as a result of the war, America was in a very egalitarian... period, it was rather unique in American life. So all these people who were in graduate school were getting paid for by the American government with the GI Bill, and there were enormous benefits for everybody. There was a lot of cheap housing going up and generally speaking social welfare was very good at that time, and there was a general feeling of solidarity - people were friendly and not afraid of each other.

It all started sort of when I was in Cornell. I think the Truman Doctrine was that summer, but the Cold War hadn't really got going in a way that affected us much. I don't remember the chronology, but certainly I was deeply involved with the Federation of American Scientists - Phil Morrison was one of their leading people and Hans Bethe was also. I mean that this was a very serious concern; this was fighting for civilian control of nuclear weapons and for the international... civilian control of the atomic energy industry in the United States, and international control of the weapons. So there was a great deal of political activity going on. I became a member of the Federation already at that point, and so we used to go to Federation meetings and learn about all the things that were going on at the United Nations and Washington. The United Nations Atomic Energy Commission was having its meetings, I think, at that time.
[Q] And this was your first meeting with Kramers, or you didn't meet Kramers at that stage?
Not until... I met him at Princeton, but he was of course the Netherlands delegate to that. But already at Cornell, that, I think, that was the political activity I was mostly engaged in. It wasn't the Cold War at that point.
[Q] It was still international control over atomic energy.
Yes, and trying to get, almost, world government. I mean trying to get people to take the United Nations seriously.
[Q] And Cornell was interesting in that sense because you had Wilson and Bethe and Morrison and.... 
They all talked about Los Alamos, and so we used to sit at lunch and hear stories about Los Alamos, so that to me was also another new world, and it was something that I had not heard about at all in England. In England there were of course a few people who came back from Los Alamos but they were not talking about it to that extent.

One of the main reasons I came from England to America was because at the time when I made the decision all the good experiments were being done in America. I mean England was pretty barren as far as experimental physics was concerned, and then the main centre for the experimental work in America was Columbia. There was the physics department at Columbia; the leading spirit was Rabi who was a wonderful character and a great experimenter, and in Rabi's lab the decisive experiments were being done using the techniques of microwave spectroscopy that had been developed in World War II. So it was a spin-off essentially from the radar developments in World War II. All this microwave technology was available, and with microwaves you could observe very much finer details of atoms than you could before just with visible light. So, in particular, hydrogen, which is the thing that physicists love to play with, it is the simplest atom - you can do the spectrum of hydrogen with visible light, that had been done in the 1930s, and at that time they observed, there was a kind of suggestion, that things weren't quite right. The observed spectrum of hydrogen wasn't quite exactly what Dirac predicted it to be, but the difference was not quite clear because visible light isn't precise enough. But after the war when you had the microwave techniques you could measure the hydrogen spectrum really precisely, and that's what Lamb did. Willis Lamb, who was at Columbia working with Rabi, measured the hydrogen spectrum for the first time with really high precision with microwaves and he found this discrepancy between theory and experiment which is called the Lamb shift. Which was quite clear and definite with microwaves and you could measure it very accurately. So it became an outstanding problem for everybody to explain this. The hydrogen atom being the simplest and most deeply explored object in the whole universe, in a way - I mean if you don't understand the hydrogen atom, you don't understand anything, and to find that things were wrong even with a hydrogen atom was a big shock.  So it became the ambition of every theoretical physicist to understand this. And basically that's why I came to America. I knew that's where the experiments were done, that's where I was likely to be able to really to get in touch with what was happening in the real world. And of course the people at Cornell were very closely in touch with the people in Columbia, and in particular Willis Lamb talked to Hans Bethe who was the professor at Cornell, and Bethe then sat down and gave the first more or less adequate theory of the Lamb shift, just from a physical point of view. He understood that the reason why you had the Lamb shift was that the electron in the hydrogen atom was interacting with the Maxwell electromagnetic field, in addition to interacting with the proton, so that the effect of the fluctuations in the Maxwell field were disturbing the electron while it was revolving around the proton, causing a slight change in the position of the orbits. And so it was the back reaction of the electromagnetic field on the electron that Lamb had been measuring. And so Bethe understood that from a physical point of view. The problem was then, could you actually calculate it? And with the quantum electrodynamics as it was then, it turned out you couldn't; that if you just applied the rules of the game as they were then understood and tried to calculate the Lamb shift, the answer came out infinity, not a number of megacycles but an infinite number of megacycles. So that wasn't very useful and so it was clearly a real defect of the theory that it couldn't grapple with this problem. And Hans Bethe in the spring of '47 succeeded in fudging it; by cutting off the Maxwell field at the high frequencies and considering only the low frequencies, he managed to get the right answer more or less.
[Q] By doing mass renormalisation?
Yes. He renormalised the mass, which means to say that he allowed for the fact that the measured mass of the electron already includes the back reaction of the Maxwell field, and so what you're comparing is not a bare electron and an interacting electron; you're comparing an interacting free electron with an interacting bound electron. So you have the interaction in both the bound and the free electron, so you're comparing the two states of an electron. So you can subtract away the infinite mass renormalisation, and with a little more fudging you do finally get a finite result, and that's how Hans got this thousand megacycles which agreed more or less with the experiment. So that was the situation when I came.
[Q] And you had heard of that result already in England?
In England we had heard of the result and I think we'd even seen Hans's calculation, but of course we felt frustrated being three thousand miles away and not knowing the latest gossip; you always feel very much left out if you're not in touch with the people directly. So it was a very strong reason to come over.

I was immediately impressed with how friendly he was and how much he cared about students, just that we were just a friendly bunch in a way that I'd never experienced in England. Well, the very first afternoon when I walked into this freezing cold building and I met Bethe, the thing which I noticed first was extraordinary muddy boots he was wearing. It was one of these hot steamy days where the ground was very muddy and no professor in England would be seen in such muddy boots. And the other thing was that all the students called him Hans, and that was something completely new to me, I mean, even, I can't imagine calling even my best friend, Besicovitch, I never called him Abram and it just wouldn't have occurred to us to call a professor by his first name.
[Q] Nor Kemmer?
No, Kemmer was always Kemmer.
[Q] Dr Kemmer?
No, not Dr Kemmer. No - he was Kemmer, I think, but that's the way it was. I mean - family names. And, anyway, so Hans was very different and his whole style was different. He had this intense love of doing physics collectively. I mean that it wasn't really physics if you did by yourself, it was something you did with a group of people.  And so I just loved it from the beginning and became very much a part of it right away. And then, of course, his way of work was actually quite unique, I mean if you compare Bethe with anybody else I knew. First of all, he had total command of the facts, that he absolutely just - you never needed to look up a number in a table because he knew them all. He knew all the energy levels of hydrogen and he knew the atomic weights of the different elements and the density of lead and gold and uranium, all these just physical quantities, he knew them all. In addition of course, he had an extraordinary ability to sit down and calculate and just simply go at it. He would have a problem, he would simply sit down and do it, and that's rather unique I think. I mean he went on calculating all day long whenever he wasn't interrupted, and he almost always was interrupted, but that didn't matter because he would get to page 352 in his stack of pages and then he would be interrupted by a student, and then as soon as the student went out of the door he'd go back to page 353, and he would just continue without a break. So he used his time with amazing efficiency. So he was able to do really hard calculations without spending too much time, just by working so efficiently. And he was, of course, also just extraordinarily reliable: if he said something, you could believe it. He was very careful about everything he said. So just a thoroughly solid person. Very different from Feynman, because Feynman was far more imaginative. I mean, one thing Bethe did not have was imagination; he never really invented anything, he just used the theories that were there to explain the facts, and he knew the facts and he knew the theories, so he just put them together; whereas Feynman was always inventing things and he didn't believe the theories that were taught in the textbooks, he had to make them up for himself, so he had a much harder time; but still, of course, in the end you need imagination too; I mean, both kinds of physicists are needed. But for me Hans was just ideal because what I needed was just guidance in doing some real calculations and as a guide Feynman would have been useless to me. In fact, he was not good with graduate students at all. He always said he didn't like graduate students and if he had a problem that would be of interest to a student he would do it himself, and that he just wasn't able to supply the kinds of problems that students needed because everything that he worked on was generally so imaginative and beyond the reach of students. So for me, it was far better that I was working with Bethe, but at the same time I could learn a hell of a lot from Feynman.

I find with me that the difficult part is before you get started. I think that's true of everybody probably, but once you're in the middle of a calculation and it's really flowing, it doesn't matter; you can get interrupted and you get back to it easily once you have the momentum; but I get very, very nervous if I'm trying to figure out how to do it at the beginning, before I've really got started, and then if somebody interrupts I get angry and the day is ruined. And that's true of writing as well, of course, that when I'm writing the difficult part is always before you get started.

I find I think with my fingers more than with my brain, I suppose; so, for example, I mean in the case of the Lamb shift, what I would do is to sit down and do some calculations and just use whatever tools I had available and see whether they worked or not. So I would flounder around for a long time, sort of taking bits out of Heitler's book and trying to figure out why they didn't work.
[Q] On paper?
Yes. So it was all being done in writing, so that I would gradually work out how to do it by doing it. I'd never be able to plan ahead, and I think that's true of everything I do in maths or physics or writing prose. Essentially I can only make the plan as I go along, and so the difficult part is always this floundering at the beginning.
[Q] But once you are finished floundering you more or less know how long it will take you to actually get through the problem?
Well, usually I rather tend to overestimate the time. I mean, what I tend to think is, that'll take a month and it actually takes a couple of weeks or something...
[Q] But you know more or less what is involved?
Know more or less, yes. I mean, I think once I get going I am sort of one-tenth as good as Bethe, which means pretty good.
[Q] And you just can, so to say, plough ahead then?
 Yes. I had this ability to go through a calculation and really get it done, which of course is the superlative quality of Bethe.

The Commonwealth Fellowship, of course, wasn't intended as a PhD course. It was intended just to have two years in America, and in England the PhD system hadn't yet really got its grip on the academic community, so I didn't need a PhD if I stayed in England, so I didn't bother about that. I think if I had stayed at Cornell I couldn't have got the PhD in two years anyway; there were some rules that didn't allow that. So it didn't come into question. So all I did was... in fact, I was nominally a student for a Master's degree which I never took. And then, in fact then, sometime in Spring of '48, Bethe and Oppenheimer got together and arranged that I would spend the second year at the Institute [for Advanced Study] in Princeton instead of Cornell, and I don't know exactly why, or who took the initiative, but in any case, I think Bethe thought it would be quite a good idea for me to get exposed to Oppenheimer and the various other people who were around here. So, anyway, he encouraged me to apply for the Institute and so I did. And so I was set to come to the Institute in the fall of 1948, just to get a fresh look at a different collection of people. And it was of course, for me, it was not such a difficult choice because I was mostly just interested in sightseeing and everybody had heard of Oppenheimer and so it was an opportunity I didn't want to miss, actually to work with Oppenheimer, even though I might have learned more from Feynman if I'd stayed at Cornell.

There was a summer school every summer in Michigan in those days, which was the main meeting place for theoretical physicists. It had been going in the 1930s and it kept going after the war, and in the summer of '48 the main event was going to be a course of lectures by Julian Schwinger, and that was the main reason I decided to go. The Commonwealth Foundation didn't particularly like that. They didn't want us to be working through the summer. We were supposed to be tourists in the summer, but I insisted that I couldn't miss this and so they said, 'That's okay.' So I went and heard Schwinger talk for about six weeks.

Then I had an offer, because there was an interval of a couple of weeks between Cornell and Michigan, and Feynman happened to be driving from Cleveland to Albuquerque and he offered to take me for a ride just to see the country, and the Commonwealth Fund wanted me to do that, and so that was fine. So I took a bus to Cleveland and Feynman picked me up there, and then from Cleveland we drove then all across the country to Albuquerque, which of course in those days was much more an adventure than it is now. It was all country roads and going through small towns and seeing the real life, instead of superhighways. So it was a great ride.  We got marooned in a huge rain storm in Oklahoma and spent a night in a more or less brothel in which Feynman managed to get us a room, because, I mean, the whole place was completely crowded with people who were stuck because of the rain, so all the hotels were full. And Feynman found this wonderful place which only cost 50 cents a night! So we spent a very restless night there with the strange noises going on outside.
[Q] It's part of life...
Yes. So I saw a lot. It was a great time. And during the day we took hitchhikers, which in those days were very much part of the scene, so we always had company going on... going across.
[Q] So it was four days of Feynman?
Yes. So Feynman talked about all kinds of things, so I heard about his wife who had died, and about his views about life in general and especially about nuclear bombs. He had very strong views about nuclear bombs and he thought we were all going to get blown up with nuclear bombs. He didn't see much hope that the world would not get destroyed and it was just a question of when. But he was never gloomy, he always just had this very cheerful attitude that, 'Well, it's going to be pretty bad but one way or another we'll come through.'

And he talked about physics, of course, a great deal and there I argued with him a lot because I still had strong resistance to his way of doing things.
[Q] His way of doing things now being path integrals....
Yes. I said to him, 'Look, you've got to get the mathematics right otherwise it doesn't make any sense. You've got to have some solid foundation in mathematics. It's all right to draw the pictures but...'
[Q] Could I interrupt you?
Yes.
[Q] I mean, could you... when were you introduced to path integrals and his way of thinking about quantum mechanics? Maybe you could say a few words about that. 
Well he talked a great deal about integrals, but he didn't really use them.  You see, there were two aspects to Feynman - I mean the way of doing physics. There was the path integral which gave him sort of the fundamental view of the physical world - before there were propagators this is. The path integral doesn't have propagators, the path integral simply says that you sum all the histories, that the world just does everything it can, there are no laws, there are no rules. You start out with the world in a certain state and then it does everything it can, it can move in all sorts of directions, all the particles can jiggle around as much as they want in all possible ways, and then at the end then there's a certain probability amplitude for finding a particular state in the future, and you find the probability amplitude for that future outcome by simply adding together all the paths. That's it - that's the recipe. And that makes sense, and so each path contributes an amplitude which is just got by integrating the Lagrangian over the volume, and that was his recipe. But he never really used that, but it gave him the physical basis. And then out of that he concocted these working rules which were sort of a crude approximation to the path integral, in which you simply gave each particle a straight line trajectory - instead of having a real path integral you just got a schematic approximation to it by having a straight line track for each particle, and then joining the tracks together at vertices where they interacted, and then you had propagators telling you how the particles got from one place to another. So in order to get the probability amplitude then you just added up the propagators. And that was sort of a crude version of a path integral, but it wasn't the same thing.

So Feynman has this path integral picture of the world, as if the world was a kind of a tapestry in which all kinds of things could go on and all you had to do in order to predict the future was start with a known state in the past, allow everything to happen in the intermediate time in all possible ways, every particle or every field could jiggle around as much as it wanted in all directions, and then at the end, in the future state, you want to calculate the probability amplitude for a particular configuration in the future, you simply add up the contributions from all the histories in between. Each history contributes a certain probability amplitude and the amplitude is just the integral of the Lagrangian over the space time volume between the past and future. So that was Feynman's picture and it made sense, it was understandable as a physical picture. But then he had a practical version of this which was a sort of a crude approximation which was the Feynman diagrams, which were very different actually, although they were supposed to be an approximation. The Feynman diagram just consisted of a set of straight line tracks which were supposed to be individual particle tracks, and joined at, vertices where two or three lines would intersect, and each vertex corresponded to an interaction and each straight line corresponded to a particle track. And then you had propagators which were telling you the probability amplitude for the particle to move from A to B, and then instead of a path integral you had just a sum over the propagators. And that was supposed to give you the answer, and the amazing thing was that it did, the amazing thing was that this very simple diagram method gave you the right answers although the connection between that and the path integral wasn't at all obvious. So what I was always trying to persuade Feynman was that it's not enough to get the right answers, you have to understand what you're doing. And so we had big arguments about that, and I told him that he ought to learn some quantum field theory if he wanted really to understand this, and he said it just was a language he never would learn and he didn't think it was worth it. As far as he was concerned he thought in pictures and he didn't think in terms of equations. I thought in terms of equations and not in pictures. So we never agreed, but we just had fun talking.

So in the meantime, going back now a couple of months, there was a meeting of all the leading physicists at Pocono in the spring of '48, where I wasn't invited but there were then all the leading people, Schwinger and Feynman and Bethe and Oppenheimer and Niels Bohr and Rabi and Lamb, all those people were there.  And that was where Schwinger then presented his new version of quantum electrodynamics, which was also getting the right answers. Schwinger had in fact been able to calculate the magnetic moment of the electron and get the right answer, which was a great triumph. That was another of the Columbian experiments done by Kusch and Foley, where they measured the magnetic moment of the electron very precisely, and they found that it was not the Dirac value, but differed from the Dirac value by a certain finite amount, which then Schwinger was able to calculate. And then - so that was a big triumph for Schwinger - and his method of calculating was much more conventional. It was essentially just a relativistic version of Hans Bethe's method. It involved things that Schwinger called Green's Functions, which again I found rather incomprehensible, but Schwinger was very obscure when he described the things he was doing. He loved to make the - as Oppenheimer said, most people when they explain something, they're telling you how to do it; but when Schwinger explains something he's telling you that only he can do it! That was roughly the way it was, I mean, so from Schwinger one only had the impression that this was so difficult and so elaborate a way of calculating, only Schwinger could possibly do it. So people were not too happy with that. But then later on Feynman also was able to calculate the electromagnetic moment and he also got the right answer with his completely different method. So that was also very impressive, that both of these methods somehow must be doing the same thing in some fashion, but nobody understood really the connection. So that was the background in which I came to Ann Arbor; and in Ann Arbor in June of '48 I learned the stuff from Schwinger himself. I listened to his lectures in the morning and I spent the afternoons working very hard, just simply going through the Schwinger lectures step by step and really understanding what he'd been saying, which was very hard work because he just had this wonderfully baroque style of lecturing in which everything was dressed up to be as complicated as possible, and the answer somehow came out miraculously at the end. But I managed to figure out what he'd been doing, so what was clear at the end of this was that actually the Green's Functions that Schwinger was using were really the same thing as the commutators in quantum field theory, that in a way what Schwinger was doing was basically quantum field theory, and that was something I knew, because I'd had it from Kemmer, so I was able to translate Schwinger into the language of quantum field theory and that made sense of it. And then the problem remained whether one could connect that with Feynman, whether one could reduce Feynman also to quantum field theory, and that remained a problem after I finished at Ann Arbor. It was clearly the next thing I had to try.  And you actually could talk to Schwinger, I mean...  I talked with him very well, in a very happy way. I mean Schwinger was actually very friendly to me.
[Q] And very approachable on a one to one..?
Yes. When I had him alone, I mean, all this public performance, this disappeared. He actually told me quite plainly what he was doing. No, he was very pleasant, and I always felt he was really a great gentleman because afterwards I sort of stole his thunder, and he never made any complaints.

So that was the end of the time in Ann Arbor. At the same time there was a lovely course by George Uhlenbeck in that summer study which I went to, about statistical mechanics. I learned a great deal from Uhlenbeck.
[Q] So you were there the entire 8 weeks; and that's also the beginning of a friendship with David Park?
Yes. David Park was there and Clara and they were deeply engaged in the Wallace campaign for President. That was the summer of the...  
[Q] '48...
... election campaign with Dewey against Truman, but of course, Truman was not far enough to the left for most of us and so most of us were hoping that Wallace would win. But the Parks at that time didn't even have any children, I think.
[Q] But I think David Park was a note-taker for... 
... for Schwinger, that's right, yes. So he understood a lot, and so I learned a great deal from him. He was, like you, just a very learned man who seemed to have read everything.

So then what happened, after Ann Arbor I then took another Greyhound bus and went all the way to California, which was what the Commonwealth Fund required me to do. I had at least to see California. So I showed up in Berkeley and I didn't know any physicists in Berkeley, so I simply stayed around there for a couple of weeks. And the most memorable thing that happened, there was a young fellow who was lecturing about non-violence, which was a subject that I was deeply interested in, and his name was Martin Luther King. And I'd never heard of him, but I went to hear him lecture and he was just so wonderful that I was deeply impressed with him. That was before he became famous. And otherwise I read the autobiography of Nehru and various other good books.
[Q] And you stayed in Berkeley or you stayed in San Francisco?
No, I stayed at Berkeley at the International House where the students are put up, so it was good time, but I don't think I had any contact with the physicists there, as far as I remember.
[Q] But you went into San Francisco and you looked at the town?
I must have, but San Francisco didn't make much impression on me. The place that made really the deep impression was Salt Lake City on the way back.
[Q] The Mormons?
Yes, the Mormon valleys, these wonderful Mormon temples with the green valleys around them, which looked like Switzerland and that I found much more to my taste than San Francisco.

So I got on the bus in Berkeley and I always loved these long Greyhound bus rides, especially because I never stopped on the way.  In those days of course it was very different from Greyhounds today. They had these long rest stops where you could go to the bathroom and get meals. They didn't have bathrooms on the bus. And so you could actually see a lot of the country as you went across. You'd have usually half an hour or an hour at the rest stops, so I saw a good deal and, and I remember Wyoming and I remember Salt Lake City and I remember Kansas. But anyway, somewhere around Kansas, after about 48 hours of being sort of half awake, half asleep, suddenly everything fell into place and I understood Feynman and Schwinger altogether; how they fitted together, and... Feynman was essentially talking the same language as Schwinger, only putting the time in a different order, and... so the Feynman propagators were simply time ordered Green's functions and they were also multiple commutators, so all three languages actually were the same.
[Q] May I interrupt you? Then this was done without paper? This was really done on the bus?
Yes, it came absolutely just in my head only, and I knew very well that I couldn't write on the bus; I knew very well that once I got to Chicago I could write all this down and it would make sense. And the equations were sort of already well-formed in my head. So we droned on through Iowa and finally ended up in Chicago. And there I stayed also in the International House in Chicago, spent a week there, and walking the sand on the shore of Lake Michigan, I explained all this to Christopher Longuet-Higgins, drawing diagrams in the sand like in the style of Archimedes! We had a great time, and I was able to make it all clear, first of all on the sand and then afterwards on paper.
[Q] And clearer to yourself?
Yes. So the first, then the first written account of it was done in the International House in Chicago. I also learned a lot from Christopher about what's going on in chemistry. He was doing the hydrides of boron which were really interesting because it has, you know, it has anomalous valences and the normal rules don't apply. Nevertheless it has a lot of stable hydrides. So he was able to understand that. And then, after a week in Chicago, I took another Greyhound bus to Princeton and settled down here and then wrote up the official version of this work, which was the paper called: The Radiation Theories of Tomonaga, Schwinger and Feynman.   And meanwhile, of course, we'd heard about Tomonaga's work which was, I think, also in the spring of '48, when Tomonaga sent his first two papers from Japan, and these came as an absolute total surprise, that somebody in the rubble of Tokyo was actually able to do physics. I hadn't heard of Tomonaga previously and he wrote to Oppenheimer from Tokyo and Oppenheimer sent a copy of the papers to Hans Bethe in Cornell, and so we saw them there. And these two papers of Tomonaga, it was called, I don't remember... on the many...
[Q] So he sent you - I mean so you had available a copy of The Progress of Theoretical Physics?
Yes. This was the new Japanese journal which was published in English. It was published on brown paper which was all they had in Tokyo at the time, and it was just like a voice from the deep. I mean we thought of Japan as being a total ruin and there was this man who had somehow or other kept physics alive all through the war, and there it was. And he'd in fact done all this long before Schwinger and essentially arrived at the same results as Schwinger three or four years earlier, with more or less the same techniques. I mean, his techniques were very similar to Schwinger, but actually crystal clear, much, much clearer that Schwinger. So that helped again. Anyway, so I wrote up the paper and just explained why all these things were the same and the time ordering was essentially the key to it and wasn't all that difficult really. And so once you had this time ordering method you could translate Feynman into equations, and then... so anybody could actually do it. I mean, all you needed was to write down the equations in the way normal physics is done, and then the Feynman rules would follow. So that was published in the Physical Review around November '48.  And...
[Q] And did you communicate that to Feynman?
Yes. I made a trip with Cécile Morette, who later became Cécile DeWitt. We... we went up together in the train - those days they actually had trains going from here to Ithaca - so Cécile and I made the trip by train and spent a weekend at Cornell and explained all these things to Feynman, and Cécile was very much interested. She was the first in Princeton to understand all this and so she and I had a wonderful weekend explaining all this to Feynman. There were two problems we weren't able to solve at that time, which were sort of required in order to make the thing consistent which were the scattering of an electric field and the scattering of light by light. There were third order and fourth order processes which hadn't yet been done.

There were two problems which Cécile and I took along for Feynman to deal with... were the scattering of light by an electric field, and the scattering of light by light; especially the scattering of light by light had been a sort of a notoriously difficult problem. It had been more or less done by Euler and Kochel before the war with old-fashioned methods. It was a formidable calculation and it wasn't at all clear that we could do it by the new methods of Feynman. And it was something we had to get straightened out before this whole theory was really complete. So we asked Feynman about this, and he said, 'Let's see about that.' And he sat down and he just worked through it; in about three quarters of an hour he'd done the whole thing and it was the most amazing performance. He just - with his lightning calculations, it all came out very beautifully. It turned out that the third order effect was zero and the fourth order effect was finite and everything worked exactly the way we wanted. So after then, it meant that the theory really was consistent. And we talked about other things there and Feynman had an amazing proof of the Maxwell equations from quantum mechanics which I published after his death. He didn't want to publish it, he said it was just a joke, but finally after he died I decided it was time to have it published. It was something so clever and cute and it is in fact a rather illuminating idea, although I mean Feynman was right that it didn't lead anywhere, but still I'm happy that I was able to publish it in the American Journal of Physics some time after he died. So he told us about that, and other things. He was just bubbling over. He was so happy to have somebody to talk to, and so Cécile and I had a great time. And we came back to Princeton just bubbling with enthusiasm for Feynman and his way of doing things.

And then we met Oppenheimer and I wanted to talk about this in the seminar at the Institute, and somehow or other Oppenheimer wasn't enthusiastic at all. It came as a big shock to me that we'd done this wonderful stuff and I desperately wanted to tell Oppenheimer about it, that was the whole point in coming to Princeton. And Oppenheimer just brushed us off and said, 'Well, you know, that's not leading anywhere,' and he had somehow got convinced that you couldn't do physics at all with these old methods. He considered this all old stuff and what physics needed was something radically new. This is of course a common situation; that the people who have failed to clean up a subject then don't believe that it can be cleaned up, so they're looking for something totally different. And then if somebody comes along and says, 'Look, it works,' they don't believe. So that was how it was, and so we had a very hard time to get Oppenheimer's attention. And I think Niels Bohr had a very bad effect on Oppenheimer too, because I mean Niels Bohr, at that time, was convinced that physics had to be radically different if it was going to work; and Heisenberg, all the old gentlemen of those days, they'd lived through this radical revolution of quantum mechanics which was so successful, they wanted to have something like that again. They thought a new revolution, like 1925, was needed. All the old people tried to do that, including Max Born and Heisenberg and Schrödinger, I mean each of them had radical proposals which turned out to be totally useless, and in the meantime it was the young people who actually were the conservatives; from this point of view even Feynman was a conservative. I mean he went back to the old physics and made it work, and that was what Schwinger did too, and what I was doing. So we were conservative in the sense that we used the old physical concepts of quantum electrodynamics exactly the same as Heisenberg and Pauli in the 1920s, and actually made the mathematics work and got the right answers. And that came a surprise to Oppenheimer. It was very hard for him even to listen to it.
[Q] Was there also a partiality toward Schwinger, in contrast to Feynman?
Well, Oppenheimer was even hostile to Schwinger at that time. It was strange. Schwinger had been his student and earlier he had been very enthusiastic about Schwinger, but somehow he came back from Europe that summer, or the fall of 1948, convinced that the whole thing didn't work, that you had to start completely afresh, including Schwinger. Schwinger was not good, I mean, he was clever but he wasn't - he wasn't deep. Anyway - so finally Uhlenbeck interceded with Oppenheimer. Uhlenbeck had come to Princeton for that year, and Uhlenbeck persuaded Oppenheimer, 'Let's listen to Dyson,' and so Oppenheimer put on a seminar series for me to talk about the new stuff, and so I had the chance at least to talk.

And the first seminar was a complete disaster because I tried to talk about what Feynman had been doing, and Oppenheimer interrupted every sentence and told me how it ought to have been said, and how if I understood the thing right it wouldn't have sounded like that. He always knew everything better, and he was a terribly bad organiser of seminars. I mean he would... he had to have the centre stage for himself and couldn't shut up, and we couldn't tell him to shut up. So in fact, there was very little communication at all.
[Q] And a great deal of frustration on your part?
Well, I felt terrible and I remember going out, after this seminar and going to Cécile for consolation, and Cécile was wonderful, I mean, she was really like a mother to me at that point.
[Q] And your feeling was if you couldn't convince Oppenheimer, then it was hopeless or...?
I don't know whether I ever felt that. I always felt Oppenheimer was a bigoted old fool. I mean I was arrogant enough to be confident that I had the stuff and sooner or later it would be accepted, but it was very irritating and frustrating not to be able to get a hearing. Anyway, Cécile was very comforting, and then that night I was walking around by myself in the dark and there was a huge aurora in the sky, it was the brightest aurora I'd ever seen and the whole sky lit up red and green and somehow that looked as though God was saying something! So after all things aren't so bad, if God is with me I'm okay! And then... so, a week later I had the second seminar and it went a little bit better, but it still was pretty bad, and so I still didn't get much of a hearing. And at that point Hans Bethe somehow heard about this and he talked with Oppenheimer on the telephone, I think.
[Q] I think he came down to Princeton and he heard, he saw you in action...
Yes, but that's after the telephone call, I think.
[Q] I see, OK.
I think that he had telephoned Oppy and said 'You really ought to listen to Dyson, you know, he really has something to say and you should listen.' And so then Bethe himself came down to the next seminar which I was giving and Oppenheimer continued to interrupt, but Bethe then came to my help and, actually, he was able to tell Oppenheimer to shut up, I mean, which only he could do.
[Q] Then Oppenheimer would listen?
Then he finally began to listen, yes!
[Q] I mean, I'm saying, he would listen to Bethe and shut up?
Yes! So the third seminar he started to listen and then, I actually gave five altogether, and so the fourth and fifth were fine, and by that time he really got interested. He began to understand that there was something worth listening to. And then, at some point, I don't remember exactly at which point, he put a little note in my mail box saying, 'nolo contendere'.

I wrote the S-matrix paper over Christmas. Because the S-matrix paper needed a lot more work. It was a much more ambitious programme. It meant proving the whole series could be done all the way. The original radiation theory paper was only to second order and I had to prove that everything worked to all orders of perturbation theory and so on. So that took a while.
[Q] But it was already in your mind to try to do the general problem?
Yes. It became clear that it was the S-matrix that we were talking about, so then, it was in probably October, November, December, I worked out the S-matrix theory and then wrote it up over Christmas, and I remember going to a tea party with Wigner - I never really got to know Wigner well, but he invited me to tea which was nice and his wife was very hospitable. I think, again, Cécile and I were invited and I was going out with Cécile a lot at that time, although I never had the slightest romantic feelings about Cécile but she was such a great person, so we got along very well. Anyway, so we went to tea with Wigner and just as we were walking in at the door, suddenly I realised that divergences could overlap, that the whole S-matrix technique depended on divergences not overlapping, but in fact they did overlap and so the whole thing was no doubt completely wrong. So I walked into Wigner's house with this sudden... 
[Q] Insight...
 Realisation the whole bottom had fallen out of it! So I was rather inattentive during the tea party. And then, afterwards, I came home and tried to work out the overlapping divergences but I never really got them straight, so it remained a loose end. So I wrote the S-matrix paper without really settling the problem of overlapping divergences, which afterwards Abdus Salam actually did. So I left it for him actually to clean it up, and so it was a matter of faith whether you believed that it was going to work. But I wrote the paper anyhow and published it because I couldn't deal with the overlapping divergences. They really were very hard to do. And then, so after that paper was published, then suddenly I became famous and my life changed, from ever afterwards...

[Q] There is another conference, I mean the third of the series of conferences, Shelter Island, Pocono and Oldstone, where you come, where you are invited.
Yes. And I remember that conference rather vividly. It was fun and there were a lot of interesting people there, but there was very little actual progress to report. Everything had already been done by that time.
[Q] Except for one thing which is, if I remember correctly, you give a talk on the notion of renormalisability and put forth the notion of renormalisability as a criterion for selecting theories.
That might be true. Yes, I don't remember, that's quite possible. You already know more about this than I do.
[Q] I mean it's in the notes of Pocono...
OK... of Oldstone. What I remember from Oldstone was that it was a great disappointment to most of the people there, that there was really nothing new and that's why they decided that they wouldn't have another conference.
[Q] And the interest had shifted from electrodynamics to meson theories and things like that.
Right. Yes. So it was in fact the sort of the end of the game rather than the beginning of something new. So it was fun to be there but it wasn't exciting in the way the earlier conferences were.
[Q] No, 	I raised the issue of renormalisability because it does become a central feature of how theoretical... I mean that as a selection principle it becomes important in terms of what people like Weinberg do, and etc etc... namely, whether theory is renormalisable or not is a central question to be asked and you're not going to consider theories which are not renormalisable.
Yes, that's true, and of course, it turned out to be very simple to calculate whether a theory's renormalisable or not. 
[Q] Right.
Yes, so that was certainly a step forward.

[Q] You now reach the end of the second Commonwealth year, and having been a Fellow you must go back to Great Britain?
Yes, and the sad thing was at that moment I got an offer of a job from Rabi which I would have given my right arm to accept. I mean, that was exactly what I wanted, to go to Columbia and be there among all these great experimenters, really see the experiments. It would have been just the most wonderful thing for me. But I had made my promise that I would go back to England, so I went back to England. I said, 'Sorry, I can't do this,' so Norman Cole got the job instead of me which was always a great sorrow. Anyway, so I went back to England and there I had an offer from Peierls in Birmingham to go for two years with a Royal Society Fellowship, and I spent two years in Birmingham.

I must say that from every point of view that was a disappointment. I mean, first of all, the fact that he wasn't willing to listen, that was a shock. But in addition to that, that he wasn't really a good leader, and I'd been told so much about how wonderful he was at Los Alamos. I mean at Los Alamos he was like the great conductor conducting this big orchestra of people and that they all felt so intensely grateful to him for leading the operation so well. And I'd expected something like that at Princeton, but there was nothing of that at all. He hadn't any kind of detailed interest in what people were doing, and he was remote, and the real problem was he was spending about two thirds of the time in Washington and he was so absorbed in public affairs. So for him - I mean he liked to come to the seminars and show off how much he knew about things that he didn't really know. But he never gave us really any sort of leadership. So that was a big disappointment. And then of course thirdly the fact that the things that he actually had done himself, the best contributions he made to physics, were the description of black holes, the work in gravitation which he did just before the war with Snyder and Volkoff; two papers, one on neutron stars and one on the black holes, which I considered really the most substantial contributions to physics that he had ever made. And I was deeply interested in black holes, in fact, at that time, and he wasn't. That came as a great surprise, that he refused to talk about black holes. He thought of that as something any graduate student could have done and it wasn't really worthy of him. I don't know why, but he was basically not interested. I found that very strange. Of course it was even more true of Einstein. Einstein was actively hostile to black holes. It's very hard to understand from our present view point, black holes being now by the far the most profound consequence of general relativity.
[Q] But for... I mean for Einstein it's understandable because he wanted a theory free of singularities, right?
Yes, but why be so dogmatic? I mean there was solid evidence that black holes exist and he wasn't able - he wasn't even willing - to consider it as a question.
[Q] And during your stay at the Institute you actually had the occasion to be able to talk to him?
Not to Einstein, but to Oppenheimer.
[Q] You never  spoke to Einstein?
Never spoke to Einstein, but I did talk to Oppenheimer, and that was also very disappointing. So, I think from every point of view he was a disappointment. I only got to like him a bit later on his life when he'd been battered and when he was dying especially, I mean, then he became quite different.

I got to know Gödel quite well later on but during that year, no, I stuck strictly to the physics and I didn't talk to the mathematicians much at all because I didn't want to get embroiled. I mean, it was in a way a great opportunity missed. I could have talked to Hermann Weyl and various other people, but I didn't.
[Q] So you were really within physics.
We were - yes - and also I mean it was a case of young against old.  We were very arrogant, all of us. I mean in those times, we thought the old people were simply not with it and so why bother to talk to them. That didn't really apply to Gödel, but, anyway, that was the way it was. So I don't remember ever being aware - I think it's true to say that I wasn't aware that the Institute faculty existed. There was of course no physics faculty at that time. It was only Oppenheimer and the young people.
[Q] And Pais was already a permanent member at that stage?
He certainly was not a professor anyway. Of course there was a whole faculty of professors in mathematics and history. I don't think I even knew they were there. I thought it was just all young people and few old dodderers who didn't matter.
[Q] And so if I hear your correctly, you come away from your year at the Institute, you're pleased with what you had done but not very impressed by what Oppenheimer was doing here.
Yes. I mean I think that my feeling was that this is a marvellous place because of all the young people who'd come from all over the world. I mean I made a lot of friends here - it was much more cosmopolitan than Cornell, but it was still only the young people who were really, for me, worthwhile.
[Q] And this was the year that Karplus and Kroll and these people were here with you.
Oh yes, and of course Jack Steinberger was my closest friend among that crowd, so I learned a tremendous lot from him. He was of course somebody who did both theory and experiments. I think the only one, in fact, who was really at home with experiments, and he was wonderful. And then there was David Bohm whom I got to know very well, and in fact David Bohm and I were the two bachelors who had just rooms in town and we didn't live here. So David Bohm and I would have supper together every night at Grigg's restaurant in Princeton, in Witherspoon Street, which is a wonderful place where you got soul food. It was black owned and most of the clientèle was black, and they served very good food very cheap and it was great, so Dave Bohm and I loved to eat there. And one day I got a very stiff little note from Kate Russell who was Oppenheimer's secretary, telling me that it was inappropriate for a member of the Institute to eat at Grigg's.
[Q] And your reaction was?
My reaction was that we would continue to eat at Grigg's, which we did and so that was that. But - I found that absolutely amazing, that this was still at the time when - I mean this was after all 1948 and the place was supposed to have been desegregated. Anyhow, that's the way the Institute was. I mean the Institute was supposed to be much more liberal than the university, but that was the attitude.

[Q] And did you go speak to Oppenheimer when the time came to... what you should be doing in the future?
Yes, I talked with Oppenheimer and he said it was good that I go back to England. He thought that I should spread the word in England. I'd done all this good stuff in America, that I should go back to England and build a school in England and my future should be in England. He was very clear about that. He didn't want me to settle in the States. He wrote me a cryptic note which I was to give to the harbourmaster at Lowestoft in case of necessity, and that was the kind of obscure language he loved to use. I never really figured out what he meant, but I think the basic idea was that... and Niels Bohr in 1940... or whenever it was, I guess it was '43...
[Q] When he left...
...when the Germans - well, of course they had occupied Denmark for several years - but they were going to have a round up of all the Jews, and so he and his Jewish friends took the boat across to Sweden, and I think that was roughly what Oppenheimer had in his mind, that...
[Q] That you could always come back...
... that I could come back to Princeton, if I were in a desperate situation of that sort. But why he chose the harbourmaster at Lowestoft I never could figure out.

Well, then I fell in love with Verena who was a mathematician member, also at the Institute, who was interested in foundations of mathematics and had been a student in Switzerland, in Zurich. She had lived in Switzerland during the war and had studied with Speiser and knew a lot of group theory. She was a serious mathematician, and at that time there were three outstanding women at the Institute, all very young and rather glamorous figures: Sheila Powers who came from Ireland, Cécile Morette from France, and Verena Haefeli who came from Switzerland. I fell in love with Verena and just in the last month. So we had a tumultuous getting acquainted and I was also infatuated with her little daughter Katarine who was then four years old, and I loved Katarine and she was also badly needing a father. But then I had to rush home to England, so we never managed to decide what we were going to do. We sort of decided more or less we would probably get married but it was left hanging.

So I had been dimly aware of Verena being here all through that year, and it was only in May of '49, just a month before I had to go back to England that she got into a car accident somewhere in Lakewood, somewhere close to the shore of New Jersey.  She was always bumping into things anyway, and so she had to go there for a court hearing or to pay a fine or something, and I agreed to go along just to keep her company and give her some moral support. And so that was when we got to know each other and it went very fast, of course, under the pressure of time. So we got madly in love and then had to have a very sad parting, and I remember being terribly downcast and she actually went off before I did; she had to go for the summer - I don't remember, to Illinois or some place - anyway, then afterwards I left for England. We had this  very abrupt meeting and abrupt parting, and then for the next year, when I was in Birmingham and she was in Goucher College teaching, we were exchanging letters almost daily. So it was a sort of a love affair by correspondence, which made life difficult for me in Birmingham and that was why I never really felt at home any more in England, because I had this strong attachment to Verena and it was fairly clear that she wouldn't want to settle in England, that we verified the following year. So in the summer of 1950, then I came back for the summer school at Ann Arbor; in the middle of the two years I was allowed to come back for the summer school and to get married. So we got married in Ann Arbor, then I took her back to England, and then we verified the fact that she wouldn't be happy in England. It was the second year in Birmingham, she was there with the little girl and we were all very miserable and she just didn't acclimatise to England at all. And Katarine was sick most of the time. So the second year was very difficult.

Well my parents had been hearing about my successes all the time when I was in America. I wrote letters at least once a week back home to my mother and father and they shared all this, day by day almost. So I mean they were certainly enormously proud and happy that I was doing so well, and of course, England has always been a country of emigrants; nobody thinks badly of you in England because you happen to emigrate. So they're proud of you, so that was true of my parents. And in a way it was easier for them when I was here - when I came back to England it wasn't so easy. I mean, first of all things in Birmingham didn't go so well and I was a bit frustrated and somehow we got along better writing letters than we did face to face at that point. And there was a certain amount of tension about this love affair because Verena was clearly a risky proposition. She'd already been divorced once and with a little girl, she wasn't the kind of daughter-in-law my parents really wanted, and that was fairly clear. I mean that they were willing to accept her but obviously not with great enthusiasm.  So that was another barrier between us. So I never felt so close to my parents in England as I did when I was here and writing beautiful letters. Which is quite a common state of affairs I think.  So coming back to England was not easy. I love England in many ways but it was already clear at that point that I wasn't going to live there. I had already struck too many roots in America.

So Peierls was wonderful and he not only gave me a job but he had me in his house as a guest. I was a house guest of Peierls the whole of that first year in Birmingham. Genia Peierls, the wife of Peierls, was like a mother in a way my own mother never had been. She's a very warm person. She had four kids of her own, always had the house full of students, and many students came through her house with just marvellous memories of her.
[Q] And you spoke English or you spoke Russian?
With her I always spoke English. She had no patience with my sort of half-baked Russian.  She spoke of course a very strange kind of English but it was clear and well understood. So, I got along extraordinarily well with her, and she was what made Birmingham really worthwhile for me, and Rudi also. Rudi was much too busy. He had heavy responsibilities as teacher, and head of the department and administration. He had to do almost everything himself.

Fuchs came to the house several times while I was there, and he was always a welcome guest and he was very, very nice. I mean we all felt very fond of him. He was very gracious guest and he was a lonely fellow. He was at Harwell at that time running the theoretical division, and he liked to come to Birmingham and he and Peierls, of course, had been old colleagues. So they were very close, and he loved the Peierls children. He was very good with the children, altogether just a sort of a friendly uncle type of person. And so we enjoyed it when he came, and Genia liked him too, so he was one of our favourite guests. And then, of course, I don't remember exactly the date at which Fuchs was arrested, whether I was still in Birmingham or not.   Yes, I mean it was in January...  It was January, yes. So it happened while I was there. Anyway, that was a terrible shock of course, and suddenly it turned out he was not only just a spy, but the spy, I mean he was the number one spy, and for Peierls personally it was a terrible betrayal. I mean Peierls had been responsible for bringing him to Los Alamos in the first place so it meant that sort of England had become untrustworthy, not just Fuchs, and that was for Peierls a terrible blow, which I think in a way was more of a blow for him than the Oppenheimer affair was for Oppenheimer. I mean I always thought Oppenheimer never really - I don't think Oppenheimer really was suffering from the public disgrace as much as Peierls did. Anyhow, that's my impression. But it was certainly a disaster for Peierls in many ways.  For both of them.   And Genia took it very hard too. I mean Genia was absolutely vitriolic that a man could do that to his friends. She always said, 'In Russia we know how to suffer. We don't betray our friends.' Anyway, that was very hard. And Peierls went to visit Fuchs from time to time, but Genia absolutely refused to have anything to do with him.

I got to be very good friends with Gerry Brown, and he was an interesting character. Of course he was at that time more or less a stateless person. He was an American without a passport.
[Q] And also a member of the Communist Party at that stage.
Is that so? I don't remember. I know he was certainly...
[Q] That's the reason that he had left the United States, and he was... he became very close to the Peierls but then they were rather shocked that he had this kind of political affiliation, and it took a while, particularly in the light of what had happened with Klaus Fuchs...
Yes, I didn't know about that. I mean, as far as I saw it they were always very friendly to him, they certainly were, I mean outwardly at least, they were very friendly. And Gerry Brown was certainly in difficulties at that time and he valued their hospitality very highly.

This was a grand programme. I had the ambition of making quantum electrodynamics into a completely solvable theory, a theory in which one could calculate everything precisely, in which all the renormalisations would be done, out of the way, and you'd have a convergent series so that it was not just an asymptotic expansion but a real convergent series, so it would be a mathematically well-defined theory and everything could be done in principle as accurately as you want. So I sat down and tried to do that, and the tactic that I developed was to separate high and low frequencies, or high and low energies, so that you'd first of all systematically go through a power... series expansion in the high frequencies only, which would be convergent, and so therefore could be, in principle, calculated rigorously. And so once the high frequencies had been done all the renormalisations would be out of the way. The remainder of the problem would just be ordinary physics, the low frequencies which would not present any problems in principle; it would just be a matter then of hard work to find the solutions of things, like the hydrogen atom where you'd have to deal with the low frequencies numerically. So essentially the programme was to do the high frequencies analytically, and the low frequencies numerically. Well, it failed, and I put two years very hard work into it. It was a more concentrated period of hard work, in fact, than I ever did on anything else. I think I worked really with high concentration for about two years, which I've never really done on any other project that I was involved with.  And I thought it would actually succeed. I published four papers in which various stages or the programme were gone through and it seemed to work well; from a formal point of view everything worked. I was able to reduce the Schrödinger equation and the Heisenberg operators into the form which I thought would make them convergent and so as far as the formalities were concerned, everything seemed to work. And so those were done. All that remained was actually to prove the convergence. And then, when I was in Switzerland in the summer of 1951, the moment of truth happened: I suddenly found a very simple argument which showed that the series are divergent anyway, and no matter what you do, whether you separate high and low frequencies or not, the perturbation series in quantum electrodynamics simply diverges, and the argument to show that is a simply physical argument which is published in a one page note in the Physical Review letters. So that was the end of the story and that particular illumination was in a way a very joyful time. I mean, because suddenly I had this burden lifted, that the programme was a failure, I didn't have to think about it any more; that chapter of my life was over. In a way I suddenly felt a sense of enormous relief, that I wasn't having to fight this monster any more, which had gone on for two years and it was obviously something that would remain beyond my reach, and that was it. So in a way it was a great success although it was also a failure. At least it showed that was a dead end but in the course of reaching the dead end I found out something about quantum field theory which was important, namely the fact that the perturbation theory really does diverge.

When I came back to Cornell in 1951, then as a professor, I started a new programme which was dealing with the strong interactions. It was clear we'd done as much as we could with quantum electrodynamics: quantum electrodynamics was not a closed theory, clearly it had to be embedded in something larger if it was to become something mathematically well defined. So the next thing to do was to look at the strong interactions which in some way or other must be connected. And by that time we were starting to get good information from the experiments that Fermi was doing, the first really quantitative experiments on meson-proton scattering. In Chicago he had this beautiful new cyclotron. So the experimental data were starting to come out showing how mesons and protons really do interact, energies up to about four hundred million volts. So we organised, including Sam Schweber, himself, and various other people, we organised a team effort in Cornell to do the strong interactions, using the same tricks we used in quantum electrodynamics, but with certain additional approximations because the interactions were strong, so one had to chop off the higher order effects in some way which wasn't just a simple perturbation theory. The method we used was called the Tamm-Dancoff method, which effectively meant neglecting the higher orders, but in a way that made it somewhat more physical than the... just ignoring everything beyond the second order. And so the Tamm-Dancoff method was a way of more or less just ignoring anything beyond two particle interactions and making very crude approximations. So we sat down and did a set of rather careful and complicated calculations, essentially describing interaction between a meson and a proton so that, amongst other things, we would get the scattering cross sections. And we worked on this for about a year and a half or so, and we got some rather impressive numerical results. We were able to calculate the cross sections. The basic theory was the pseudo-scalar meson theory as it then existed. It was a theory simply of a nucleon field interacting with a pseudo-scalar meson field, which was the pion field which had positive, neutral and negative components, and it had pseudo-scalar interaction with the proton. That was the basic physics from which we started. And from that we managed to derive the scattering cross sections, using these rather crude approximations. And the results were rather encouraging. They seemed to agree pretty well with what Fermi found experimentally.

So I was in a high state of enthusiasm and I decided I would go to Chicago and show these results to Fermi and tell him how well we were doing. We wanted to have Fermi's blessing on our efforts as he was really the prime mover in this whole subject, and it was a good opportunity for me to get to know Fermi. Anyway, I arranged through Hans Bethe to go to Chicago and tell him about what we were doing. So I arrived at Chicago and knocked on Fermi's door, and he was very polite. I came in, and he said, 'Yes?' and I showed him the graphs on which our experiment, our theoretical numbers were plotted and Fermi's experimental numbers were plotted, and the agreement was on the whole pretty good. And Fermi hardly looked at these graphs, he just put them on the desk, just glanced at them very briefly and he said, 'I am not very impressed with what you've been doing.' And he said, 'When one does a theoretical calculation, you know, there are two ways of doing it. Either you should have a clear physical model in mind, or you should have a rigorous mathematical basis. You have neither.' So that was it - in about two sentences he disposed of the whole subject. Well then I asked him, well what does he think about the numerical agreement, and he said, 'How many parameters did you use for the fitting? How many free parameters are there in your method?' So I counted up. It turned out there were four. And he said, 'You know, Johnny von Neumann always used to say, "With four parameters I can fit an elephant, and with five I can make him wiggle his trunk." So I don't find the numerical agreement very impressive either.' So I said, 'Thank you very much for you help,' and I said goodbye. There was nothing more to be said. The whole discussion took maybe 10 or 15 minutes. And I came back to Cornell to tell the team the bad news. So that was another watershed in my life, and I think it was profoundly useful what Fermi did. He had this amazing intuition. He could spot what was good and what was bad right away. I mean, we might have worked on these calculations for five years if Fermi hadn't given us the red light and, as it was, Fermi was absolutely right because in the end of course it turned out that the theory on which we based the whole calculation was an illusion. There is really no such thing as a pseudo-scalar theory of pions. In reality 10 years later, or whenever it was, quarks were invented and the whole theory of the strong interactions was totally transformed into a theory of quarks, and it's only when you represent the pion as a compound system of two quarks that you can begin to have a real physical theory. So our whole physical basis was wrong, and so it was perfectly true that any experimental agreement we found was illusory, but it took Fermi to see that and he could see it without knowing about quarks - of course nobody had dreamed of quarks at that time - but he felt in his bones that this theory was no good. And he was right. So he saved us maybe five years of blind work and so I'm extremely grateful to him for that. But it was a tough situation for us, especially because we had some graduate students involved in this project. They depended on it for their PhD thesis, so it was difficult. I mean I simply had to tell the team, 'Look, I'm sorry, but this is not going anywhere, so all we can do is write up what we've done and publish it but it's not going to go any further, and you'd better find some other line of work.' So it was not a very pleasant experience for the graduate students or for me. But in the end, of course, it was for the good of us all. But that's the kind of genius that Fermi had, and I think that showed me very clearly that I wasn't a particle physicist, that I didn't have that kind of instinct. I mean, that my gifts are in mathematics and not basically in physics. So when there's a theory that is well based on physics, as it was in the case of quantum electrodynamics, then I can do marvellously well with using it, but I'm not able to invent a new theory, and what was required for the strong interactions was an invention, and that clearly wasn't my cup of tea. And so from that time on I didn't seriously try to solve the problem of strong interactions. From that time on I worked in field theory on the mathematical side, which I could do very happily and even usefully, so from that time on I was interested in the mathematics of field theory and I got involved in the Whiteman programme of trying to establish quantum field theory axiomatically, and deducing from axioms physical consequences. That's something that I love to do which is, in Fermi's terminology, based on a firm mathematical basis; whether it's physically correct or not, it's certainly mathematically sound. So I made that choice that I would go with the mathematics and not with the physics.

[Q] You stay in Cornell for two years and then you go to the Institute. Do you want to say a few words, besides the experience of meson nucleon scattering at Cornell, about life at the university there, and what made you decide to come to the Institute, to accept an invitation to the Institute in '53?
Yes. This was a hard choice, because I was spiritually much more at home at Cornell. Cornell is a much warmer place. It's a real community, partly because of Hans. I mean Hans made it like that, but even without Hans - it's a place which commands enormous loyalty. I mean the friends that we made at Cornell 40 years ago, a lot of them are still there. These people just never leave, including Hans himself, who's now been there for 60 years. And so I felt very much at home there and sort of spiritually I still feel more at home in Ithaca than I do in Princeton. So there were these strong forces keeping me at Cornell. Cornell had always been my vision of America, whereas Princeton is not. Princeton is definitely an alien growth in America. Ithaca is the real thing. So from that point of view I would have preferred to stay in Ithaca, and also I love the people there. But I hated the PhD system, and that was what - I felt basically out of tune with the main job I had at Cornell, which was to train PhD students. The whole PhD system to me is an abomination. I don't have a PhD myself, I feel myself very lucky I didn't have to go through it. I think it's a gross distortion of the educational process. What happens when I'm responsible for a PhD student, the student is condemned to work on a single problem in order to write a thesis, for maybe two or three years. But my attention span is much shorter than that. I like to work on something intensively for maybe one year or less, get it done with and then go on to something else. So my style just doesn't fit this PhD cycle. What would happen, a PhD student would want to go on working on a problem for two or three years, but I would lose interest before he was finished. And so there was a basic mismatch between the way I like to do physics and this straightjacket which was imposed on the students. And so I found it was very frustrating, and of course this meson nucleon scattering was a part of that, but it wasn't only the meson nucleon scattering; all the PhD students had these same constraints imposed on them, which I basically disapprove of. I just don't like the system. I think it is an evil system and it has ruined many lives. So that was the down side of Cornell, whereas at Princeton I was offered a job at the Institute for Advanced Study which works on a one year cycle. We have only post docs at this Institute here, so the post docs arrive each year, then they can decide what they want to do. I can collaborate with a post doc for a year, I don't have to keep him fed for the next two or three years after that. So at the end of six months or a year we can say goodbye and I can go and do something else, he can go and do something else if he likes. It's a much more flexible system, and it suits my style much better. So that was a strong reason for coming to Princeton. In addition to that, of course, there was the question of salary, which is never negligible since by that time I had a wife and three kids, and when I arrived at Cornell as a professor, I thought I was rich. I had a salary of $8,000 a year, which to me at that time seemed great wealth. But after living in Ithaca for two years with a wife and three kids, or the third kid just arrived at the end of the time in Ithaca, we found $8,000 dollars wasn't really much, and at Princeton I was offered twelve and a half. So that was a big consideration, that twelve and a half was real wealth, and so that was a good reason to move, and I don't make any bones about that. And in addition, of course, the Institute was a great opportunity. It was something that I had in a way dreamed of, of becoming a professor at the Institute. It carried a certain amount of glory even then, and - anyway, it was an opportunity I couldn't turn down. And I think it did work out for the best for everybody, since my job at Cornell was taken by Ed Salpeter who did magnificently there, and he's still there and he was certainly more appropriate for the job than I was. So I think I did a favour to Cornell by leaving, in a certain way. Anyway, I think it suited us both the way it was, and so the decision was made.  Another reason which might be worth mentioning was that the the second year in Cornell, Hans was in Los Alamos all the time, and that was very disagreeable to everybody. First of all, I mean, without Hans, just Cornell wasn't the same and we missed him very much, and everybody was a little bit depressed, just because Hans wasn't there. And also it meant the teaching loads were heavier and it was a general feeling that it wasn't a very happy place. And of course, in addition then we'd lost Dick Feynman, and so neither Hans Bethe nor Dick Feynman were still there.
[Q] In fact you were the replacement.
I replaced Feynman, which of course meant I didn't have Feynman there. But it wasn't the same Cornell that I had known as a student.

The closest I came to Oppenheimer during the period of his hearings - he disappeared from sight, of course; the hearings went on for three weeks and his whereabouts were kept a very closely guarded secret because he didn't want the newspaper reporters getting at him, so nobody knew where he was. So the closest I came during that time was to pick up a bunch of laundry which was delivered to, I think, the American Physical Society in Washington - I was at the Physical Society meeting and so secretly this bag of laundry was delivered to me and I took it back to Princeton and got it washed and took it back to Washington. Anyway, so I served as a courier for his shirts. That was about as close as I came, but what I also remember from that meeting was meeting Hans Bethe in Washington during the hearings, and Hans said to me, 'I just had the most unpleasant conversation of my whole life with Edward Teller.' And he didn't say any more, but it was clear what it meant, that Teller had been testifying against Oppenheimer and Hans Bethe was trying to persuade him not to, and Teller went ahead and did it anyway. So that was the time when Teller and Hans Bethe ended their friendship, which had been extremely close for many years before. So it was a very sad moment for Hans. So that was the only firsthand contact I had with the proceedings. Then after the thing was over Oppenheimer came back to Princeton and he looked fine. The result of the hearings, of course, was that he lost his clearance. I considered that, actually, a good thing for us and a good thing for him. It meant that he was at the Institute full time, instead of being in Washington, so that he was able to give his mind to the Institute much more than he did before, and I felt he was happier after the hearings than he was before. He seemed to be more relaxed. I didn't at all have the feeling that he had been spiritually destroyed or anything of that kind. I mean, there were a lot of people said that, but I didn't see it. To me he seemed to be considerably relieved: the thing was over and now he could get back to doing science, and that's what he wanted. That's what he said at the time. So he came back to Princeton and life actually became rather more interesting than before, and he was much more available for conversations about science.

During that period I had decided quite clearly that if the Institute would sack Oppenheimer, I would go back to England, and in fact I made enquiries about jobs in England during that time. After the hearings were over, when Oppenheimer's tenure at the Institute was in doubt, I made contacts with Imperial College and I think also with [Rudolf] Peierls in Birmingham about getting a job in England, because it was clear to me that I couldn't stay at the Institute if Oppenheimer was sacked; it would be neither desirable nor honourable, and I would certainly have to resign my job. So I was prepared to do that and I made that known. But, in point of fact, the trustees had their meeting, I think it was not until May or June, and it turned out the trustees decided unanimously to retain Oppenheimer, and they put out a statement saying that Oppenheimer - I forget exactly what they said, but anyway: 'We have every confidence that Oppenheimer will continue to be a leader for the Institute as he has in the past.' So he was reinstated and so there was no question of my having to leave.

That summer I was teaching at Les Houches in France, and that I also remember as a particularly happy summer, the summer school which Cécile had founded  This is Cécile DeWitt[-Morette]   - the same Cécile who had been at the Institute a few years before. And in the meantime she had - I mean she was a real ball of fire and so she had, all by herself she had started this summer school in Les Houches which turned out to be a teaching ground for the whole of Europe and which was an enormous success. So I went - I was there for six weeks of that summer, and I was enjoying that enormously. And I had the most marvellous bunch of students in Les Houches. That's the kind of - I mean it's sort of the antithesis of the PhD. These students came from all over Europe. They were just passionately involved for six weeks in the summer school. There was no problem of exams, no problem of grades or passing degrees or anything. They came just to learn. That was my ideal for a teaching job and, and I think it was just the genius of Cécile to have created it. Anyway, so we had a wonderful summer there. It rained for six weeks without stopping, and one of my students was Georges Charpak, who got a Nobel prize not long ago. They were just a marvellous bunch of students. Almost all of them became famous ultimately.

In the summer of '53, after I had packed up the furniture and left Cornell, and before arriving at Princeton, we had three months in Berkeley where I was invited by Charles Kittel, who was professor of solid state physics, to work on problems which he supplied, and he was a wonderful supplier of problems, like Hans Bethe; he gave me things to think about which were just suited to my abilities.  They were problems of a well-defined nature where many particle systems could be handled by the techniques that I had developed for quantum electrodynamics. So it was the first time that we applied what later came to be called the Green Function methods in solid state physics. And I did first of all a problem of a ferromagnetic resonance in metals, of spin resonance in metals, and then the next time I was there, two years later, I did a major study of spin waves, which was one of the main things that I am proud of, this general theory of spin waves.  In fact it was a very beautiful piece of mathematics, everything worked just marvellously, just as beautiful as quantum electrodynamics - not as important but still, from my point of view, just as satisfying. So I was able to deal with spin waves in a very elegant and systematic way.

The problem is that the ferromagnet is a collection of atoms and each of them has a strong magnetic moment, and the magnetic moments interact with each other, so that neighbours tend to point in the same direction, they like to pull each other to point parallel to each other; and against this ordering force which tends to make them all point in the same direction, of course, you have just the thermal fluctuations which tend to disorder the system of magnets. So it's a problem of the balance between order and disorder, and there's a certain transition temperature called the Curie point at which the ferromagnet stops being a ferromagnet and the spins all point at random, and below the Curie point you have long range order and the spins are all lined up. So I'm talking about the low temperature region where it is ferromagnetic, where the spins to a first approximation are all parallel. But then you have waves of spin moving through the crystal, the spins just moving around their average position in a random fashion, but in fact the spins tend to propagate in waves in a coherent fashion at low temperatures, and so you can actually describe the ferromagnet as a system of waves, which is rather similar to the way you describe the electromagnetic field by a system of electromagnetic waves. You can use the same mathematical schemes. So it's a field theory of spins in a solid, so you sort of ignore the discrete structure of the solid and represent the spins as a continuous fluid. And the question is, how good as an approximation is that? How can you deal with the finiteness of the atoms?  So to the first approximation, of course, you just treat the thing as a simply linear fluid, that was the original Heisenberg model of a ferromagnet which Heisenberg invented. Then you want go beyond that and consider the effects of finiteness of the atoms. So what I did was to develop a systematic analysis that could enable you to go beyond the linear approximation, so you had actually interactions between spin waves which you could calculate. I did that for the first time, actually to calculate the interaction between one spin wave and another, which turns out to be very, very weak at low temperatures, but you can still calculate it. And the interesting question was the power-law; with what power of the temperature does the interaction decrease? It turns out it goes down with the fourth power of the temperature, whereas most of the previous theories had got much lower power-dependences which turned out to be wrong. In fact there were three previous attempts at a theory which gave I think, three halves, and two and two, and five halves... and I mean they were all wrong and they all gave different power-laws, The correct power-law is T 4. So anyhow, it was great fun to do this, and I mean, the pleasure for me is just always to have a problem which is clearly defined, where elegant mathematics actually is useful. This was a great example. So I worked through the spin wave theory in two months and actually then took it back to Princeton to write up the paper. But that was in 1955, the second time I was in Berkeley. Then the third time I was there was in '57 which was this summer when Yang and Lee discovered parity violation, and then all my interests had gone back to particle physics temporarily because parity violation was so important, so I told Kittel, "I'm sorry, but I can't think about your problems - parity violation is too exciting." So I didn't go to Berkeley any more after that. It was, to me, one of the happiest periods of my life and it did actually set a trend. I mean the way condensed matter physics has developed since that time has been very largely simply to take this spin wave method and generalise it to all kinds of oscillations in condensed matter, so the same kind of techniques work, it turns out, for all kinds excitations at low temperatures. So it's a general theory of low temperature behaviour of condensed matter systems.

I forget how I got interested in one-dimensional ferromagnets. It was always a generally sort of accepted dogma that you couldn't have ferromagnets in one dimension, that you needed at least two dimensions to create the co-operative behaviour in a collection of spins, because the standard models of ferromagnets only work in two dimensions or higher. They all work very well in three dimensions, which is the world we live in. In one dimension the ordering forces would not be strong enough, and it was clearly true that if you had short range interactions then you couldn't have long range order in one dimension. But the question had never been raised whether if you had long range interactions in one dimension you could actually have a ferromagnet. So I got interested in that and I found a model of a one-dimensional ferromagnet where I was able to prove that it really does have a long range order - in which the interaction between spins goes with the power of the distance, I think the inverse - the critical - the lower force is where it has inverse square interaction, so that the interaction between two spins goes like one over D2 where D is the distance. And in that case there is, in fact, an order-disorder transition, and there is an ordered phase and a disordered phase. And I was able to prove that, and it was not easy. This was again an interesting problem. It was in fact in this connection that I used the Littlewood method which I mentioned yesterday. I don't remember who first suggested this as a problem. It might have been Elliot Lieb. It's a whole subdivision of physics, one-dimensional physics, which is delightful to me because it's a field in which almost all problems are solvable, in which analytical methods actually work much better than they do in higher dimensions. So it's a playground for theoretical physicists who are able to do rigorous mathematics, even if it has not much to do with reality.

This is another of these beautiful problems which is mathematically well-defined. If you have a... a gas of hard spheres with no other interactions except just excluded volume, each sphere excludes its neighbours by a certain distance; the question is: what's the ground state energy? That's the simplest problem you can ask, at zero temperature, when everything is as close to zero motion as it can possibly be: what's the energy? And there is a famous conjecture, which I think it was due to Yang, or maybe Yang and Lee together, that says the ground state energy per particle is 4pi rho a where 4p times the density(p) times the radius(a), in suitable units, and everybody believes that that's true. It was actually proved only this last year by Elliot Lieb and one of his students. So it's taken fifty years or so actually to prove it. It's a beautiful piece of work. Finally, Lieb... I mean Lieb is, of course, the master craftsman in this particular field, and finally he was able to do it, but again by a very elegant and difficult piece of mathematics. I was not able to do that. I managed to get a lower bound on the energy which at least was of the right order of magnitude. It was too small by a factor of about twelve, so I came within a factor of twelve of the right answer. So I didn't solve the problem, but at least I made some substantial progress. And I'm happy that Lieb finally has smashed it.

This is another chapter in which again, I took somebody else's problem and converted it into a mathematical theory. It was Wigner's idea that one would describe a complex system, such as a heavy nucleus involving a lot of strongly interacting particles, by a random matrix. That is to say, a matrix is supposed to be just the Hamiltonian of the system, which describes the physical nature of the system. Since we really know nothing about the system except that it's a very complicated black box, or in this case a black sphere with a whole lot of things going on inside which we can't observe, let's just pretend we know nothing and say that we have absolutely a state of total ignorance about the Hamiltonian - then what can we say should be true on the average? So that's the question which Wigner asked. If you take the average of all possible Hamiltonians in a certain class, then how should they behave? And that turns out to be a very interesting question. First of all, you have to define very carefully the ensemble of matrices that you're talking about so that you have a precise definition of probabilities, and then you have to figure out how to calculate averages. And so Wigner was able to do that. He defined an ensemble, which is just what we now call the Gaussian orthogonal ensemble, which essentially says that the probability of a certain Hamiltonian which is represented by a matrix, is just the independent Gaussian distribution of each of the matrix elements, multiplied by a normalisation factor to make the probability come to one. And that's it. So, simply, as all the matrix elements are statistically independent and Gaussian, that's it. That gives you a well-defined ensemble, and he imposed the condition that they should be real and symmetric, which means the Hamiltonian is time reversal invariant. And then you can get well-defined questions and well-defined answers, and Wigner was able to show that in this case - Gaussian orthogonal ensemble - that the Eigen values of the matrix which correspond to the energy levels of the system have a semicircular distribution. That means the probability distribution of the Eigen values goes like the square root of one over one minus x 2 - no, the square root of one minus x 2, where x is the difference between the energy and the average energy. And so if you plot the curve of probability of density of Eigen values against energy, it's a semicircle. So that was a non-trivial result, which Wigner proved around 1946, I think. Then it was taken up by two Frenchmen, Mehta and Godard, and they went much further, and they were able to calculate many other things, and they found the spacing distribution, which is a much harder thing to calculate. To calculate the statistical distribution of the spacings between nearest neighbour levels, which is a very non-trivial problem, they were able to calculate that by very clever tricks.

And so I got interested in that and invited Mehta to come here to Princeton and work with me, and so Mehta and I wrote a series of papers which occupied us for several years and we were able to go a lot further.  The most interesting thing that came out of that was in effect a sort of a general classification of all the possible ensembles. Whereas Wigner had just chosen one arbitrarily, we were able to prove that there are in fact precisely three irreducible ensembles in a well-defined mathematical sense; that every possible matrix ensemble with certain properties of invariance is a direct product of irreducible components, and each irreducible component then has to be one of three types. And the three types are what we call orthogonal, unitary and simplectic. And so the orthogonal one is where it is time reversal invariant and integer spin; and the unitary one is where there's no time reversal invariance; and the simplectic is where it's time reversal invariant with half integer spin. And so those are the only three possibilities, and they have very different behaviour as far as the level spacing distributions are concerned. You have always, in all three cases, you have a repulsion between nearest neighbour levels, so they're not randomly distributed, and a strong level repulsion is different in the three cases. It's weakest in the orthogonal case, and then a little bit stronger in the unitary case, and strongest of all in the simplectic case. So we were able to develop this theory of random matrices into a much more general form and also to prove a lot more fundamental properties of the spacing distributions.

Besides the spacing distribution, there is another thing you can calculate, which is just the general correlation function of any number of levels; the probability for finding, say, five levels with five given separations can be calculated, and I was able to find a very elegant formula for this general correlation function, which turns out to be Pfaffian, which is a very elegant object. It's not a determinant but it's like the square root of a determinant, and with the Pfaffians, this mathematical theory of Pfaffians, you can then deduce essentially everything that these level distributions do. The only difficulty with this whole subject is to find any practical use for it, and Wigner originally designed it to be used in nuclear physics, but it's only useful if you have experimental data to compare it with, and there don't exist, in fact, enough levels of heavy nuclei to get good statistics. I mean, the best case is a certain isotope of erbium which is - I forget the exact atomic weight of this particular isotope, but in any case there's one case in which you have about two hundred well-defined levels, but two hundred isn't enough, really, to do a good statistical analysis. So the subject died essentially for lack of applications. But it was revived more recently because now we have all the virtual reality, now we have these big computers, and we can compute ideal systems of energy levels in enormous quantities, so it's trivial now to find a million levels for a suitably defined system and then compare that with the theory. So this is now a large industry. So the subject has actually found quite a lot of use in dealing with the behaviour of complex systems, simulated on the computer, whether or not it has anything to do with the real world. And there is one very interesting case which is the zeros of the zeta function, which is a purely mathematical problem . You have this famous Riemann zeta function, which is one of the great mysteries of pure mathematics where you have the zeros which are all on a certain line with real part equal to one half, with the imaginary parts of the zeros distributed in this mysterious way up the line. And it turns out - Odlyzko, a mathematician at the Bell Labs, calculated about 10 to the 20th  zeros of the zeta function - and, well, it turns out they precisely obey the unitary distribution law, as if they were the Eigen values of a random unitary matrix. And that's an empirical fact; it still is not understood, there is no theoretical proof of that. So it's a very interesting connection between the physics of random systems and this mathematical mystery.
[Q] But to you, working on it was beautiful mathematics.
Yes, it's fun to do and the applications to me were always secondary. The connection with zeta function, in a way, is to me the most exciting part of it.
[Q] Which has possibly stimulated you to go back to looking at that problem?
 Yes. And of course there's been a certain amount of progress. Hugh Montgomery actually proved a weaker version of this unitary distribution law. I mean, he was able to prove rigorously that if you take Fourier transform as the distribution within a certain subset of the Fourier space, unitary distribution is exact. He couldn't extend it over the whole space. And at least, as far as it goes, his proof actually covers a substantial region. So it almost certainly is correct, and the mathematicians are still busily working on it. Sarnak here in Princeton is a mathematician who is very much interested in this, so I keep in communication with him.

This was the result of a bet, and it was, I think David Ruelle and Michael Fisher, who had offered a bottle of vintage champagne to anybody who could prove the stability of matter. And so Andrew Lenard was here in Princeton at the Plasma Physics lab and he got interested in that question, and he made considerable progress, actually, with proving it. The problem is, if you have an ideal description of matter it just consists of ignoring nuclear forces, ignoring gravitation, just ignoring magnetic fields - it's the simplest description of matter; it's a set of positive and negative point charges held together with coulometer actions only, non-relativistic. So it's a system of n positive and n negative charges, or you can have different numbers if you like, held together with coulomb forces. The question is: what is the binding energy of such a system as a function of the number of particles? Does it go linearly with n or does it go with a higher power? If it goes - this is all quantum mechanics - if it goes linearly with n then the matter is stable, it means that the binding energy per particle is fixed; that's the situation we live with and everybody believes that that is true, but there's no mathematical proof of it; but if it went with a higher power of the number of particles it would mean that every piece of matter would be a high explosive. When you joined pieces of matter together you'd get an enormous binding energy just by combining, so everything, every chunk of material, would be a hydrogen bomb essentially. So it was a problem that one ought to be able to understand. And the proof of it turned out to be remarkably difficult, but Lenard and I worked on it and managed actually to prove it, but by a method that was extraordinarily complicated and difficult and just opaque. Both Lenard and I are mathematical manipulators and not really physicists, so we didn't understand the physics of the problem, we merely, just by brute force, managed to prove the stability. And the interesting physical fact that emerged was that it works only if the particles have an exclusion principle for one sign of the charge, for at least one, either the negative or the positive and, in fact of course in the real world, the negatives, the electrons, have to have an exclusion principle in order for matter to be stable. If you didn't have an exclusion principle, if both the electrons and the positive charges are bosons, then matter is unstable, and there again we had a conjecture which we couldn't prove, that the binding energy for n particles should go with the seven fifths power of n in the case of bosons, which again Elliot Lieb finally proved rather recently, and we were only able to prove that it wasn't more, it wasn't stronger than five thirds, we never could get the seven fifths, which is the correct power.

So we worked on this and it ended up with two very long papers which nobody reads in... in the Physical Review,  first proving it in the case where the... both the positives and negatives both have an exclusion principle, which is the easier case.
[Q] The exclusion principle stating that no two particles can be at the same place at the same time...
Right, which is the case for electrons; but it's not always true, of course, for nuclei. Ideally if they have integer spin and they have... they obey Bose statistics, they don't have an exclusion principle. But it... anyway, the much more difficult case is where the electrons have an exclusion principle but the positive charges don't. So the second paper which proved that was even more complicated and opaque than the first paper. And we finally proved the energy is not... the binding energy is not greater than a constant times the number of particles, but the constant was absurdly large, in fact it was something like 1014, and this 1014 was just a piling up of sloppy factors from the many, many steps in the argument. It had nothing to do with physics. Well, then... it turned out actually fairly soon after this - after Lenard and I had earned the bottle of champagne, and we did in fact drink the champagne - but fairly soon afterwards Elliot Lieb and Walter Thirring found a good proof of stability of matter which was based on physics, which did the whole job in four pages, which was infinitely more useful than our proof, and it led to understanding and not just to a proof. And they also got a reasonable constant. So the Lieb-Thirring is the way to do it, and as usual, I mean, I think it was Littlewood who said that you can tell a great mathematician by the number of bad proofs that he publishes. The first proof is usually bad, and then somebody else cleans it up.
[Q] The... but it's fair to say that your solution, or your indication, was the stimulus for the further activities. 
Yes, that's the good thing, if you publish a bad proof then of course it's a challenge to other people to find a good proof and that certainly worked in this case. But, I might mention that Elliot Lieb has just published a whole volume of... papers on the stability of matter which is an absolute treasure house and so he's the world expert on this subject and he has proved a very large number of difficult theorems which are all collected in this volume.

I worked with Barry Simon and Jürg Fröhlich and what we wanted to do was provide rigorous proofs that three dimensional ferromagnets had phase transitions under very general conditions, and we really weren't able to do it, and we never achieved what we set out to do, and I haven't followed the subject. I think Fröhlich has done a lot more since. I don't regard that as a glorious chapter in my history. I don't think I've much to say about it. I mean, the problems again are purely mathematical and we ran into difficulties which didn't seem to be physically motivated, I mean, seemed to be just simply we hadn't found the right tools, somehow, to deal with them, and so I don't think it's worth talking about that really. Just... we had a certain degree of success, we were able to prove quite interesting results but under very restricted conditions, which obviously ought to hold much more generally.
[Q] What I had in mind actually was your work, which you entitled 'hierarchical models' and you had mentioned earlier the influence of Besicovitch in how to solve problems, and here was a case where Besicovitch's approach was useful in structuring, in modelling a system and giving a mathematical proof?
Yes. That was of course connected with the one dimensional ferromagnets which I spoke about already. I mean the point was, the hierarchical model is a analytically solvable model, so that it has interactions which have a much higher degree of symmetry than the one dimensional chain. And the hierarchical model is not actually one dimensional. But the point is that you can map the hierarchical model into a one dimensional chain in such a way that the interactions in the one dimensional chain are always larger than the interactions in the hierarchical model. So you get inequalities, so that the binding in the one dimensional chain is stronger than it is in the hierarchical model, so you can get very useful information about the one dimensional chain by solving the hierarchical model. So the hierarchical model was in the Besicovitch style; it was a mathematical tool with which to deal with the physical case. It worked beautifully, and it turns out, of course, once you've invented the hierarchical model you can study it as an object in itself. It has very interesting properties.  I was... I invented it actually just as an analytical tool in order to deal with the one dimensional chain.

The question was raised by Dirac, I think in 1936 or thereabouts: Could gravity be varying with time as the universe evolves? And the motivation for Dirac was he didn't like the fact that gravitational interaction is so weak as compared with other kinds of interactions, so if you take a dimensionless ratio which is Gm2/hc, where G is the gravitational constant of Newton, m is the mass of a proton, h is Planck's constant, and c is the velocity of light - that's a dimensionless number; it happens to have the value 10-39, and Dirac considered that to be ugly; that in the laws of physics there's this enormously small quantity which appears to be just arbitrary and put in by God into the laws of physics, and he said any self-respecting god wouldn't have done that, so that there must be some reason for this very small number appearing. So Dirac's argument was that if you assume that gravity goes down with time, like 1/T from the beginning of the universe, and you measure time in units of the proton Compton wave length, which is sort of the natural unit of time - no, not the Compton wavelength but the Compton frequency, the Compton wave length divided by velocity of light - then the unit of time is about 10-22 seconds, and the universe has existed for about 1017 seconds, so the ratio between the present age of the universe and the natural unit of time is 1039. So that's an interesting fact. So Dirac's hypothesis was that - so this small number merely is indicating the particular age at which we live in the history of the universe; in the natural units we are 1039 units from the beginning of time. So if you assume that gravity goes like 1/T, then you don't need to write this small number into the laws of physics. Well that was a very attractive notion to Dirac. He had this very strong belief in the power of aesthetics to divine the laws of nature, but then it's a question whether that's experimentally true. Well after that, then... Dirac's hypothesis remained a hypothesis for 40 years. Nobody had good enough observational data either to confirm it or to contradict it. So it remained quite possible that Dirac was right. In the meantime I think it was Edward Teller who proposed that the same thing might be true for the fine-structure constant, since that's also a rather small number, not as small as the gravitational coupling constant, but it's still... it's  e2/hc, that's 1/137, and that looks like a logarithm. If you take the logarithm of Dirac's number, the natural logarithm of 1039 is about a 100, so it's about a 100 powers of e, so you might imagine that 137 is the logarithm of the time. And so Teller proposed the hypothesis that the electromagnetic interaction is also weakening with time, but going like 1 over logarithm. So that was also a very interesting question and that... Teller proposed that, I think - I don't remember exactly when, around 1950 or so - I mean it was some time after Dirac. And that was clearly much easier to test because we have much more accurate information about the electromagnetic interaction than we do about gravity. So... attention then was immediately concentrated on the fine-structure constant rather than on gravitation. And the first response to Teller, I think, came from Denys Wilkinson and he showed that in fact Teller couldn't be right, and he did that by looking simply at the decay rate of uranium in ancient rocks. That if you observe isotopes of uranium and isotopes of lead into which they decay in ancient rocks you can... by - it's a fairly circular argument, but you can in fact more or less prove by looking at these different kinds of rocks that the decay rates have remained pretty constant over the last 109 years or so, within 10%, something like that. I mean, there hasn't been a huge variation in the decay rate. Well, if you take the rate of the outer decay of uranium 238, it's actually extremely sensitive to the fine-structure constant because it... the alpha particle has to come out of the nucleus over a very high Gamow barrier, and the Gamow formula for the lifetime has an exponential with the fine-structure constant in it, since the fine-structure constant determines the Coulomb interaction between the alpha particle and the rest of the nucleus. So you... the lifetime goes like the exponential of something proportional to the fine-structure constant with a big coefficient. And so if you change the fine-structure constant by a small fraction, you change the lifetime by the 500th power of the fine-structure constant. So it's actually a very sensitive test for variation of the fine-structure constant, and so that by itself was enough to demolish Teller.

But I was interested in looking further at this, getting finer and finer limits on the fine-structure constant. It's a long story; I'll tell only a couple of things. The... the next step was looking at the rhenium decay which is even more sensitive to the fine-structure constant. Rhenium 187 decays to osmium 187 and the decay energy is only 7 kilovolts, so it's a case where the energy of the two nuclei - it's not just the nuclei, it's the atoms, the nuclei including all the bound electrons - are so very, very close to being equal that if you change the Coulomb binding of the nucleus by a tiny amount, you'll shift the balance drastically and so the osmium would become unstable, or the decay rate would be twice as large, either one way or the other. So it meant that the decay rate of this rhenium is even more sensitive indicator of the fine-structure constant than uranium. It turns out it goes with the eighteen thousandth power of the fine-structure constant. And by looking at rhenium and osmium in the meteorites and various other places which have long histories - many of these meteorites, in fact, are 4 billion years old, and so they are very good indicators for the rhenium decay - you can show that the rhenium decay has not varied by more than 10% over 4 billion years, and multiplying that by 18,000, you get a much more precise limit on the fine-structure constant variation, which turns out to be something like, I think, 1 part in 1015 per year, so way beyond what Teller proposed. Anyhow, the last chapter was opened by Alex Shlyakhter, who unfortunately is dying of cancer as we speak. He's a brilliant young man, and he's... Russian. Was a student in Leningrad about 15 years ago, and he had this brilliant idea that you could get an even more sensitive test of the fine-structure constant variation by looking at the fossil fission reactors in Gabon, in Equatorial Africa. These fission reactors are natural fission reactors which actually were running about 2 billion years ago, when uranium 235 was much more abundant than it is today. In those days, 2 billion years ago, the uranium in the ground had 3.5 percent uranium 235, which is just about what we use nowadays for reactor fuel, so any lump of uranium could be a reactor in those times, and so... that was what actually happened. In several places in that particular ore body, uranium went critical and it was operating as a fission reactor for about a hundred thousand years, and the fission products are still there. And the French have published all this; two books were published describing in great detail what they found. It's a fascinating subject and it turns out that one of the fission products, is samarium 149, is heavily depleted in these fossil reactors. They find only 2% as much samarium 149 as you would in fresh fission products. So something happened to the samarium 149, and what happened was that it was converted by the neutron flux to samarium 150, and you find the samarium 150 instead of 149. But that proves that 2 billion years ago samarium 149 had an enormous fission cross... I mean an enormous capture cross section for slow neutrons.

This is an entirely different chapter of my life because it's... not talking about mathematics, but it's talking about my passion for details; that I just love all these peculiar things that one finds in the real world, like for example samarium 149. I mean, it just happens to be there, it has this enormous capture cross section for neutrons. That to me is beautiful. The world is full of things like that, just accidental coincidences which happen to be there, just like the birds outside flying around in the trees, these isotopes are just things that I've always fallen in love with; or the stars in the sky. The world is so rich in detail. Anyway, that's... that's why I found this subject so appealing. Anyhow, samarium has this enormous cross section for capturing neutrons. Well, why? And the answer is because there is a resonance, there is a bound state of the samarium 150 which is very, very close to zero energy, so when a free neutron comes in and is captured it can easily slide into this excited state which is actually one tenth of a volt above zero, but it's 8 million volts about the ground state of samarium 150. So it's just a remarkable coincidence that there is this excited state 8 million volts up which happens to be almost precisely equal to the zero energy of the incident neutron. Well what we've discovered then, by finding the depletion of the 149 in the fission... fossil fission reactors, is that that particular resonant capture level was there exactly in the same place 2 billion years ago as it is today. We see it today when we measure the cross sections, and it must have been there, or otherwise the isotope would not have been depleted. So that gives you an even more sensitive test for the variation of the levels. Again the... you have to do a rather careful calculation to see how the position of that resonance level would change if the fine-structure constant had changed between 2 billion years ago and today. It turns out to be immensely sensitive, much more so even than the rhenium. It's something... it's something like a tenth of a volt in 8 million volts, so it's roughly the 80 millionth power instead of 18,000. So if you change the fine-structure constant by one part in 80 million you'd have thrown the thing off by a tenth of a volt, which would have been enough to change the cross section by a factor 2, which is way over, way out of the experimental limits. So, that was Shlyakhter's idea and he published this in a little note in  Nature about fifteen years ago and so that was the last word and... and the variation of the fine-structure constant then was limited, I mean it was still zero within the experimental errors. It was... it was bounded by something like 1 part in 1017 per year. And actually, just in the last two years, the last piece or serious honest physics I've done was a collaboration with Thibault Damour who is a French physicist who was here in Princeton.  Two years ago Thibault Damour and I actually went over Shlyakhter's arguments and did a much more careful job, looking at the actual history of the fossil reactors and what the operating temperatures were, and finding more information about the neutron spectra and doing a more careful job with the mathematics also. So Thibault and I published this in Nuclear Physics just last year, and that's my last published work in physics, and we found, in fact, a slightly weaker but much more firmly based limit which agrees with Shlyakhter... apart from fine details, but it puts Shlyakhter's limit on a firmer basis, and it's still around a few parts in 1017 per year. So it's... the field is of course still open. The exciting thing, of course, which we all hope for, was we might find a real variation. That would open a real new chapter in science if we found a variation in the fine-structure constant, that would be a major revolution in science. Unfortunately we only found negative results, but there's always hope for the future. And it turns out that the progress in quantum optics is so fast that in fact even the Shlyakhter bound is likely to be - within a few years - superseded by actual laboratory experiments. Nowadays, because of quantum optics, one can measure optical frequencies to within one cycle and that... you can actually count vibrations of an atomic state in the optical range, and so you get... within a few years we'll have precisions probably even greater than 1 part in 1017. So the subject is still alive and there's always a hope that one day we'll find a real variation.
[Q] But the obverse side of that is that you know that the laws of quantum electrodynamics have been valid... the ones that we know at present, have been valid at least 4 billion years, if not longer, right?
Yes. And it's extraordinary... I mean, the precision with which one can do these experimental tests. I find the experimental tools are just as marvellous as the theory, and that's to me a... a great motivation for doing this kind of work.

Freddie de Hoffman was a Los Alamos physicist who went to Geneva in 1955 at the first international conference where the experts on nuclear reactors from the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union got together and the whole field was declassified, suddenly. It had... everything involving reactors had been secret up to 1955, and suddenly it was thrown open and all these experts came together and had a great time describing to each other what they'd been doing. And the publications of the Geneva Conference then became the bible for reactor physicists. And Freddie de Hoffman who had been representing the United States in Geneva came home and decided that this was the time to start a company actually to build peaceful reactors, something he'd always wanted to do. Now he could do it out in the open, independent of the government. So he started the company, General Atomic, in San Diego, and it started in the summer of 1956 with a three month workshop to which I was invited, and it was a marvellous time.  We had... Edward Teller was the leader of our group, and there were a lot of real reactor physicists there. I, of course, knew nothing about reactors but I learned the subject very fast and it was tremendous fun. And our project, which Edward Teller in fact promoted - it was Teller's idea - was to build a safe reactor. He understood right from the start that the real problem with reactors was safety, that in order to make reactors publicly acceptable you must make them really safe, and by really safe, his definition was that you could let a crowd of school children into the control room and they couldn't do any harm; no matter what sort of nonsense they did, the thing couldn't blow up. So that was our charge. And I found that extremely challenging and I actually invented the method which we used for making the thing safe, which is a thing called the warm neutron effect which I was very delighted with.

In the normal course of events, you depend on neutrons being absorbed in the fuel of a reactor in order to produce fission, but a lot of the neutrons then get absorbed outside, just... what they call 'parasitic absorption', or are absorbed in the stuff that's moderating the reaction, or in the coolant, and in the case of a light water reactor a lot of the neutrons are absorbed in the water that's cooling it. And... so it's always a balance between the neutrons that are absorbed in the water and the neutrons that are absorbed in the uranium. In a normal reactor which is cooled with light water, if the thing goes supercritical so that the fuel gets extremely hot, the thing can actually blow up because the neutrons that come into the fuel are still cold, they've been exposed to the water, so if the thing is blowing up in a fraction of a second, the water is still cold, the fuel is hot, but that doesn't affect the temperature of the neutrons. So the neutrons are still cold, that means the fission cross sections are still high and the thing continues to be supercritical and it blows itself up. Well the warm neutron principle says if you could put the moderator in mixed with the fuel, then you'd be in much better shape. What happens then is that the... moderator, which in this case is zirconium hydride – we chose as the stuff to moderate the neutrons – is heated up as fast as the uranium. The uranium and the zirconium hydride are mixed in the solid fuel elements so that as fuel heats up, the hydrogen is heated up within a microsecond, and so the neutrons that come into the hydrogen get slowed down and the fuel elements are heated up too. And once the neutrons are warmed up, then the fission cross section goes down, and then the water which is also necessary remains cold and so the neutron cross section in the water remains high. So it means the neutrons which have a lower cross section in the fuel and still the high cross section in the water, will stream out of the fuel elements into the water, and the fuel elements will immediately stop being super-critical. And... so it's a simple thing, but it's a very lovely thing and this was actually demonstrated; after we had invented the reactor we actually built it and Simnad... Massoud Simnad, who is an Iranian chemist who built the actual... did the chemistry of the fuel elements and actually made the fuel elements, was an employee at General Atomic, so he actually did the hard work after we had left, but within two years we actually had a working reactor and we demonstrated it at a public... ceremony in San Diego.
[Q] And the energy output is roughly...?
Well, Niels Bohr actually pushed the button to start the thing at this public demonstration, and what it did was to pull out the fuel elements explosively with compressed air, so that the thing became highly supercritical; this was all done in a public situation with a big crowd of people sitting there, and the reactor was exposed to the public view. And... it went up to 1000MWs within a millisecond, which is equal to the power output of a huge power station, and it shut itself down within 2 milliseconds, without any moving parts. I mean, that's the beauty of it, that the shut down is caused just by the laws of physics, not by any kind of engineering, so that it's totally automatic; after you've thrown out all the controls the things goes highly supercritical and it's exploding with a multiplication time of a millisecond. But this warm neutron effect actually just quenches the reaction within two milliseconds and so then the thing sits down and bubbles away at about 1MW, which is its design power. So it's supposed to operate at 1MW; it was actually operating a million times that power level for a millisecond, but it didn't do itself any harm and it didn't hurt anybody in the crowd. So it was a triumphant success, and... so it was great fun to do. It was a case again of an elegant idea actually working and... so since then the reactor has actually been used a great deal, in hospitals for producing short-lived isotopes, and the company is still in business and they're still making the reactor and they're still selling it. It's one of the few reactors which actually has made... made a profit for the company that builds it.
[Q] And this was your first hands-on experience in an engineering project?
Yes. In fact, really, the only one. I mean, I've never done anything like that since.

And the interaction with Teller was delightful, because we fought like cats. He's a very emotional guy, as is well known, so when we disagreed he would very often just go off in a huff and throw a tantrum and say, 'I'm going to quit if I don't get my way,' and then Freddie de Hoffman would be scared because he didn't want to lose Edward Teller, so Freddie would then decide that things had to be done the way Teller wanted. So he would always win the argument by throwing a tantrum. But I was quite happy because I knew it would all pass over in a couple days, and it was just an interesting human spectacle to watch Teller in action. So I never took it personally, and then in two days Teller would have forgotten or would have had a new brilliant idea and we'd all be happily working together again.
[Q] I mean, as you said, this is 2 years after the Oppenheimer resolution, of severing his ties with the AEC and the community... the physics community was certainly unhappy with Teller's behaviour. Did it manifest itself at San Diego during 1956?
No, the people there were all Teller's friends, more or less. I mean, Freddie had been very close to him, Freddie de Hoffman who was the boss, and I think everybody there was basically on Teller's side. I mean not that they approved of what he'd done in the hearings, but we all found... I mean, we knew Teller was a spoilt brat, that was all, I mean, that he was power hungry and he was unscrupulous and... and he would behave in a brattish way, but still he was somebody you could work with and, and he always produced these brilliant ideas. So we could tolerate him very well, whether we agreed with his politics or not.

That started immediately after Sputnik. Sputnik was I guess in October... '58... '58, so two years after the reactor, and on the same day that Sputnik was announced, Ted Taylor, who was one of the people who had worked with me on the reactor at General Atomic, and by that time he had joined General Atomic as a staff member – he had moved from Los Alamos. In Los Alamos he had been a very successful bomb designer, now he's an anti-nuke – anyway, at that time he was sort of making the transition. So he came to General Atomic and on the night that Sputnik was announced he had the idea, which originally had been suggested by Stan Ulam, of using nuclear bombs to propel a spaceship, so as to beat the Russians, essentially that was the idea. I mean to make a quantum leap in space, doing it with nuclear energy instead of chemical. And the idea was simply: You take a huge space ship, large enough to carry a few hundred nuclear bombs, and you'd throw the bombs out of the back one at a time; each of the bombs would blow up and the debris would hit the bottom of the ship and you'd go boom, boom, boom, up into the sky. So it was a grand idea. It appealed to us very strongly as a method of unilateral disarmament, or even multilateral disarmament: it was a way to use the bombs for some good purpose, and incidentally get rid of them.

So Freddie [de Hoffmann] then came to Princeton in order to enlist my help and I had this interesting interview with Freddie. He was rather dubious about the project himself, I mean, it wasn't at all clear that a private company could really pull this off, and it was certainly an ambitious thing to try to do. And so he wanted to get some respectable backing, and so he came to me and asked if I thought it was sensible, and I immediately said, 'Yes.' I mean to me it sounded basically right; I mean, the basic physics of this is simply the principle that you don't burn your fingers if you flick a piece of red hot coal into the fire place, as long as you do it fast; as long as your finger is in contact with the red hot coal for only a fraction of a second you don't get burned. That's essentially the idea, that the bomb explosion throws this exceedingly hot debris at the bottom of the ship, but the contact with the ship is so brief that not much of the substance gets ablated, so that the ablation by... by the nuclear explosion is confined to something like a millimetre of thickness for each shot – or you hope to have it less than a millimetre. A millimetre is about the maximum you can tolerate. But since the explosions are over in a fraction of a millisecond, there's some hope that that'll actually be feasible. So the real... the first question was how fast the surface is going to be ablated, and the... the early stages of Orion, it was essentially Marshall Rosenblueth and Ted Taylor who did the basic physics, and they convinced themselves that that was okay, that the ablation would be tolerable. Then after that it was a question of trying to design the ship, and work out all the details.

I didn't join the project actually until the following summer because I had other things to do in Princeton, but I took a leave of absence from the Institute for a full year, so I joined the project in the summer of '59 and then – I guess that's right – and worked there for a full year until the fall of 1960 – or is that.... is that correct? No, I think it's wrong, I think we're a year wrong. Sputnik went up in '57, I joined the project in summer '58 and went back to Princeton in fall of '59. So I was 15 months working on Orion. And that was also a very exciting time.  We did all the basic physics, and it works, I mean there's no doubt technically the thing works. You have a number of very interesting physics problems; essentially it's radiation, hydrodynamics, the same kind of physics that you need for studying stellar atmospheres. A lot of it's just applied astrophysics, which I... I enjoy, so it's using information you get from astrophysics for this practical application. And there are always stability problems in hydrodynamics. The hard part is understanding the various instabilities. You have this oblique flow; the... the bomb is essentially a point source, the debris is flying off in a cone hitting the bottom of the ship. The bottom of the ship has to be very broad to distribute the impulse over a wide area so you don't get too high a pressure, so a lot of the stuff is coming up at an oblique angle, so it's capable of then giving rise to various kinds of instabilities, Taylor instabilities and Helmholtz instabilities. So we worked out the instabilities and tried to convince ourselves that they were tolerable. And then you have... this is combined with neutron physics and radiation flow, so there was a lot of good physics to be done. And in addition, there was a lot of very interesting engineering. I mean, one of the very big problems is shock absorbers. The bottom of the ship is a very heavy flat plate and it's impulsively... pushed by the bomb debris, once every second or so, so you get this bang, bang, bang on the bottom of the plate, and that impulse has to be transmitted to the rest of the ship, and the passengers if you're actually on board, in a more gentle fashion. So you need huge shock absorbers to transfer the momentum from the bottom of the ship to the rest of the structure. So there's a big engineering problem there. So we went through a lot of different designs of shock absorbers. And then there were very interesting problems connected with the command and control of the orientation of the ship, and especially what you do if one of the bombs is a dud, so the pusher plate is going backwards and the bomb doesn't fire, and you have to have some means of rescuing the pusher plate before it disappears! So, anyway, there were lots of problems, but after a year and a half I had to make the choice either to stay with this or go back to my scientific life in Princeton, and it was obvious to me by that time that I'd done what I could for the project and from then on it had to fly by itself. It was already by... by that time pretty clear that this wasn't going to be our road into space. It was a competition between this kind of nuclear propulsion and the big chemical rockets, the von Braun brigades, and it was fairly clear that von Braun was going to win. He had the chemical rockets and he had a huge organisation already in place, and he had a lot of political support, and we weren't going to push him out, and if we couldn't push him out then we didn't have really a great and glorious future. And so it was fairly clear that this thing wasn't going to fly, although it was still alive. The project actually continued for 7 years and it developed considerably after I left, but by the time I left the... sort of the real fire had gone out of it. The dream that we would be the ones actually to fly to Mars I think had more or less disappeared.

Space travel for me has always been something obvious and something that didn't need to be explained. I mean, I read Jules Verne of course when I was 9 years old, The Voyage to the Moon [sic], and I also wrote a little story based on Jules Verne myself with a similar theme. I mean, clearly that was in my mind from the age of 9, as obviously something we will do and it didn't need to be justified, it was just clearly, obviously a great adventure, and why not? So that was my background. Then afterwards, of course, I got interested in astronomy from a scientific point of view, but I think it's important to keep the two things separate, that there are two kinds of space activities: there's space... space science, which I'm very much concerned with; and there's space adventure or 'sporting events' in space, which I'm also concerned with, but they are very separate, and it was a great pity that the things became confused in the public mind. So we have, at the moment, a very successful space science programme which is done with automatic machines, with robots, with unmanned missions, which are much cheaper and much simpler; and on the other hand we have the shuttle programme which is using humans and which is supposed to be a big human adventure. But somehow the two things have got confused in the public mind, and... so the public thinks that the shuttle is doing science, which it actually isn't, and... and the public also thinks that the whole programme is in trouble because the manned programme is in trouble. But the reality is the manned programme is in trouble because it doesn't have any clear goals; the unmanned programme is doing fine. So my life has been sort of divided between these two compartments, and I like to keep them very separate. I think the science, the space science programme, is enormously exciting in itself. We are exploring the universe with these automatic machines, and of course the whole art of... automatic navigation and data processing has advanced by leaps and bounds since the 1960s, so what we can do now with an automatic probe at Jupiter or Neptune is so vastly more than we could have done with a manned mission in the 1960s. So there's no justification, from a scientific point of view, for manned missions. On the other hand, I still would love to go, and I think people will go, simply because it's in our nature as living creatures; that life has a tendency to occupy unoccupied niches, so I think life will spread into the universe, and we are just a part of that. And for me that's a basic... what Dirac would call a basic belief which doesn't need to be justified, that life has beautified this planet so enormously, and compared with this planet everything else in the universe is rather dull, and all the planets we observe are pretty boring compared with the earth because there's nothing living there. And if life could just expand out into the universe, the whole universe would just become vastly more diverse and vastly, vastly more interesting; and why shouldn't we do that? And we should be the midwives to make that possible.
[Q] Did at any stage the worry about diversity being constrained here on earth become likewise a factor?
That's of course a factor. I mean the earth is getting to be too small for us. We have great problems with the environment; we have great problems with the extinction of biological species; it's clear the earth is getting too small and it's we who are making it so, and of course we have to limit our population on the earth, we have to learn to live frugally, and that's absolutely clear. But in addition, we just need more real estate and there is all that beautiful real estate out there, and why not spread out? And that's... anyway to me, it's a question of when and not a question of why. And of course, it has to be cheap. I'm not interested in billion dollar missions to Mars. That seems to me a dead end, just as the Apollo missions to the moon were a dead end. They were too expensive to be sustained. So that's not the way to do it. But it will become cheap just because the technology improves all the time. But that's the end of the sermon. I think we should go back to the history.

In Orion from the very first day of course, we knew that fall out was a major consideration. What we proposed to do was to take the thing off from the ground under nuclear power, so we'd be exploding bombs in the atmosphere all the way up, and we'd be plastering the ground with fallout, of course, and radioactivity would be spread far and wide. And you might say, 'Isn't that totally crazy? Isn't that totally unacceptable?' Well by present day standards, of course, it's completely unacceptable and it's absolutely clear we wouldn't want to do it. In those days it was different because it's a question of compared with what, and we were comparing this with a nuclear war, which in those times was, we felt to be a very real possibility. We were thinking of a nuclear war in which hundreds of megatons would be exploded on the ground, would be plastering the earth with fallout on a vastly larger scale, killing billions of people. But what we proposed to do was a few kilotons per shot, so as you go up through the atmosphere, maybe a few hundred kilotons total, and getting rid of the bombs, so we wouldn't have a nuclear war. I mean that was the idea. So our mindset was: You compare this with what the bombs could do if they were really used in anger. And in that case of course, what we were doing was tiny by comparison. In addition, in those times, there were bomb tests in the atmosphere going on all the time. There was a heavy testing programme, but what was actually being put into the atmosphere every year during that time was much larger than what we proposed in the total programme.

So during the time at Orion I did a lot of calculations of fallout and we studied the literature and how many people would be killed per kiloton of fall out and... and we took it very seriously, and our estimate was that it would be a public health hazard, but very small compared with other things that you might compare it with, like coal mining... the... not to mention traffic accidents and other causes of death. So we considered it at that time acceptable, but it was fairly clear then that this would be the major obstacle it would have to overcome; that... that in order to use this way of getting into space the public would have to be convinced that it was worth the price. And I became convinced myself that it wasn't going to work, largely because of the fall out question. I remember, in the summer of... '58 I guess it was, I'm not sure - no, it was '60... later on, it was toward the end of the Orion time. Orion finally finished in 1965, I was at the Disarmament Agency for the summer in 1962 and again in 1963, and so it was during the Kennedy presidency - I spent two summers at the Disarmament Agency, and there of course I was deeply involved with the test ban negotiations, and so I had to make up my mind then, at the Disarmament Agency, was I for the test ban or against it? And obviously the conclusion was, I was for it, that was what the Disarmament Agency was about. And what convinced me was that I plotted a little curve of the total number of tests per year that were being done, right from 1945 until 1963; and the total number of tests per year was simply a rising exponential curve with a doubling time of about three years, and it was obvious at that point that this thing couldn't go on, that we just were not going to continue testing exponentially for ever, that fairly soon one would have to put an end to it, and the only way one could put an end to it was to have a test ban. So that to me was the convincing argument. And the reason why the doubling time was three years was fairly obvious, because it takes three years to prepare a test, so every time you do a test you have two unanswered questions which require two new tests to answer, so it's a natural process of exponential growth. So there has to be a stop somewhere, otherwise the thing is... just becomes... unacceptable. And so I fought then at the Disarmament Agency to get the test ban adopted. That meant saying goodbye to Orion, and so that was my final point of decision, that if it was a choice between a test ban and Orion I clearly chose the test ban.

[Q] Did you have any discussions with Bethe and with Teller, who clearly were on opposite sides of the issue of the test ban treaty at that stage?
Yes. I think I talked with both of them. I don't remember in detail, but it was certainly true that I was opposed to the test ban for several years when I was involved with Orion. I mean that was inevitable; clearly we had to have tests if we were going to fly Orion, and also, even to fly it of course we needed an international regime that would allow it. So I was definitely against the test ban and I argued with Hans about that. And then later when I was converted, I argued with Teller about it, but without any kind of acrimony. I think we just obviously agreed that we had differences.

The motivation for my becoming an American citizen was very simple, that my children were not acknowledged by the British Government. I had two children when I was still a British subject and Her Majesty's Government declared them to be illegitimate and therefore not entitled to passports. And so that was a real problem. I had a daughter who was stateless and it was a real hassle to travel around with this stateless child. Every country where we went we had to have a special visa for her. So she was very happy, she loved to be stateless because it was something special, but I wasn't too happy about that. And so I became an American citizen for that reason. So once I was an American citizen the American government wisely gave them citizenship: whether they were illegitimate or not it was not their concern, so when I became a citizen they automatically got it too. But the consequence of becoming a citizen, of course, was also very pleasant for me in that I could be involved in American politics.
[Q] And you became a citizen in '60... I mean '50...
It was actually... January '57, I think it was. And so it was about as soon as I could have, and the only jarring note was that when I actually got the citizenship there was a judge who awarded the citizenship and he gave us a patriotic pep talk in which he talked to us as if we were escaped prisoners coming from lands of slavery to the land of freedom, which I didn't quite agree with, but I didn't make any protest.

I was then invited by Goldberger, I think, to join this group, JASON, which at that time was a group of young physicists advising the government, or rather doing technical work for the government on all kinds of questions, not only military question but also various civilian questions, and I jumped at the chance. I enjoy applied work and I always have felt it was good, from the Bomber Command experience, to talk to the soldiers and to let some light into their windows which... which otherwise they lack. And so I was very happy with that and I have stayed with JASON all my life ever since, it's been a big part of my life. It means spending six weeks every year doing technical work on various interesting problems and it's a negotiation between the members and the government. We have to find sponsors in the government for things we're interested in, and so they have to agree to pay us so much for working so many days on a particular problem. So it has to be interesting to us as well as interesting to them, and on the whole the thing has worked extremely well over the years. We haven't changed the culture very much, I mean we haven't made big changes in government policy, but I think we have done a great deal to save money inside the government, especially in the military. The thing that JASON is best at is demolishing unsound projects and, there are many expensive and very stupid things that the military does, and JASON has a habit of criticising these things and getting them stopped. So we've actually saved the money that would otherwise have been wasted. Probably we've saved the government hundreds of billions and what we have cost over the years is – the total budget of JASON is I think a couple of million a year – so from the point of view of the government we're certainly very cost effective. And the reason the government likes us is because we are independent, our jobs are not at stake. The requirement for joining JASON is you have to have a tenured position so that you can always quit if you disagree with the government, and you're also not bound to any industrial organisation. So we can be independent umpires when there are competing bids on a contract, and so you... we don't allow people to join JASON who are employees of a company and we don't... we don't allow people who are still waiting to get tenure at universities.

At the moment I'm involved with the Human Genome Project, which is to me very interesting. The Department of Energy is involved in the Genome Project, it's the division between the National Institutes of Health, which does about two thirds, and the Department of Energy, which does one third. So they're both engaged in this very large project to sequence the genome, and JASON was called in by the Department of Energy to have a look at the programme and advise them as to how to do it. And so we spent two summers looking at it and this next summer we'll be looking at it again. And by and large, I found it very, very educational. I mean, I spent a whole day actually sequencing DNA with my own hands, as part... just part of the training so to speak, just to get a feel for what it actually involves; and of course, what is most impressive about that is how primitive the technology still is; that in fact it's sort of old-fashioned chemistry, rather of the kind you do in high school, pouring things from one little test tube to another and putting things in and out of a... microwave oven.  So it's essentially a... still rather old-fashioned, labour-intensive technology, and it is extremely expensive. And they are trying to make it cheaper and faster.
[Q] May I interrupt you? When JASON started it was almost exclusively physicists. Has it changed on that score? When for example, on the Genome Project, will there be molecular biologist involved, as JASONites?
Yes. We now have two biologists in JASON and we have a fair number of chemists and of course a lot of computer scientists. Computer scientists are the sort of second largest group. There's still a majority of physicists but the... of course the overwhelming fraction of physicists are old and are retiring, and the young Turks are much more widely spread over the different branches of science. I think it's rejuvenating itself quite well. And the two biologists, Steve Block and Gerard Joyce are extremely good. They're both young and so they led the genome study pretty much.
[Q] And just a question which interests me: How many women among the young JASONites at the present time?
I forget the last count. They're not enough of course, but there are a fair number. What is striking is that every woman we get is so good. I mean that is, I think, a remarkable fact, that every time we succeed in getting a woman she turns out to be a star. The... of course Claire Max is the woman who broke the barrier first, and she's wonderful. She's the leader in the active optics business and she's one of the most effective of all the JASONs; and well, Helen Williams is another, she's a condensed matter physicist; there are two others I think whose names I don't remember. I think it's something like four out of 50 or so at the moment, it's less than 10%. But we're working hard at it and actually we've been working hard for many years to bring more, ever since Claire Max there's been a clear policy to bring in women, which is difficult to do. It's a big commitment and especially for women with kids, it's not easy.

Well, roughly speaking the problem for DoE is: should they go into full scale production, or should they go into technology development, that's the real choice. And I feel very strongly that DoE ought to be doing technology development, that's their strength; they should be inventing the clever, cheap ways of doing sequencing, and leave the mass production to NIH, who are already set up to do it. But that's not what DoE wants. The DoE, they want to be big players, they want to be part of the first team, they don't just want to be the technology developers in the background, so they're determined to go ahead with big production projects. So there's a clash of wills there. JASON - as usual - sort of straddles the fence, and the official JASON position is not as strong as my personal position. Officially JASON said we want to see more of the technology development and a little bit less of the crash programme for production, and so that's the way it's going, but I think we still have far too much in the crash programme which is very expensive. It's rather like Apollo that, it's being done, but it's being done at a cost which is not going to be sustainable. After this programme is finished nobody will want to do it again the same way, whereas if we had technology development, finding out how to do it a hundred times cheaper, then that would lead to a sustainable effort, which is no doubt what will in the end happen.

I was asked by JASON to look into adaptive optics about 20 years ago and at that time it was unclassified, it was an open technology which had been developed by Itek, an industrial firm. The idea is to correct the distortions produced in an optical image by the atmosphere. When you look at the sky through an ordinary telescope you don't get a sharp picture because the atmosphere is turbulent and the turbulent eddies in the atmosphere distort the waves, so you always get a certain smearing of the image on the eyepiece of the telescope. So the best possible optical resolution from the ground is something like half a second of arc or so, which is the smearing produced by even a quiet atmosphere. So the idea was that you could have a very fast acting optical sensor system which could actually sense the distortions of the wave fronts as they come down to the ground, and do a very, very fast servo system to correct a flexible mirror, which would then bend the mirror in such a way as to exactly compensate for the refraction, the variable refraction, in the atmosphere. You need to work at a rate of about a KHz, that is, you need to make about a thousand corrections per second in order to have good performance, and so you can actually design a system to do that, and Itek already had such a system 20 years ago, and the question was: What can you do with it? And we were asked in by the Defense Department to look into this and to see what the future of this technology would be. And so I set myself the question of... what are the real limits? If you look at active optics as a information processing problem, how well can you do in principle? And the limits are essentially the balance between atmospheric noise and photon noise. The light itself which is coming through consists of photons, so the information that the light carries is limited by the number of photons, and if only... if you have to do everything a thousand times a second, photons are very precious, you don't have enough photons to get very high signal-to-noise ratios, so that the photon noise is actually very important. And so I did a... I worked out the general theory of this, how you make an optimal system, given the... given the telescope and given the detecting equipment, so you know what you can actually measure; then how do you organise the optimal feedback circuit in order to produce the optimal correction? I actually solved that problem, which turned out to be, again, a beautiful piece of mathematics. And it connected with another of my hobbies, the inverse scattering problem in quantum mechanics, which is an old problem to which I was introduced by Res Jost, another of my physicist friends. So I had this background in the inverse scattering problem which is another very beautiful mathematical theory, which is reconstructing a quantum mechanical potential knowing the scattering that it produces. And it turns out the mathematics for that was identical with the mathematics for the active optics correction system, although it's not at all obvious why they should be the same: one's quantum mechanics, the other's classical - but anyway, they turned out to be the same. So I had this theoretical solution which I published then in the Journal of the Optical Society and it was a good piece of academic science. And it said that if you looked at it from a practical point of view, it said that adaptive optics only works well on astronomically bright sources. You should have... if you're thinking of focusing on a object in the sky, it has to be magnitude 14 or brighter, and magnitude 14 of course is way below what you can see with the naked eye, but from an astronomer's point of view it's still a fairly bright object. Most astronomical objects are fainter than that, so that this was of limited use for astronomy. On the other hand, it was very good for the military because they're looking at satellites which are floating by, illuminated by the sun, and so they're much brighter than magnitude 14, so it should work beautifully as far as looking at satellites coming by, wanting to see clearly what the Russian satellites are made of and so on. That was the object that the military had in view and, so we said, 'That's okay, that works.' But at that stage, after we said that, the military very unwisely declared the whole thing to be secret and that was a disaster for the whole field, so everything went into a black hole and disappeared. So I was in contact with the astronomers on the outside and with the military on the inside, but it was very difficult to... to do anything either inside or outside that made sense. The people on the inside were not interested really in the science at all, they just wanted to have an operational system; they didn't want to know anything more about the atmosphere; and... the people on the outside were totally turned off because they said, 'Well, since the military is spending billions and billions on this, it's pointless for us to spend our little hard-earned astronomical money on trying to compete.' So the astronomers stopped doing it because it was classified, and the people in the military stopped doing anything interesting because they weren't interested in science. So it's a typical example of what classification does. I mean, essentially it stops progress both inside and outside.

And so that was the situation for 10 years after that. And... during that time Claire Max got involved. She was by that time at JASON, and she pushed in two directions. First of all was to get the thing declassified. She works at Livermore and she had very good connections with the classified work and with the people who were running the programme in the Airforce, and she persuaded, after a lot of very careful diplomacy, she persuaded the Airforce that they were not going anywhere unless they had the thing out in the open, that they absolutely needed to have people on the outside look at it, and she finally persuaded the Airforce to declassify the whole thing, which they have done. So for the last five years it's again been out in the open and progress from that time on has been great. So Claire herself is now leading a project to use adaptive optics for astronomy at the Lick Observatory and the Keck telescopes, and she has developed another invention which is the laser guided adaptive optics, which is a very beautiful idea. You... you have a rather powerful yellow laser, of the order of a kW, which points a very narrow beam up into the sky and it illuminates the sodium layer, which is a layer of sodium atoms about 90km above the ground, which is a fairly narrow layer, and these sodium atoms fluoresce vigorously when the laser light illuminates them. So you get a point source in the sky which is as good as a star from point of view of focusing, so you make your own artificial star. So then you can actually do adaptive optics very nicely in any direction you want and just point the laser in the direction you want to observe. The sodium light being one single frequency doesn't interfere with the astronomical observation. So this is the new technique and it's now no longer in any way hindered by the military and it's becoming a very... a very effective way of doing astronomy. And Claire has been just wonderful in getting this actually all organised and making it happen.

In fact the involvement with Vietnam wasn't really JASON. It was a group which called itself JASON East which actually was in Massachusetts, while the real JASON was in California, and so there really wasn't so much connection. JASON East was a much higher level affair. It was... it involved McNamara and various other high level people, and it was a mistake that they called themselves JASON East, but it was convenient because they used the same administration that we had for JASON. It was really quite a separate operation and it was directly concerned with building a barrier in Vietnam, but this was not really a JASON project and certainly JASON was involved in Vietnam in various other respects, but this main barrier project wasn't ours. So that's sort of to clarify the thing. A number of people were bitterly attacked because they were JASON members. I mean there was a... Sidney Drell... violent, physical harassment which occurred, especially at Columbia, and... and Murray Gell-Mann actually suffered from this too. So there was a general feeling of being under siege because the public believed that we were responsible for the horrors of Vietnam. So, I didn't feel much threatened by this because first of all I wasn't myself being physically assaulted and I felt I wasn't guilty anyway, and if I was innocent there's no reason why I should appear guilty. So for me there was no reason to resign from JASON, it would only have sort of strengthened their case if I resigned from JASON. But a number of us did. I think Ed Salpeter was the one I spoke with the most...
[Q] Francis Low and Steve Weinberg I think.
Yes. And Ed Salpeter was the one I spoke with, and I mean it was clear for him, it wasn't so much the particular barrier project that he was concerned about, but just the... the mere association with the government at all at that time that he didn't like. I mean he felt the government was just doing such bad things that he didn't want to be associated with them. Whereas I felt, from the Bomber Command experience, just the opposite - that the worse it was the more I needed to talk to them. So it was a difference in philosophy, but I... of course, I respected very much the decision of these people. I mean, it was clear they were very sincere in wanting to... not to be involved. But what I really did at that time for JASON, which was actually... my real involvement in Vietnam, was caused by a remark I heard Maxwell Taylor drop at a cocktail party. Maxwell Taylor was at that time the private military adviser to Johnson; he was very close to the centre, I mean he was retired chairman of the Joint Chiefs, he was the man who whispered into Johnson's ear, so he was very much responsible for everything that happened. Well, at a cocktail party he remarked, in my hearing, 'Wouldn't it be fun to drop a nuke once in a while, just to see what the other side would do?' Well, that scared me to death! So four of us in JASON who heard him say that, we decided we should do something and so what we did was to prepare a hard-boiled military analysis of nuclear war in Vietnam. It was called The Use of Nuclear Weapons in Southeast Asia [sic]. We did a little study to find out what would really happen if nuclear weapons were introduced into Vietnam, and of course the answer was we'd lose very fast, because they had no targets and we had very good targets, so if the war became nuclear we would have lost in a couple of weeks. So that... it was very simple to make the case that, even from the most hard-boiled military point of view, disregarding all questions of ethics, that this made absolutely no sense. So we... we did the study and we put the report in, and whether it had any effect I don't know, but I felt good about it, I mean, it gave a strong case. If anybody in the Pentagon got hold of our report it would strengthen the case for not doing what Maxwell Taylor suggested. I mean, whether Maxwell Taylor was serious or not, I don't know....
[Q] If he was. I can relate to you, at least going through the Rabi correspondence, he too is worried about the use of nuclear weapons, so he had heard this possibility and he gets various people engaged to try to stop any such move.
Yes. Well, anyway, that's what I actually did and of course, there was, of course, a lot of repercussions of this, because the list of titles of JASON reports was not secret. And so this report we wrote about nuclear weapons of course was secret, but the title of the report got out into the open. And so when of course our friends in France and Italy saw this Use of Nuclear Weapons in Southeast Asia [sic] - author FJ Dyson, I mean, that looked pretty bad. So we got some unpleasant repercussions from that, but I think it was worth it.

I was in the science and technology session of the Disarmament Agency, and it was great fun. The Agency was brand new, it had just been started by Kennedy, so half of us were volunteers and half were people who were going to stay, State Department people and some retired ambassadors. But it turned out there were about 50 people in total in the agency, and the science and technology section was maybe 10 people, but we were doing almost all the work and somehow the scientific and technology section people really believed in the thing much more than the diplomats did. So a great deal of the work which was not technical was actually being done by us. So it was great fun. I was involved to a limited degree in the test ban negotiations while they were going on in Moscow and I remember, sort of, the climatic moment when they almost had a treaty and Harriman was negotiating in Moscow and they were quarrelling about peaceful nuclear explosions which has always been a subject of contention between us and the Russians. Sometimes we are on the side of peaceful nuclear explosions, and sometimes it's the Russians, so we change sides from time to time but we often disagree. Anyway, at that time the United States was in favour of peaceful nuclear explosions and the Russians were against it. So they made it a condition of the treaty that the peaceful nuclear explosions should be banned together with the others, it should be all explosions; whereas the United States was holding out for an exception for peaceful explosions. And it happened then that Harriman said... he cabled back to us what was going on in the negotiations and he cabled back saying, 'Look, I think I can get a treaty if we give on the peaceful explosions. What about it? Can we change the position on nuclear explosions?' That was put to the Agency. Well this happened... this question came on a Friday afternoon and my boss had gone home for the weekend and the next in line above him had gone home for the weekend, so it happened to come down to little me at that... to decide this question. So that was my moment of glory and of course I said, 'Yes, we should give way,' I mean, and that was it.  Whether that was really the decisive point, I don't know; probably many other people were also consulted, but anyhow, I was happy I put in my little input and it was clear to me that the peaceful explosions weren't important. It might have been fun to do peaceful explosions and certainly Edward Teller enjoyed doing them but I wasn't going to stop the treaty because of that.

It's a very long history of course. I was very delighted to have Meselson as a colleague and I learned from him a tremendous lot about biological weapons. Of course he knew everything and we were both cleared for the secret information, so we knew everything that had been done. The United States had a pretty massive programme at that time and we had all kinds of weapons in stockpile, various lethal bugs and various kinds of delivery systems. And it was obvious to both of us that this made absolutely no sense, that there was no conceivable military use for these things that would, from our point of view, make any sense at all, again quite apart from the ethics, and that one should be able to make a strong case to get them abolished. And that Meselson actually did and it happened about, I guess about, I don't know when it was, six years later, when Nixon was President, that by good luck Meselson lived next door to Henry Kissinger and he got to know Henry Kissinger and he persuaded Henry Kissinger that this biological weapon programme was... terribly dangerous, and if it got in the hands of terrorists could be extremely lethal, and was actually useless from our... from our own point of view. So he persuaded Kissinger and Kissinger persuaded Nixon, and Nixon unilaterally decided then to abolish the whole programme, which was one of the major steps forward, I think, towards sanity. So I give Nixon enormous credit for that. So the United States programme was completely abolished, stock piles were destroyed and the weapons lab at Fort Detrick was converted to peaceful uses, which it still is. So that that was a huge step forward. Then about a year later we negotiated with the Russians at the biological weapons convention, which made the thing bilateral, and as we now know the Russians cheated, and of course that's very sad, I mean, that the Russians signed the convention but continued their programme after we stopped. But it's still true that the convention was nevertheless very valuable and I think it's a fine example of the fact that an unverifiable treaty is still useful. This was unverifiable. There's no way we could tell that the Russians were cheating until after the collapse of the Soviet Union. But it's still good to have a treaty because it gives you a stick to beat them with, and... and it's... from a legal point of view it's an enormous help to have an agreement which they signed so that whenever we get evidence that they've been cheating, as we often do, we can take them up and protest publicly and appeal to the United Nations and generally embarrass them. So it is, I think, a very useful thing to have, the treaty. Without the treaty we'd have no way of even complaining. So although treaties are imperfect instruments, but they still are very helpful. So I'm a 100% behind the treaty, no matter how much the Russians cheat.

We have a clear commitment, both from our own government and from the scientific community: we don't do biological weapons and we don't do chemical weapons any more. So that's already... that's a done deal, and what Bethe is suggesting is that we do the same for nuclear weapons; simply say we're not ever going to develop new nuclear weapons. I think that's good and I think it's high time we do that. I would certainly be very happy to see that adopted officially. To some extent it is. I mean, Clinton already has... I think even before Clinton, I think, Ford or whoever it was, no, I guess it was Bush... already declared the policy of not making new nuclear weapons, so it is our declared policy and clearly that should be maintained. What Bethe is saying is that every individual scientist should also declare the same policy and I think that's fine. I would do... certainly do it myself. In my whole life, in fact, I never did design a nuclear weapon so in a way it's sort of not applicable to me, but... but I think it would be a good idea. The weapons labs themselves are not in that business any more. They are only interested now in understanding the stockpile as we have it.

Always of course the concern is applying genetic technology to humans, and that's where the real ethical problems arise. There's an excellent book on this subject called Remaking Eden, which came out last year by my friend Lee Silver, who is a biologist here in Princeton. And he's looking mostly at fertility clinics and I think he's absolutely right, that's where the action is. That it's not... it's not the scientists who are really responsible in this area, it's the medical people, and the fertility clinics are an enormously profitable industry driven by the passion of parents who have to have babies. Parents who go to the fertility clinics are willing to stop at nothing to get babies, and also when they get babies to get good babies free of genetic defects. So that's the driving force. The parents will always take advantage of any technology that comes up to make sure that they can have babies they can call their own, and this is somehow a very, very basic human need, and it's not just in the rich countries but in the poor countries too that this is now a very profitable and... and growing industry. And it's... it's not going to be easy to stop if you wanted to stop it. I think that's the problem, and I think we have to face it, that people are going to use these technologies as soon as they become available. There have to be some legal limits, and the obvious legal limit is to say that you should never apply any technology to produce babies that you don't have reason to believe is going to work. I mean that... you should not take undue risks to produce defective babies. What is an undue risk? Roughly, the risk of producing a defective baby should not be greater than it is naturally, which is already quite high. The risk of genetic defects in a natural birth is about 4%, so that you can allow yourself risks below that level and it still improves on what nature can do. But further than that, I don't know. It's very hard to know where to draw the line. I think Lee Silver has looked at it rather carefully and his conclusion is basically laissez-faire, that it's very hard to intervene in some human... where we are dealing with, sort of, basic human desires and needs, which... which are so passionately felt and so widely felt.

The problem with biochemical ethics, if you like to call it that, or medical ethics, is that it's the knowledge which is the problem, and not any specific application like cloning. People fuss a lot about cloning since we now know how to produce a cloned sheep. Cloning isn't the problem, it's the knowledge that enables you to do it that's the problem. Because if you take the case of fertility clinics, that very few people will actually want to make clones of themselves. That is something which is a possible option for parents who can't have babies, but it's not likely that a lot of us will want to do it. On the other hand, if you take the possibilities that genetic engineering opens for changing the genes in detail, which is what's going to be possible in the next decades, then every parent, whether you're fertile or infertile, will have the option of ordering a baby according to their tastes, and it's hard to see how that's going to be resisted. Parents are willing to spend a $100,000 to send their child to an expensive college; why not spend, say, $10,000 for some superior genes which have the same effect, or enable the child to make much more efficient use of the college education. That's the problems we're going to be up against. So it's genetic engineering in the large which is the problem and not any particular application of it. We'll know what the applications are when the time comes. So I'm in favour of being worried about this, keeping a watchful eye, but I don't think we can legislate anything for it yet. There's the interesting parallel with what happened in 1973, I think it was, when the biologists discovered recombinant DNA technology. That was a momentous event. It was an absolutely new and very powerful technology which suddenly and unexpectedly arrived; it was comparable to the discovery of fission for the physicists, and the biologists responded magnificently to that. There was essentially one person who actually caused this to happen, and that was Maxine Singer who is a great hero, I think. She ought to be celebrated much more than she is: she's a great human being apart from being a great scientist. So she seized the opportunity after recombinant DNA appeared to call an international meeting of biologists simply to decide what to do, and in the meantime all experiments stopped. So for 10 months, I think, the entire biological community all over the world stopped doing experiments with this method and then they got together and decided what should be allowed and what should be forbidden, and that actually has worked. I mean they, they had the meeting in California, at Asilomar, it was an international meeting, they came together, they agreed on a set of guidelines that certain types of experiments should be forbidden; certain other types should be very rigidly controlled and only done under highly contained conditions; and others should be free. And these guidelines have been followed ever since, I think quite meticulously. That's what the physicists ought to have done in 1939 when fission was discovered and the physicists absolutely missed this opportunity, which is very sad because I think it could have... it could have happened in 1939 in the same way, if the physicists had had social consciences equal to the biologists. However, that's by the way. Anyhow, so when something like that happens again, as it will; when some new breakthrough happens in genetic engineering, I hope that we'll do the same thing again, that we'll simply get together and decide what should be permitted. But until the breakthrough happens it's not much point in trying to decide in advance what you'll do.

I don't think I've ever really done astrophysics. I have been interested in it all my life and I've been... I've been a cheerleader but not a player. I mean, the two greatest things I did for the Institute here in Princeton were bringing two people here. First Stroemgren, and second, Bahcall, who are both of them great astrophysicists. Stroemgren started astrophysics here, I forget just when, in the 1960s I think, and I was instrumental in bringing him here, and he was wonderful in getting things started. He attracted very good people, he had excellent relations with Princeton University, and he had this ability to do both observation and theory. So he would... he would go away to Kitt Peak to observe and come back and work out his observations here, and so I loved Stroemgren and I was very close to him, but I never did astrophysics myself. He was... he was the one who did it, but I certainly gave him a lot of encouragement. And then 10 years later after Stroemgren went back to Denmark we had to find somebody to replace him,and it was my initiative that brought John Bahcall here, and John Bahcall, of course, was a marvellous success too. He's very different from Stroemgren, but he's done equally well, and he's been father of neutrino astronomy; he pushed neutrino astronomy with his friend Ray Davis right from the start, which has been a very, very hard struggle, but has now, after 30 years, finally begun to flourish. So we're making big discoveries now with neutrino detectors underground, which are essentially brain children of John Bahcall. In addition to that of course, he does many other kinds of astrophysics. So I have been all the time, all the way through, I've been a bystander. I love to sit at the astronomers' table at lunch and hear what they're doing, but I am not able to do very much myself because it's not mathematical enough for me. It's... very much of the work is imaginative, very, very much imaginative. I mean, in theoretical work in astrophysics you invent a new model and you do some rough estimates and then you publish, and three months later there's a new observation which makes it obsolete. It's a style of work which I'm not really able to compete with myself. It's very quick and dirty and it's done very well by lots of people here.

One thing I did which I enjoyed which... which was the theory of using the earth as a detector of gravitational waves. That's another kind of astronomy, gravitational wave astronomy, so that was an original contribution which I'm rather proud of. I published a paper on seismology in The Astrophysical Journal which I think is a unique achievement. 	It's an interesting question: If you have a gravitational wave coming in from a distance, some astronomical source, with a very precise frequency, something like just  a rotating dumbbell or something far away, a binary neutron star or something of that kind... can you see the earth resonating with seismographs? And the answer is, you can, but of course the coupling between the gravitational wave and earth is very, very small, and I worked it out. It was an interesting piece of theory, and you... you have the coupling between the gravitational wave and the earth going with the cube of the ratio of the sound velocity to the light velocity. Since the ratio is 10-5, the coupling's strength is about 10-15, so that's why it's such a weak signal. But in principle it could be observed and it's interesting that you could... it has a lot of rather interesting characteristic features: because the earth is rotating the lines, the frequencies, will actually be split into rotational components, and since the gravitational wave is a quadropole, you actually get a quintuplet of frequencies. So it has some amusing sort of quasi-quantum mechanical aspects, but needless to say, nothing of that kind has actually been observed. I think it's worth looking for and maybe one day it will be observed.

This was of course a great contribution Cocconi and Morrison made in 1959. They calculated what you could actually detect with existing radio telescopes over very large distances, and it turned out that the results were surprising; that you could detect our present day radio transmissions if they were transmitted from here to some place else in the galaxy and if the aliens at the other end had a similar telescope receiving the signal; that even with our present equipment you could communicate over thousands of light years, in fact not quite all the way across the galaxy but over a substantial part of the galaxy. So it was technically within reach to communicate with aliens over these enormous distances. So they proposed that we actually listen for the aliens. If there are any extraterrestrial intelligences they might be transmitting on the radio and we might be able to hear what they're saying. So that was the Cocconi-Morrison proposal and... which I thought was a brilliant idea and it made sense from every point of view. The beauty of it is that it doesn't cost much to implement, so right away Frank Drake in the first year started a search programme at Green Bank with the existing telescope, actually listening. He didn't hear any aliens, but he proved the feasibility of it and it was an extremely cheap programme. I mean he... his total expenses were a few thousand dollars just for a little bit of detecting equipment and data processing, and that's all he needed. And from that beginning it has continued now for 40 years, so there is a very active programme going on. Particularly there is a programme in Massachusetts led by Paul Horowitz which is listening for radio signals on about half a billion channels, so it's increased in its data processing power by factors of billions since Frank Drake. But still the equipment is quite cheap and the running costs are small, so this is actually all being done with private money, it's not funded by the government, so it's one of the most cost effective things you can do in the whole of astronomy in a way. If we did discover any aliens of course, it would be an enormous... revolution in our whole way of thinking. So I'm 100% in favour of this searching for the radio signals.

But it occurred to me in 1960, I think, a year after Cocconi and Morrison, that there might be aliens who were not communicating, that they might not want to communicate or they might have other means of communicating, so what about... what about detecting them, how could we detect uncommunicative aliens? And there is another way, which I got interested in. At that time they had satellite pictures of the earth, I think, already - I'm not sure, no, that may have been later - but in any case, if you look at the earth in the infrared band at night, nothing that you see is natural. The whole earth is in fact emitting in the infrared band only through human activities. So if you look down from a couple of thousand miles up at night with infrared telescope, what you see are flares from oil fields primarily, that is, the brightest patches on the earth are in Kuwait; and then after that you see of course big cities where humans are congregated.  Everywhere where there is large scale human activities you see infrared radiation, and that's just the result of the second law of thermodynamics, that wherever humans are doing big engineering projects they have to radiate away the waste heat, just because of the laws of thermodynamics. Waste heat... waste heat has to be got rid of and it gets radiated away in the infrared band which is the natural frequency band for activities at a temperature of a few hundred degrees. So why not apply that to the universe at large?  If there are extraterrestrials who are expansionist or have not controlled their populations, who are doing enormously big engineering projects, they also will have to radiate away their waste heat, and so they should be detectable over huge distances. So I proposed looking for these artificial sources of infrared, and so I published a little one page letter in Science called Search for Artificial Infrared Sources, and that was fine, and in recent years there have been some activities in that direction. We haven't discovered anything artificial. We now have very good infrared telescopes and so large numbers of sources have been found - nothing that is suspected of being artificial, but it's another channel which should be exploited.

And in the meantime, unfortunately I used the words, in my paper in Science, 'artificial biosphere' to describe these possible alien activities, biosphere just being an inhabited region, and I called it an artificial biosphere as being something that would radiate in the infrared band. And the science fiction writers got hold of this phrase and imagined it then to be a spherical rigid object and the aliens would be living on some kind of artificial shell, a rigid structure surrounding a star, which wasn't exactly what I had in mind, but in any case that's become then a favourite object of science fiction writers. They call it the 'Dyson sphere', which was a name I don't altogether approve of. But anyway, that's... I'm stuck with it. But the idea was a good one.
[Q] But you had indicated the possibility of advanced civilisation taking planets apart, and... it's possibly that idea that, so to say, resonated with science fiction, I mean the notion...
That's also true, yes. I mean, that was a different paper. I published another paper in a Marshak memorial volume, I think...
[Q] In the Bethe Festspiele.
Oh, that's what it was. Anyway, that was about taking planets apart, demonstrating that, as far as the laws of physics are concerned, it's quite possible to take planets apart simply by spinning them up; you can... you can apply a homopolar generator to a planet and spin it up faster and faster until the equator flies away and it becomes a disc, and so in principle you can do that. I wasn't advocating that, but merely pointing out that the aliens might in fact have done that and that would be a good way of getting material if they wanted to do large scale engineering.
[Q] But it's... I mean it's... as the editors commented in the introduction, there are very few people who would have dreamt of doing something like that, except for you.
Well, Olaf... I got that idea from Olaf Stapledon. Olaf Stapledon is one of my favourite writers of science, he does... he wrote excellent science fiction and, very imaginative, and he also was a professor of philosophy, so he was thinking big.

Well there again, I've always been sort of looking at general relativity from the outside rather than from the inside. I mean this seismological paper is the only the paper I've published, I think, which was directly concerned with general relativity.
[Q] Except for some lectures at...
At Yeshiva I gave a whole year's course of lectures on general relativity, which I enjoyed very much. I mean, of course the best way to learn a subject is to teach it.
[Q] And the American Mathematical Society once published some of your lectures.
I didn't remember that. Maybe that's true. In any case, I took a year off, a year's sabbatical from Princeton, and I worked at Yeshiva and gave a one... a whole year course on general relativity which I enjoyed very much and at least one person learned the subject and that was me. It's a great subject, but I've never actually done research in it.

James Arthur was some sort of amateur scientist – I don't know what his history was – but anyway he endowed these lectures at NYU which have to given in... every year; he endowed them with a substantial sum of money, and the lectures have to be given on time and its mysteries, so every year they have to find somebody to talk about time and its mysteries. So I was invited to do that. It was a wonderful opportunity then to talk about wild stuff, and so I talked about the future of the universe and the question, essentially, whether life could survive for ever in an expanding and cooling universe, and the answer is yes. I mean that was sort of surprising but it turned out to be positive; that as far as the laws of physics and information theory are concerned, a cold universe actually is favourable to life. Life doesn't depend on absolute quantities of energy, life depends on signal to noise ratio; that, you've got to be in a situation where the signals are larger than the noise, so cold is actually more favourable to life than hot. So as the universe gets colder the quantities of energy available are smaller, but the demands become smaller even more rapidly, so actually you win as the universe gets colder. And it turns out, if you take a finite store of energy and if life is able to adapt itself toward colder temperatures, you can actually continue forever staying alive, processing more and more information on a finite store of energy. The process converge... the energy demand integrated to infinity converges, even though the amount of information diverges to infinity. So that's sort of neat, and so in principle there's... there's no automatic death as the universe gets cold.
[Q] And expands – this is for an open universe which keeps on expanding.
Which is now probably confirmed by the observations. I mean the observations have always been sort of wavering between flat and open. Now the observations point pretty strongly to the universe being open, so it will continue to expand for ever and it will cool off. And so this is good news if you want to survive for ever. And I think that this maybe actually not just a game, I mean it may really have some substance to it. And the other question which I looked at, which was also interesting, was how well you can communicate over huge distances, again in a cooling universe with limited supplies of energy, and it turns out there also that you never need lose touch with your neighbours, you can continue communicating by radio.
[Q] It can take a long time.
It takes an enormous time, of course, and the message, the bit rate, gets less and less, but the time available is infinite so that you can afford to wait. So the universe can in fact maintain communication over these enormous distances and times as long as you want.

I have always been interested in biology and clearly the central problem of biology in a certain way is the origin of life, how did it all get started. And, so I read Oparin's little book and various others; I think Haldane wrote a little book about origin of life and Purnell [sic] I think... anyway there's a standard literature about this. And then I was in La Jolla doing Orion, next door was the Salk Institute where Leslie Orgel was. Leslie Orgel is a chemist who's done real experiments on DNA and other essential components of life, and he was... has always been interested in this question of origins. So actually, I was there for a year and we had many meetings and conversations which we would go over this question of how the whole thing could begin, and it was clear that there was a kind of a paradox. That the... life has to be able to replicate; that's sort of the definition of life according to the orthodox view, which means you have to have exact copying of molecules, and how can a replication system then ever get established? It has to be able to replicate itself and somehow or other it has to lift itself up by its bootstraps from a thoroughly disorganised state, which is the sort of natural chaos from which things originate, into something that's highly organised, able to replicate. And the problem is that on the way up, you have a system which is bad but still partly replicating which has a high error rate, so it can replicate itself with a lot of errors before it's become a good replicator. But if you do the arithmetic you find out that it'll slide down again, that the errors multiply as... as the generations go by. So that if you have something that's 90% accurate and then it tries to replicate, in the next generation you'll get the same 10% errors, plus a few more because of the fact that the system is not perfect. So the next generation is worse than the one you're in. So the mathematics is always against you. It seems very, very difficult to get a replicating system to jump from disorder to order. So were sort of stymied, Orgel and I, and it's remained like that ever since. The orthodox view among biologists is that life has to start with replication and it then becomes very, very hard to get over this very first step; how can it overcome this error, what we call the error catastrophe, the fact that errors propagate more rapidly than the... the amount of information? So I finally decided one has to make a completely fresh start and have life without replication, which to my mind is not such a great difficulty. I mean of course it goes against all the prevailing dogmas of the biologist. The idea is that you could have a replicating system coming in much later, when life already existed, and then it becomes a much easier problem. But how could life even start without replication? Well, that then is the question that I addressed and I think I made some progress with that.

So I consider a sort of, a cell, which is a little bag with molecules inside, so I'm looking at little populations of molecules, and they're going to be able to grow by absorbing stuff from the outside, and then from time to time simply fission; just, the cell will divide into two either because of some surface instability or because it's chopped up by rainstorms or something, so by natural processes the drops divide and then continue to grow and then divide and continue to grow. But there's no replication in the proper sense, there's no exact copying, merely the population just randomly accumulates. And the question is then, could there be an evolution of droplets of this kind without replication, and I think the answer is yes. So that's the model that I have in mind. So it's a system that has the attribute of metabolism; that is, a living process that brings in molecules from the outside.
[Q] These would be primarily proteins rather than...
Nucleic acids. Yes. I mean it's probably neither, it's probably a much more heterogeneous mixture. But anyway, things that eventually evolve into proteins. But the point is that you don't need to have a very low error rate for this to work. So you imagine that the population of molecules has a certain tendency to catalyse its own reproduction, but I make the distinction between reproduction and replication. So you reproduce a population approximately, but you don't replicate the individual molecules. So the population is reproduced by catalysis, by... because the molecules themselves catalyse other molecules to be reproduced, so the population as a whole is being reproduced with a very high error rate, and nevertheless it evolves. And... so you can actually then... I made a little mathematical model of this, and it turned out it did very nicely. There's a certain natural... it's a purely mathematical exercise but it sets a natural scale for the population that... which comes only from natural constants, not constants of physics but constants of mathematics. And it... I mean it goes with essentially the fact that e4 - e is the exponential, is 54, which is sort of a reasonable number, and the quality factor for the catalyst has to be at least that good. So there's a natural sort of lower limit on the quality of the catalysts, but that's a very easy limit. 54 is pretty low, because even poor catalysts easily achieve a factor of 100. Biological catalysts, proteins, have quality factors like 104, or 10,000 or higher. So you don't need the modern very efficient proteins to make this work. If you have these very poor catalysts, it turns out that the thing actually can lift itself up statistically by its boot straps and you get an evolution toward better quality. And it turns out that the error rate at this saddle point where you change over from disorder to order is 1/3, which is very satisfactory. So you're dealing with... really with messy mixtures of molecules, which is what you expect at the early stages, so it's totally different from the picture you have with the replicating system where you need error rates like 1 in 1000. So it's a totally unorthodox view but I think it could in fact be right. So I wrote this little book called Origins of Life expounding this point of view and it had an interesting history because it's been totally ignored by biologists and it's been welcomed by physicists and by all kinds of other readers, sort of generally non-expert readers, but made a case which is convincing to everybody except the experts, which is quite normal for revolutionary ideas. I have a... I know my son, George, who is one of my honest critics, says, 'This is what you're going to be remembered for, not the physics', and maybe he's right. Anyhow, I'm happy to say that this book is now going into a 2nd edition, that the Cambridge Press who published it 12 years ago finds there's enough demand, so they're going to publish a new edition next year, and I'm rewriting it for the second edition, putting in some more modern information. So by and large I would say that the experiments are still completely neutral, they... there's no evidence one way or the other whether replication came first or whether metabolism came first, it's still an open question. The biologists all believe that replication came first. I think the reason is clear, because they work with RNA all the time: RNA is such a wonderful experimental material, it's like the hydrogen atom for biology; they can do these beautiful experiments with RNA evolving in a test tube and it... RNA does all sorts of lovely things, it's perfect experimental material.  Including acting as a... an enzyme.  Right. Now they discovered ribosymes which are these RNA enzymes, which only confirms the orthodox view that RNA was the original stuff. So that's now they talk about the RNA world as having preceded the protein world, which I think is a fantasy, but... it's the party line among biologists. So anyway, I just am quite patiently waiting to see. I think in the end there's a good chance I might turn out to be right, but I probably won't live to see it, and in any case, I don't care.

This is Lynn Margulis's idea really. I mean she has been the great promoter of symbiosis in biology, and I mean she promoted... not... she didn't invent, but she promoted the idea which actually was invented in Russia, that eukaryotic cells are symbiotic systems in which all the little components, the mitochondria and the chloroplasts, were actually invading bacteria that were co-opted by the cell and converted into organelles. That view is now accepted by biologists; that the modern eukaryotic cell is a symbiotic structure which arose not by gradual evolution but by sudden acquisition of creatures that came in from the outside. So that's an orthodox view. What I'm proposing for the origin of life is that this happened at an even more basic level, when the original life, which consisted then of metabolism only without replication, produced as a by-product things like the... ATP, adenosine triphosphate, which is an energy carrying molecule which is a part of the metabolic system. It's a molecule which is rich in phosphorous and which arises naturally as part of the metabolic apparatus. And so some cell invented ATP and...and that was... gave it some selective advantage, it became a common currency in the metabolism of cells. Then at some point the ATP happens to be closely related to the adenosine nucleotide which is a constituent of nucleic acid, and at some point this ATP polymerised and formed nucleic acid inside the cell, and the cell became saturated with nucleic acids which didn't have any function; this was a disease of the cell. But at some point then it became a parasite; it developed a life of its own, and it became a parasite on the earlier metabolic life, so you have the nucleic acid life originating then inside the cell, which is much easier than originating outside because the cell has provided the raw material. And so finally then this parasitic DNA would become a symbiotic part of the cell and would then become useful, and in the end then, the two components living together – the proteins doing the metabolism and the DNA as the parasite – finally would get together and become the modern cell in which the two are very beautifully harmonised and the DNA provides the software and the proteins provide the hardware. So that is just 2 billion years earlier; the original symbiosis giving rise to the prokaryotes just as the Margulis system, which was around a billion and a half years ago, and the eukaryotic cells were the second stage in the symbiotic... this hierarchical development of life.

I was a friend of Alvin Weinberg who was the Director of Oak Ridge for many years. He's a great physicist who had... a very close friend of Wigner – they worked together on the early reactor work – and he stayed at Oak Ridge for 40 years. He's still there. He's now retired, he's 83 and he still plays a vicious game of tennis. He's an excellent leader and Oak Ridge has always been first rate scientifically. They've had their problems with nuclear energy like everybody else, but in the meantime they've done a lot of excellent science. One of the things that Weinberg did long before it was fashionable, was worry about carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and what it was doing to the climate. And so he invited me to go down to Oak Ridge and work on this 20 years ago, and I went there regularly for quite some years until it became fashionable and then I gave up because obviously I wasn't going to compete with the huge influx of people who came into it later. But in those early years Oak Ridge was really the only place that was worrying about carbon dioxide, and we had a very good group there: Ralph Rotty, who was collecting the information from all over the world about what was actually going on, and Greg Marland who is interested in vegetation in particular. And so my interest has always been in... in finding out what was actually happening in the real world, as opposed to doing computer models. So we fought very hard to get observations, and that's remained a central concern of mine ever since; that the huge industry which has grown up is doing computer models of the climate and trying to determine effects of carbon dioxide from computing what's going to happen, and this is a very dubious business if you don't have good inputs. The out... output of a climate model looks very impressive to the non-expert; the experts know that it's no better than the input. And in this case we simply don't yet know what's going to happen to the carbon in the atmosphere because we don't know what already has happened. We don't know what is happening, and the only way to find out is by observing.
So anyway we were at Oak Ridge, this little group put together a programme, and the Department... the Department of Energy who runs Oak Ridge didn't pay much attention to us, instead they put all their money into computer modelling. And that remains true even today. But, so what I was mostly doing at Oak Ridge was actually just looking at the balance between the vegetation and the atmosphere, which to me has always seemed to be the central problem; that there's more carbon in the vegetation on the earth than there is in the atmosphere, so that the atmosphere is the tail and the ground is the dog in this case. I mean, it's a... vegetation is really controlling what happens rather than the atmosphere. In fact, what one needs in order to understand the problem is to understand the vegetation first, whereas the emphasis in the climate models, of course, has always been on the atmosphere. But you can't understand the atmosphere by itself; the vegetation is absolutely essential. Well, what do we know about the vegetation? Not very much, and so the elementary questions are: How much carbon dioxide is going into the vegetation through... the photosynthesis, and how much is coming out through respiration, and what is the balance? Well the first good measurements of this were done only a couple of years ago by Wofsy at Harvard, who has a very wonderful technique called eddy flux measurement I think he calls it; it's a figure for eddy flux measurement and it's a very clever trick. He puts a tower up above the forest, if we're talking about trees; it doesn't have to be trees, it could be any sort of vegetation. He puts a tower, and at top of the tower you have instruments which measure accurately the speed of motion of the air, second by second or even 1/10th of a second at a time, and also measure carbon dioxide abundance, 10 times per second. This can now be done with modern instruments very precisely. And the remarkable thing is that there's a very high correlation, second by second, between the movement of the air up and down, and the carbon concentration. So the... you can actually see the flux going into the ground just by measuring what's in the air above the forest. It's a very direct measurement of the flux. And this has had amazingly little notice. I mean, I think it's a revolution in the whole state of the art. He's finally done what we proposed 20 years ago and it's... been done in Brazil in one place and it's been done in Canada in one place, and there's another group in, I think in Duke University, who are doing some measurements, but it's on a tiny scale. I mean it's tiny compared with what's going into the computer models. But this is what's really needed, so one will know whether the carbon dioxide is actually going into the ground or whether it's coming out. And the evidence is that in Massachusetts it's going in, much... much larger quantity than was estimated by the experts; in Brazil it's going in more or less to the extent that was estimated; in Canada it's coming out. Well the quantities, of course, are enormous and what should happen is, in the next few years, is we should have similar measurements in a hundred different places, then we should begin to know what is going on on the global scale. But until now we don't have it, and until you have that sort of information it makes very little sense just to believe the... the output of the climate models.

I think the... the public is obsessed with the phrase 'global warming', which is not the problem. I mean global warming I think is a very misleading phrase, because there are other things which are much more important and easier to measure; for example, stratosphere cooling, and stratosphere cooling is much larger than global warming, because global warming is supposed to be a rise in the average ground temperature. The average ground temperature over the earth is impossible to measure since most of the earth is ocean and we don't have instruments. So this average ground temperature is a fiction. I mean, nobody knows what it is, there's no way you can measure it and it's not particularly important anyway. I mean, what's important is how much rain is going to fall next year, how many hurricanes there are going to be, and how much ozone there's going to be. Well the stratosphere cooling is something we really know a lot about because that's easy to calculate. It's a direct effect of carbon dioxide which cools the stratosphere just by radiation, it's independent of weather, and it's very large. So that's a measurable and known effect of carbon dioxide, which can be extremely serious because it immediately affects the ozone. As you cool the stratosphere you produce more ice crystals in the stratosphere and that has a very destructive effect on the ozone.

We know that the ozone disappeared from the Antarctic over a large region; during the last 20 years you have this thing called the ozone hole which appears in the spring in the Antarctic, and it doesn't yet appear in the Arctic, but if the stratosphere over the Arctic gets cooled down it's likely it's going to happen in the Arctic. And that's of course much more serious, since it happens there's a much larger population within the Arctic regions than there is within Antarctic; I mean, the Antarctic happens to be essentially empty of people, very fortunately. But when it happens in the Arctic, that's going to be a major disaster if we don't do something about it. So that's my primary concern with the carbon dioxide at the moment, but it's not what the public is worrying about. The public thinks that you have to wait until global warming is proved before you do something and of course that's completely ridiculous because the other effects which are more easily measurable are already happening anyway. So that's the kind of thing I'm doing. I'm not really doing the observation myself, but I'm pushing very hard, and also since this became a fashionable subject, JASON is also involved with the carbon dioxide and climate, so we did a study on that, in which we advised the Department of Energy to put more money into observations. Again, very limited success. The Department of Energy has a little programme called A-R-M, ARM, which stands for Atmospheric Radiation Measurements, which is an excellent programme but it has miserably small amounts of money, and meanwhile of course they put huge money into the computer models. So it's an.... so it's an endless fight, but we are making some progress. And I think the understanding of the carbon dioxide problem is still very, very far away, we have... especially the links between carbon dioxide and vegetation are very poorly understood. But when you have the understanding, when the measurements have been made, I think we can control the carbon dioxide rather easily, because it's a question of land management essentially and... so the amounts that are involved in the vegetation are so large that if you merely just change some of the forest management practices or do a little more irrigation in some places, it's quite likely you can absorb all the carbon dioxide you want, at a cost which is far less than stopping burning coal and oil. So that's essentially what I'm trying to understand.

My first piece of real research was in number theory, directly inspired by Ramanujan, who was this Indian genius who lived in the early 20th century and died in 1921. And, so he had left open a lot of conjectures and I found some fresh conjectures very much in the Ramanujan style and I published those in the student magazine at Cambridge called Eureka. And so that was the earliest work I ever did, and the beautiful thing was that one of these conjectures called the crank conjecture was actually proved 45 years later and that's... so I was very delighted I lived long enough to see this conjecture proved; it was done by... by Frank Garvan who is a young Australian. And so that subject is still very alive, and in fact the whole subject of what I call 'Ramanujanology', which is the sort of number theory in the style of Ramanujan, is now rejuvenated, mostly the result of two people, George Andrews and Bearnt... Bruce Bearnt, two mathematicians who have taken up the systematic exploration of everything Ramanujan conjectured. They've gone through all the notebooks of Ramanujan, proving all the statements that he conjectured, of which there are thousands, so it's been a life work for Andrews and Bruce Bearnt, and so in... and they've attracted a very large number of graduate students over the years so there's now an army of young people involved in this kind of number theory, which is great fun, and of course Frank Garvan is one of them. So the ranks and cranks that I worked on as a student in Cambridge are still very much alive. So that's... that's a big joy for me; it's the beauty of mathematics, as opposed to physics, that it's forever. I published my selected papers recently in one volume, and I found out that when you publish your selected papers most of the physics is ephemeral, that you don't want to publish stuff that was written 10 or 20 years earlier, but the mathematics is permanent. So essentially everything I've ever published in mathematics is there, whereas only about a quarter of what I published on physics was worth preserving.

I find it a miracle. I mean, I don't pretend to understand it and I think it is absolutely marvellous that nature somehow thinks like a mathematician, that was what James Jeans said that... that God appears to be a mathematician. And it is astonishing that somehow all these weird mathematical ideas which we have invented for purely aesthetic reasons, essentially just as works of art, as intellectual constructions, turn up then unexpectedly to be used in nature. There're so many examples of this, of course. Of course the classic case was differential geometry which was invented by Gauss for very practical purposes, just for projecting maps from the spherical earth onto a plane, onto a piece of paper, so he invented this differential geometry as a way of representing curved surfaces on a flat plane. And then 50 years later Riemann applied that to a description of space and conjectured that space itself might actually be curved, but it was still sort of purely an intellectual hypothesis without any kind of physical basis.   And then another 50 years later it turned out to be the essential tool for Einstein to understand gravitation. It is in fact what Einstein used for general relativity. So it's built... it's built deep into the structure of space-time. It's a miracle how that happened. So Gauss had developed this tool for totally other reasons. And that's happened again and again. Of course Lee invented Lee groups to understand classical dynamics, and it turned out to be, 100 years later, exactly what you need to describe particles, and I don't know why, but... so the world has deeply built into it these mathematical structures and there seems to be a kind of rule that anything mathematicians can invent, God somehow can use. So we hope that's also true of the Riemann hypothesis. We haven't yet found the Riemann hypothesis verified in nature, but maybe we will one day.

I was sort of guided by Hardy, my mathematician mentor whom I spoke about earlier. Hardy wrote wonderful textbooks, including this number theory textbook, Introduction to Theory of Numbers and he wrote a wonderful little book called Pure Mathematics which is a sort of compendium of analysis for beginners, so he devoted the latter part of his life to writing these beautiful books. And I once asked him, I was then this young student, and I said, 'Don't you think it's a waste of your time writing these books instead of proving theorems?' And Hardy said simply, 'Young men should prove theorems; old men should write books.' And I think that was good advice. I mean there comes a time in your life when you're not so good any more at proving theorems and you can still write books, so he decided when he was 50 years old, roughly, that he would devote most of his time to writing books, and I have more or less followed his example.  It happened accidentally that when I was 50 years old or thereabouts, I was invited by the Sloan Foundation to write an autobiography. It was in a series of autobiographies of scientists that they were bringing out, so they actually funded this, paid me in advance for the book, which became Disturbing the Universe. So I had the incentive to write it and it came at a convenient time of my life, and once I had written that book, of course, I tended to get invited to give lectures and it started a new chapter in my life simply because I was better known and I was known to a much wider public. So I began to have lots of friends in the literary world and to be invited to give talks at universities on more general subjects, and this was something that fitted naturally into my growing old, and not being able to compete with all the bright young people in this building. It was... it's clear today, when I talk with these young kids in the building, they are all in their 20s and they are writing papers faster than I can read them, so it would be stupid for me to try to compete. So I don't, and instead I do the less fashionable things, and in particular then, I do a lot of lecturing and writing. And I find it's my solution of the problem which many other scientists face. You... you solved the problem by changing from being a physicist to becoming a historian; I solved it by changing from being a mathematician to becoming a writer: it's a similar decision and history is something you can very well do as an old man.

I've become much more involved, of course, in... in trying to do something about the state of the world and I'm no longer concerned about my career. My career is done and I shall continue as I... as I have been for the last 10 or 20 years and as long as I'm capable I'll continue writing and lecturing. But there's no urgency about producing some great work which there used to be when I was young. But also I just feel much more feeling of responsibility since I've become a public figure and people pay attention to what I say, it's an opportunity to say something that might be helpful, that's why I suppose I'm paying much more attention to problems of war and peace and problems of climate, problems of the environment, of biotechnology and so forth, all of which I'm not expert in but I have some strong opinions, so I might as well speak my mind.

I happen to be a moderately religious person; not... I mean I'm not in any sense a theologian or somebody who really knows a lot about religion, but I... I go to church and I have a feeling that it's a great thing that churches and synagogues and mosques exist in the world. They are communities of the kind that make people better on the whole, and certainly in Princeton we have about 25 churches and they're full every Sunday, in addition to a couple of synagogues and I don't know if there's a mosque on the highway not far away. In any case, this is an important part of our lives and I'm very happy to be a part of it. My grandsons goes to the little Sunday school at the church where we go and so they're learning Bible stories and I think it's good that people learn these stories when they're young so they have some feeling for the culture even if they don't believe the religion. That the... Christianity is very much a part of our culture and at least they should know what the Bible is about. So I'm happy to belong to that, and the church also plays an important social role in this community. It's about the only institution that really ties the community together and takes care of aged and sick and poor people, so I'm all in favour of religion as an institution. And at the same time, I find it doesn't make any conflict with my science; that religion to me is really not about belief, it's about belonging, it's about a way of life, and so I don't find the slightest difficulty in being a religious person in this sense and being a scientist. And so that's... maybe a slightly unusual combination. I mean, most of my friends either tend to be total agnostics who have no interest in religion at all, or else are... worried about conflicts between science and religion. The more religious people that I know mostly have difficulties in harmonising science and religion. So I'm... I find my situation is rather unusual, so I like to explain this. I suppose that's the main reason that I go to meetings, to try to point out to people that you can be both; that the conflicts are in a way very artificial and they... conflicts only arise if you have... if you try to make religion into a science or if you try to make science into a religion, both of which are very un... unsatisfying. Both mistakes, of course, are frequently made. The fundamentalists try to make religion into a science, and the... a lot of the more extreme what you might call science worshippers, in which I include Einstein; Einstein was one of the worst of those, that he made science into a religion and he said quite explicitly that for him science was a religion, there was something sacred about it, and that I think is a cause of a great deal of difficulty, and caused him to take a very narrow view of science.

I think you really can't tell until you're a hundred years dead what you did that was important, and so... I mean, as my son said, it might be the Origin of Life that actually is the most important scientific contribution. I never tried to create a school and I never had graduate students of the conventional sort who sort of carried on my work. Everything I've done has been scattered to the winds and you don't know whether it will sprout. So I think one just has to wait and see and I don't have any strong opinions. I think...
[Q] Can I phrase it slightly differently? What gave you the most satisfaction?
That's very different.
[Q] Yes, yes.
That's a question that's easy to answer because, I mean, the most satisfaction certainly came out of the mathematical beauty of the things that were successful, just on a technical level. The number theory was in a way the most satisfying of all because it was just a work of art and it was something that was perfect in itself. 
[Q] And lasting.
And it lasts so that's something that – as Hardy said, it's a work of art that's built with ideas and therefore lasts for ever. That was true, to some extent, of the... the work on random matrices and to lesser extent quantum electrodynamics. That's probably going to be superseded in some respects, but still it had that same quality. So I think that... from a point of view of satisfaction it was just the technical perfection of the mathematics that satisfied me the most. And... to some degree that carries over into the writing. In the things that I've found most satisfying in my writing are particular chapters in the books which became somehow works of art, like the... the chapter about Teller in Disturbing the Universe called The Prelude in E Flat Minor which somehow gave me enormous satisfaction. I mean it was... it was a problem: How do you describe Teller in a way that the public can respond to because... he's known to be an evil character and yet I want to present him sympathetically, how do you do that? And so, I... I mean the way I found to do it was the piano. The piano was the sort of the metaphor which would make Teller into a human being and... and I think it worked. So I started out with the Prelude in E flat Minor, and that's how I introduced him, so that was very satisfying to me. And there... that's the book that gave me the most satisfaction because I took longer to write it, it was written with greater care than the later ones, and... and of course the ending where I have a dream of the baby on the throne is a similar thing. I mean it may be too sentimental, but still I liked it.
[Q] If I were to pursue that particular metaphor would I be interpreting it right as it conveying a... almost a William James, a Jamesian kind of conception of the deity as one that evolves with the universe?
Yes, absolutely. I mean this... it's... of course, it wasn't a conscious invention, I actually did dream this, and so it came to me unconsciously, but I think it somehow... speaks to that question: What is God? And the answer is He's a baby, that He's growing, He doesn't yet know what He is. And so that was, I think, a poetic way of saying that.

I've never had very good relations with institutions and... so... I mean I'm just definitely not a... person who likes institutions or works well with them, so I've never had very happy relations with the Institute for example. I mean I've always... in all our squabbles in the Institute, of which there have been many, I've always been in the minority. And I detest the National Academy of Sciences, only I didn't have the guts to resign as Feynman did. Anyhow, so I've nothing to say about institutions. About people, I think I have... I mean my mother always used to say that I had a gift for friendship with little girls and old ladies, everything in between was more difficult! And that still remains true in a sense, that I mean I love old people and I love young people and in between it's not... it's not so simple. But I've had many very close friendships and I still do, and a lot of them by correspondence. There's a wonderful Mormon lady in Idaho whom I've never met, whom I've had a lengthy correspondence with simply because she read Disturbing the Universe and wrote me a lovely letter, and she has seven kids and she wanted... said she wanted to live lightly on the earth and she was feeling bad because she had seven kids and could I give her some advice. And anyway, so I've got very close to this woman whom I've never met, and that's the beauty of writing books. I mean that, to me, is what writing books gave. It was a way of making friends which has been extraordinarily powerful and it still works. I'm astonished that... to what extent people still read books and write letters though it's said... I mean, everybody says books are not being read any more, and... and letters are not being written, but I know that's not true.

[Q] After you read books which strike you as interesting, insightful, do you take pen to hand and write to the author and establish bonds that way?
Yes, once in a while I do, and that works equally well. I mean one of the examples of course is Oliver Sacks who has become quite a close friend because I read his books, and it happens also we're both of us friends of Carleton Gajdusek who recently got out of jail, so we went down together to greet him when he came out of jail. Oliver Sacks is, as I am, just a great maker of friends. He... he is a person I just, I love him dearly, although in a way I'm not a very close friend because we've mostly just corresponded, only met about twice, but... but he's a wonderful guy. And of course he's even more many-sided than I am and he's written books on many different subjects; he's a... a medical doctor and an author and has enormously wide interests. And... and also we happen, both of us, to be friends with the Parks who have an autistic daughter with whom he got very involved with. He's actually made a television documentary, which is excellent, of Jessy Park, the autistic daughter. It is a wonderful documentary because it really shows her as she really is, and that was done by Oliver Sacks. And I've been of course involved with the Park family for 40 years, so it's a network of friends.

I always say what I told the students the other day at Clarkson University: There are three things in my life which are important, namely family, friendship and work, in that order, and I think that's always been true. So for me work has always been fun, but I've never taken it too seriously.
[Q] And... has it become easier as you grow older to make friendships?
Yes, I think so. Yes, I'm not shy any more. There's a wonderful little book called Period Piece by Gwen Raverat who is a granddaughter of Darwin, about growing up a child in Cambridge, and she ends the book by saying the great thing about growing old is that you don't have to care any more what other people say or think.
[Q] It's easier to be courageous...
Yes!

I don't make many friends here at the Institute.  That... I mean this has always been true, that I don't easily collaborate with people and when I do it's generally at a large distance. I've collaborated a lot with Mehta, for example, who lives in France and now we can collaborate by e-mail; in the old days we wrote letters back and forth, so I've always been good at collaborating at a distance. But of course a huge number of friends I've made through my kids... I have six children and each of them has a world into which I am able to enter and make friends there, so their friends are my friends. That's how a lot of my friendships arise, in fact, just brought through... through the children, and that's of course a wonderful way of keeping in touch with the younger generation.
[Q] And is there special satisfaction, for example, in seeing one daughter going off and becoming a minister, and another daughter becoming a doctor, another a son who becomes a writer? You clearly did things right or...
Well, at least I didn't make terrible mistakes. That's... it is of course an enormous satisfaction that every one of these six is doing something interesting. They're all happy people, fully engaged in what they're doing and... and that's for me an enormous joy and so, I mean, I'm... I'm lucky, but it's always a gamble when you have children but so... somehow or other it worked out.
[Q] And some other people would say it's more than luck.
Well, anyway, it's wonderful.

I've always felt that the reason I'm a confirmed optimist is I survived the 1930s. I think, and... that must be true of you too, that in the 1930s when I was a teenager  things were so black that it really looked as though we didn't have a chance. I looked on the future then that I was one of the doomed generation that was going to be chewed up in World War II, just like the... my uncle was chewed up in World War I. I mean we were the young kids who were going to be slaughtered in the trenches or whatever it was going to be in World War II. World War II was clearly coming, and in addition to that of course there was the economic slump, there was terrible social disarray in England, the poor people were hungry and there was huge unemployment. It was a bad time in almost every respect and we didn't see much hope of surviving it, let alone improving it. Well, we survived all that, and nowadays we have problems, but they're nothing like as bad as they were in the '30s. Why should people be so pessimistic - if we could survive that, we shall survive whatever we have now, and so that's basically the reason. But of course, in addition, the fact that I have six happy children also helps. And I shouldn't leave out my wife. I mean of course... it's unfair to mention the children without the wife. I have a wife who is also a wonderfully outgoing and happy personality and who is... happens to be a very successful marathon runner and that's again a different world into which I'm free to move because of her. She has a lot of these crazy friends who are marathon runners. This is a special breed of people all over the world who run marathons, and they're a very diverse group, they just have this one passion in common, and so it's a great society to belong to. And through her I've made a lot of friends who otherwise I would never had met, and they even extend all over the world. I mean she's been running marathons in Moscow and other such places, so we have a lot of Russian running friends as well as Americans and Germans. So that's also a big part of my life, and so she has been an enormous help and inspiration in everything I do. She is also my constant critic, which is also very helpful too.
