joan.feynman

Joan Feynman (1927-2020) was an American astrophysicist. She made important contributions to the study of solar wind particles and fields, sun-Earth relations and magnetospheric physics. In particular, Feynman was known for developing an understanding of the origin of auroras. During her career, Feynman was an author or co-author of more than 100 scientific publications. She also edited three scientific books. In 2002, she was awarded NASA's distinguished Exceptional Achievement Medal.

This is a story of a couple of generations back. My... that was my grandmother. My great- grandfather was born in Poland and he... at the time there were the usual wars between Poland and Germany and Russia – to what part of the world Poland should be in. And my great-grandfather thought that it would be better... for the Jews if Poland were part of Germany. So he was basically importing... putting armament in Germany secretly. And the Germans caught him. No, he was doing it to Russia. The Russians caught him and they were going to hang him. So as they were preparing to hang him, the Germans attacked. And in the confusion of battle, my great-grandfather or something escaped and went to the little Jewish town where they lived, where the people immediately raised money to send him to the United States, which had no counting of how many people came. So that's how he came.And he was a watchmaker. And he opened his store... He opened his store in New York and saved money until he had enough money to invite his oldest daughter to come to help him. So he did, and she was 15 or 16. And she came over on a boat. And when she came off the boat into the... into the building, there was nobody there. Her father wasn't there. And then a young man came over and said, 'Are you Johanna Phillips?' And she said, 'Yes'. He said, 'You're supposed to come with me'. So this young woman had to follow this unknown man through the streets of New York 'till they got to the little store. And there, my great-grandmother or whatever saw her... so she rushed in and threw her arms around him. He went like this and said in German, 'Show me your deeds. Don't kiss me. Show me your deeds'. So the next morning she took a broom and she cleaned the whole store and she put the dust and stuff in the road. Well, then a policeman turned up because that was against the law in New York. She got saved from being put in jail by the neighbors who could speak two languages. But I have... but the reason I think she was intelligent was she was fixing watches, which was not normal for women.My family were not Orthodox Jews. But in about 1900, there was a... were some rabbis who were not satisfied with the new things and they started a new religion, sort of, called ethical culture. And ethical culture had to do with ethics. And they were Jewish ethics which were high on charity and so on but it was not strongly attached to a deity. You made your own idea about the deity. We didn't believe in the Christian deity but it was mostly emphasis on morality. And yes, in that area I would say we were... we believed strongly in morality.

My mother was sent to two schools. The first school was a German school because her mother thought the Germans were wonderful people. So it was dreadful because they had lunch every day, it was always the same lunch and it was a brown bean soup served in a soup plate and then the rest of the meal was served in the soup plate without washing it. So they had to finish all of the soup. Then the second school they sent her to was the... Fairview School which still exists. And that was around 1900 when there was a – I may have mentioned this – there was a... some new thinking of the Jewish religion. And they made a new religion called ethical culture which was not concerned with the deity, but just with how you're supposed to live life. And that was the religion in the house where I was brought up. We did do some Jewish things like have Passover and things like that. But the major thing was ethical culture. I found out some interesting things to me. I was in Egypt, and we were going to see some pyramids. And we were in a little cart with a donkey or a mule, and the guy was hitting the donkey or mule to get him to go faster. And I said to him, 'Wait a second. I cannot, because of my religion, ride in a car with animals being hit. So just stop and I'll get out and walk'. And he said, 'No, I'll stop hitting the animal'. And he was so pleased. And that really surprised me and pleased me that what they were doing, they didn't want to do that. So I found that more people were kind than it was obvious.My parents believed that – like any sensible person – that life was hard, so the only thing that you could do about it was laugh. And so they laughed a lot and we all laughed a lot. So it was a good... a good way to deal with it. My father went painting every Saturday, watercolors and in the summertime it was outside at... whether it was a house by the beach or something like that. In the winter time he got... bought flowers from a florist who was very good at arranging them and he had the flowers. My father always wanted me to stay home with him on Saturday. But I tried a couple of Saturdays and it took him 15 minutes to get to sleep, to sleep all afternoon. So my mother said, 'You don't have to stay home.'I normally saw him when I was a child at supper times, because he came home he worked in Manhattan and we lived in Far Rockaway which was about an hour's train drive away. And it was a family rule when he came home, knocked on the door, rang the doorbell that everybody in the family rushed to the front door to welcome and kiss him. That included the dog. The dog would come running. And the dog was always trying to be first.He wasn't home very much except at supper and on weekends he was painting. But he was a vegetarian. He was a vegetarian because he did not think it was ethical to kill an animal to eat it. We don't need to eat animals. So that was a thing which was rare about him. Even when he went to restaurants they would say, it's only a little gravy on this. No, no, jello is not vegetarian. It's made from hooves. And so he wouldn't need it.And he was a sick man from a very young age, with high blood pressure. He was one of the... He finally went to Mayo Clinic. You know Mayo Clinic? He finally went to Mayo Clinic and they put him on a new diet that had been invented. No salt, in fact, nothing but fruit and rice. And that brought his blood pressure down. So for a few months he felt better but then he died. They told him when he was at the clinic that a man in his condition had not long to live.

It was a custom we went every Sunday, I guess or Saturday once week, we went to my grandmother's, my father's mother's house for dinner. And my father had another brother who was somewhat stupid and three sisters and their spouses and so on. And my grandmother used to make a special dish for each of her sons or sons-in-law, never for the daughters-in-law, just for the sons and sons-in-law. And then she would sit at the bottom of the table with my father at the top because he was the oldest male. And she would sit there like this and say, 'It isn't as good as usual, it isn't as good as usual' and it never was as good as usual.And she had tea which she served in the Russian fashion in a glass with a spoon. And somehow you were supposed to drink it, but I couldn't. You weren't supposed to take the spoon out. But I never could get it. I still don't get how you do it.My father sat at the head of the table and my mother sat at the other side. I sat on one side and Richard when he was at home, on the other side. And we didn't have servants at that time so my mother would run with the food. We just talked usually. We didn't talk about politics at the table. We tried to keep it cheerful. It was in fact one of the dinners at that era that my mother and brother made me laugh so hard, I fell on the floor. That wasn't fair.There was one thing about the systems. If you could make somebody laugh very hard so they were very uncomfortable, that's what you were allowed to do. I had a cousin who came to us very often to eat, a very good dear cousin, and she would... Richard would stare at her without turning his eyes and stare at her, and stare at her. And all the while she just starts giggling and giggling harder and giggling harder until she had to leave the table. So we had ways to make people uncomfortable by making them laugh.My mother... My mother always insisted that she had a little door in her head. And as soon as a number was mentioned, the door slammed, and she did not want to know what we were talking about so she never came into the mathematical games. But she was a very jolly woman, funny when she tried to be. I remember one night my brother, my father, my mother and I were sitting at the table and I must have been about 12. And my mother and my brother had a dreadfully difficult sense of humor to deal with, so they were going back and forth going back and forth. And my father and I were miserable. We were laughing so hard. He said, 'We can't eat, we can't eat'. And they just kept going till I fell on the floor that they stopped, very nice of them. The kind of sense of humor was very carefully... it never was...  you never told a story which made fun of anybody. You never told a story how stupid somebody was. The stories were all just funny things that happened, sort of like are happening now. I haven't told you about my brother... anything, except that you can laugh at without hurting anybody's feelings, without being mean in any way. And that was the rule. It's been through my life. I never tell stories about damn fools. It's too easy. No, it isn't. That is too easy. It's not funny for the person that you're talking about. So it is not funny. So that's the rule. And my whole family does it that way, which makes it much easier to laugh. You're not hurting anybody.

Well, my earliest memory... I was a little kid and I got roller skates for my birthday. And as was the usual way of doing it, you just get the kids skates and you let them skate. And of course, that has some peculiar results, you know, the two knees that have scabs on them from frequent falling. We lived in a big house. My grandfather, who came over with only 50 cents in his pocket. My grandmother was in millinery. My grandfather had some successful business and he built houses and they were lovely houses and big. And we lived in one of them: my mother, my father, my brother and I, my aunt and uncle, their two kids and two people who were... servants, oddly enough. The way it was done in those days was if you wanted to get servants, you went down to the docks. I mean... There wasn't any other way. You went down to the docks and you talked to people there. And what the deal was, your family spoke English and they spoke only German, so how are they going to get a decent job in their line of work if they don't speak their language? So they say, 'Okay, you come to our house, we also speak German flawlessly'. And they worked for us and spoke German and taught us German. I was too little. But it was a good deal for everybody. But they were... they were very German and they didn't think we were being brought up correctly. So what they decided was to teach me how to speak correctly to adults. And I remember standing at the top of the stairs to the... and them saying, 'Now when you speak to adults, it's feet together, hands at your sides and then you can speak properly to them'. And so I did that to the help. I put my feet together, stood up straight and spoke very German. But then when we were eating supper, we had a big table with all these people at it. And in the middle of the table there was...  on the floor there was a bell which you could touch to inform the servants that they should come out and deliver the food. And the kids...  four kids, I was too small, three of the four kids had developed an excellent ability to look as if nothing was happening on the top, but they were managing to push the button all the time and it always ended in laughing. So that was a good game, too. The only thing that nobody taught me was how to cook. I never understood that. But we had a big kitchen, my mother cooked in it and my aunt cooked in it and the woman who was... They cooked, cooked and... And one day I stood watching them cook and a mouse came out of the cabinet. The mouse came scurrying across and the other two women dropped what they were doing and screamed, 'A mouse, a mouse!' And I was sitting on a high thing, I couldn't get off. There I was in the big kitchen with a mouse running. I didn't know what a mouse was except it was a little thing... So I sat there and said, 'They left me alone with a mouse'. And they came in and they were so upset because they had left me alone with a mouse without telling me it was not a dreadful creature.My father also helped teach me to read because we had Alice in Wonderland. And Alice in Wonderland had already been read once to me and so I loved it. You know the little stories in Alice in Wonderland which are about grandma and things like that? Like the Red Queen says, 'We have a jelly every other day, marmalade every other day'. And Alice says, 'I would like some marmalade'. And the Red Queen says, 'I said marmalade every other day. This is not every other day. Every other day is tomorrow or yesterday, but it's never... never today'. So my father enjoyed that and I enjoyed it. So I got a lot of reading of Alice in Wonderland which was learning things about logic and so on. As I grew up, I had need for money of my own, of course. So they... my father decided to give me an allowance. So the allowance was one cent a day. One cent a day. Okay, it's seven cents a week, I believe. Yes. So... One day he asked me, 'Would you rather have five cents a week or a penny a day?' So I said to him, 'Do I have to ask for it?' That was his rule. I didn't get the penny until I asked for it. He said, 'Yes, you have to ask for it'. And I said, 'Then I'll take five cents a week'. And he said, 'Why?' He looked a little worried. And I said, 'Well, if I have five... seven days to ask for it, I'll manage to remember to ask for it and get five days, but I'll never remember every day to ask for it and get a penny'. So okay, I got five cents a week for quite a while. And I saved my money up until I had a reasonable amount of money so I could buy a canary plus its cage, etc., etc. And that's where I spent my money on. My brother spent his money – which was no logic because he was nine years older – on various things. And one day he asked my father for some amount of money. He said, 'Why don't you borrow it from your sister?' He said, 'What do you mean?' My father says, 'She has money'. And my brother went to me curious, 'Do you have some money? I want to take a girl out for ice cream'. I said, 'Yes'. And I lent him the money for the ice cream. And he was amazed.

I went to kindergarten and in kindergarten... it was during the Depression. And one of the things that Roosevelt did to help was he bought... they bought the milk from the farms that couldn't sell it because people didn't have the money to buy it. And then they gave the milk to the schools so that the kids in the schools drank the milk and they somehow or other got cookies to go with it. So the cookies were round cookies about that big and they were half chocolate and half vanilla, and I was in kindergarten. Well, I was shy. So when the kids got the cookies, I always got the vanilla and somebody else got the chocolate. And I was very sad about that happening for a week or two. And I asked my mother, 'What can I do? They won't give me the chocolate'. She says, 'Well, cut it the other way so each piece was half and half'. I was so impressed, so impressed by this great idea of my mother's. I've used it ever since.In kindergarten, there were black and white kids. There were two kindergartens because there were too many kids in school so there was a kindergarten that was supposedly smarter than the other kindergarten. The other way of putting it is that there was one white kindergarten, one black kindergarten. There were couple of... there were three black girls in the white kindergarten. And when we went...  we had to go to the bathroom once or twice a day, all of us. And we were supposed to take the hand of somebody and go two by two down into the basement, which was a stinking mess and we hated it. It was never cleaned. It was nauseating. It was horrible. It was because the roof leaked... and the floor... and the floor leaked below that and so on. They cleaned the other places but they never cleaned the toilets apparently, so we hated it. But anyway, we lined up and I realized there were two little black girls holding each other's hands and there was nobody holding the other one's when she was walking behind the two. So I went in ethical culture and took her hand. And she looked so surprised and so delighted. It was so easy to do that... I remember it still, obviously, how nice it was to do something so simple as so recognize she was a human being. When I went to kindergarten, another thing started which was throughout my life. There were two teachers. One was behind the piano and the other was teaching. The one behind the piano came out one day and said, 'Are you Richard Feynman's sister?' And I said, 'Yes'. And she said, 'Are you as smart as he is?' And I said, 'No, few people are'. So it started early.So I said I wasn't as smart as Richard. But later on when I got to be six... probably around 10, I was... I worked in the office of the school. And I noticed that there were these drawers where they kept their records and I realized there were all kinds of records in there, including IQ records. So I went to see what my IQ was and I found that my IQ was 123. Then I looked up my brother's IQ, it was 122. So I was smarter than my brother!OK, how we were educated, not how we went to school. Well, my father... my father was very interested in science. He didn't go to college because people didn't go to college in those days. So he was always reading about it and so on. And he took us for walks in the woods and things like that. And he turned over a rock and under the rock there was usually an ant... ant nest or whatever it is. And the little ants when that happened, they somehow immediately grabbed an egg and then carried it out of the nest. And so that was one of our things that we watched. And we watched... everywhere we went, we watched for something in nature or something.

New Your City had five boroughs... New York's obviously a big city and had five boroughs which were pieces of land. And Far Rockaway was in Queens and that was on the Atlantic Ocean. And there was this narrow place which was a peninsula, along the sea that is the bay which was behind it. I had a stupid problem because you learnt in school that the ocean was to the east. But where we were, the ocean was in the wrong direction so I never could figure out the directions. But anyway. So in the summer time, the people in New York City if they were any acquaintance of yours, they would come out in the train for the weekend. So my mother had towels, pot... huge piles of towels for the people that came out in the summer. And I had them for several years. I didn't buy towels after I got my own house.And... but in the wintertime, it was terribly afar to... You see, the people in Manhattan believe that Long Island was cooler than Manhattan, which wasn't true. Long Island was on an ocean, and so in the summer, the ocean which had... was less easy to change the temperature, the ocean made it cool and in the winter it made it warm. Well, the people that lived in Far Rockaway... there were two kinds of people. There was a railroad that went down the middle of the peninsula. The Jews lived on one side and the blacks lived on the other side. And the blacks were household help. All over, there was no place where a black person could get a decent job. I mean, it's just the way it was. The black people that... the black women that worked for us, we were very friendly with them. If you know what the Jewish... what the Jews do when somebody dies... No. Well, they're supposed to be buried within a day unless the day is Saturday, in which case it's two days. But the family sits in the house – it's called shiva – and all the friends come and commiserate with them and somebody takes care of... When my father died, my mother went back into their room and didn't come out and talk to people for a while, but our cleaning woman came to visit. And my brother Richard was operating things. And he took the cleaning woman back to see my mother and said to the assembled people, 'A friend of the family'. She was black and old. But then that how we treated it. She was a friend of the family. He [my father] used to paint and he met a painter who was standing out and nobody wanted his work. So my father decided he would get a portrait of me. And I was about 13. So week after week after week, I sat for this guy. And in between sittings, he took out what he had done before Christmas and it was no good. So after a while, we just stopped that. But that was the view. And there was a...  the women in town watched for things like kids going to school, shoes and they... they played bridge for money. And the money was put in a... in a pot and when they got enough money, they bought shoes for the kids or they bought coal for somebody they like. So they were being very useful for the town. And no shame for anybody being hard up. In my house, a favorite game was... his favorite occupation was... We had Encyclopaedia Britannica and my father would take a book out and open it and say, 'Look at this' and then read it. And then read another or look up something else connected. And we liked to do that. It was... it was fun. But now looking back on it, I suppose it was an odd way for teenagers to have fun, but we did. It was our family that liked to do that. And my brother used to read the encyclopedia in math and he would make notes. I swear to God, he would make notes. And then we moved around and the encyclopedia went to a cousin. And then the cousin wanted more room in her bedroom, then the encyclopedia... and she wanted to get rid of it. And I said, 'Well, let's try to sell it to somebody'. Richard's got things in it and we couldn't find them. I don't know why we couldn't find them. But those things now, if we still had that encyclopedia with the things that Richard had written, now they would... I have a thing here now from a guy who sells these things and the prices they get – hundreds of thousands of dollars for little things. We'd all be wealthy as could be, but we threw out the encyclopedia because we couldn't... you know...

My father believed that every household that had a child should have an Encyclopaedia Britannica in it because then they could take any... anything that came up, they could read in the encyclopedia. So we had an Encyclopaedia Britannica. And one of the things we liked to do... my father liked to do was just take a volume and open it at random and read what was there out loud. And then sometimes he'd hand it around and read some other article that caught our eye. So that was one of the things. My father was interested in science but didn't have the money to go to college. But Richard was from the beginning interested in numbers. My mother tells a story she had him in a... in a little tricycle. She was going to take him to buy some things. And they passed a place that was building a new house and their horses were going down into the hole and coming up with the dirt to make the... And my mother said, 'Look, Richard, horses'. And my brother looked at them and said, 'Two horses down and one horsey up, it's three horses'. So it came along with Richard, I think.Instead of telling Richard all the things about science that he could or getting him chemistry sets or things like that, my father played a game with him which he invented, which I think was very useful in Richard's career. Richard was still a baby. My father bought some tiles from... They used to sell... when there was a fire, they used to sell the stuff that remained to everyone around. My father got some blue tiles and some white tiles for bathroom floors. And then he would sit with Richard and he would take a white tile and put it down then he'd put another white tile then he'd put a blue tile and another blue tile. And Richard was always supposed to put the next one. So he learnt to recognize patterns and numbers. And I think that at such a young age, being rather advanced operation of your brain. I think that was could very well have been involved. But nobody... It surprises me. Everybody agrees that Richard was unusually smart except Richard, of course. But nobody asks anything about how he was educated. What was done to make this kid smarter so they could try it, at least. They're just okay, he was a no ordinary genius. But yes, he was just a smart guy and I think that game must have been very useful because that's a high thing that the brain does, recognize patterns. And in science, it's enormously important because you notice that if this happens that happens, if this doesn't happen that doesn't. If this doesn't happen, this doesn't happen or sometimes it doesn't, sometimes it does. But all those patterns are things that I at least when I'm trying to do some science, look for those patterns and try to understand why they're there. And that it's proven quite useful. I got a medal, exceptional contributions to cosmic rays and disturbances in space. I'll find out what it says. My father was very smart, I think, but he had no education. And he had high blood pressure which meant that at a young age he was ill. But he was interested in all kinds of things of nature. The boys were educated so they could make a living, the women didn't work in those days, so there was no reason why they should be. She [my mother] worked and she's one of the reasons I had the courage to do so.

I had a brother who was interested in science. I had a father who was interested... was always asking my brother a lot of questions. I had a mother who had no objection to it. My brother's room was always a laboratory. It was a town where people were interesting. We lived in an apartment house and each apartment had a storage bin, which was big enough to make into a little lab. And one of the boys, he was my age... he had a storage bin that was a chem lab. And I wanted to... to get one and my mother said no. I didn't understand at the time, but she... in her mind there were dangerous men who would attack a little kid in a lonely cellar pouring things in one another. So then my brother was at Princeton. And he said, 'Well, why don't you make a telescope?' So I said, 'How am I going to do that?' He said, 'I'll buy the glass. I'll give you the directions. You send it to me in Princeton and we'll check the measurements and so on'. But somehow I never did. I don't know why I never did. Probably, I was lazy. That was probably it. You sort of need companions when you're a kid to do something like that.I discovered science at home. My brother showed me all kinds of neat things. My brother also... he also babysat for me. And once I went to bed I was supposed to stay in bed. So I would call to him, 'Richard, I'm thirsty'. So he would come in with a glass of water and stand there and go like this with a full glass of water, and the water, of course, stays in the glass if you do it fast enough. Well, one night he missed, the whole glass of water went soaring through the room and hit the wall. And... so that was the end of that particular trick.My mother ran an orderly house, not like me. And if you went to bed, you were in bed. And one night when I must have been five or six, Richard got permission to wake me up in the night and take me to the golf course because there was an aurora on the golf course. And that was the first aurora. I saw it was pretty good compared to any I've seen since. But that's the story of the aurora. So he showed me and he told me what it was as best as he knew and I was fascinated. I have a picture of it, you know, huge green moving things up above the sky. So Richard was very interest... We were very close when we were kids.Arithmetic came very early. He would give me a couple of numbers like one and three or one plus three and I had memorized four and that was correct and so I got a little reward, which was pulling his hair and he'd go like that. But I didn't learn until very recently that it doesn't hurt when you pull the hair. So, you know, science was always there.My brother, you know, has all sorts of teachers' prizes while I was the student. For the beginning student, he loved to tell me about nature and to show me little experiments like if you have... You know those old-fashioned Victrolas where you had a record that you put on a plate and then you turned it on and it went around. He used to put marbles at different places and we'd watch the marble go out, because it was considered angular momentum.When he [my brother] was in high school, they used to have contests with other schools and he normally won them. So he was the best in five states or something like that, so my mother was very proud of that. But on... one of her best friends said to her, when my mother told her that, 'Lucille, does Richard have any other sports?'

My brother when he was still quite young used to say to me all the time, 'Women are no good, women are no good, women are no good'. So one day I had done something stupid in my opinion. And I said to him, 'You know Richard, you're right. Women are no good'. He got this glassy look in his eyes. He said, 'No, I met a wonderful woman last night'. So okay, all right. Well, that was Arline. And if you would walk down the beach in Rockaway, you would see Arline sitting with braided hair. So they met and were attracted to one another. And by the time Richard was going to MIT... When he left for MIT, my mother and father had invited her to his graduation from high school and then he was leaving for MIT. And so she was at our house, she left from our house. And when Richard left, he kissed his family around, including Arline who must have been about 16 or 17 at the time. But it was clear they were going to get married. And she was accepted as part of the family at very young. For example, she played the piano, so she was hired to teach me to play the piano. She... she and I went for long bike rides together. She went painting with my father because she liked to paint and she went to cooking classes with my mother. Now, that's the whole family, you understand. So she was beloved by all of us.And then we had some trouble one year when all of members of my family got pneumonia. So when we all got better, we thought it would be nice if we took a vacation. So we went to Atlantic City and Arline came with us. And Arline and I shared a room. My brother and Arline would walk on the boardwalk behind me singing in a loud voice, 'She walks...' – to me, behind me – 'she talks, she crawls on her belly like a reptile'. That visit to Atlantic City... my father noticed that Arline had a bump on her back of her neck and she wasn't feeling well. The doctors didn't know what the bump was. But she got sicker and sicker. And then Richard felt that she wasn't getting the proper care and that the only way she could get the proper care was if he married her and therefore became responsible for what care she would get. But by that time, we knew she had tuberculosis and also at the time there was no known cure for it. They're actually... they were close to it, but it wasn't general knowledge. And my mother was afraid she was going to lose her son to tuberculosis and so she was very upset. But after a while, she came to realize that nothing else could be done. So she gave her and my father's permission and they took Arline out of bed in her home, put her in an ambulance and took her to the river between New York and New Jersey where there were ferries going across. The ferries have captains and captains can perform marriages. So they went to New Jersey and were married on the ferry and then she went directly into another hospital. She was a lovely girl. She was very sweet to everyone. She was very careful with people. I mean, she didn't insult anybody. Everybody loved Arline. They moved to Albuquerque where Richard was in Los Alamos. And she had all kinds of lovely ideas despite of being so sick. For example, she thought it would be nice if they had a barbecue when Richard came down on the weekends. So she bought him a barbecue outfit with all the trimmings and a barbecue. And he had to barbecue the supper outside her window of the hospital and then they had the barbecue. And she also ordered for his birthday a bunch of pencils. Now his pet name for her was 'pootsie', and the pencil says, 'I love you, pootsie'. And she gave him that and insisted he not take that off but use it. So they did the best they could but she did die of tuberculosis. Richard, her father was there but her mother didn't want to go. And I was a freshman in high school... in college. And I was very, very sad because she was so much a member of the family. She wasn't just his fiancée. She was a member who had a strong relationship to every member of our family.Somebody – a friend of Richard's – got the idea that there should be memorial steps to great scientists. So they worked on it and worked on it, and finally the United States government decided okay, so they took four great scientists, I think it was. My brother, of course was one of them.

I can't think of any miserable stories where anybody did anything miserable to me. Except, I guess when I was very small, my parents left me alone for a few hours... an hour or two while they went somewhere and then they came back. When they came back, put the key in the door and opened the door, there was clanging and banging and eerie... And my brother jumped up in bed and said, 'It works, it works!' He had put an alarm. He was still very young. And he was just delighted that it worked.My brother showed me other very interesting things. We lived on Long Island, which is an island on the other side of this country. And in Long Island, we had very frequent – in the summer time – very frequent thunder and lightning storms. And you'd see a flash and then you'd hear the lightning. And my brother told me, 'You want to know how far away that lightning...?' You know, he told me they really took place together at the same time, the lightning and the thunder. So he taught me to count the difference in time where I was because light travels with the speed of light and thunder travelled with the speed of sound. And there was a difference. And he taught me to count from one to the other. So we'd know how far away it is. So even now if I see lightning, I say, 'One hippopotamus, two hippopotamus, three hippopotamus, four hippopotamus...', because my brother had carefully measured what word to use so that it was a second. So that was my brother teaching me physics.I was his lab assistant. He had a lab. This... we're not living in the big house anymore. We're living in a small house and he had an electronics lab and there were all sorts of switches to pull and so on, to make noises and have shocks and he wanted to show that to his friends. And so he had boxes around for me to stand on and he would set everything up and I would stand there and he would say, 'Okay, go'. And I go like that and my other finger being in the... I would get a shock. I guess I put my foot finger in and then did this and got a shock in me. But I was used to that. And I knew I was going to get paid a penny a shock. So that was very, very nice.And the other thing I could do, I don't know. I remember something that I did where my reward was getting to pull my brother's hair. He had nice hair. And I would pull it as hard as I could, which since I was very small, was not very hard. But he always made this face, which looked like he was in terrible pain. And I enjoyed that.And he used to ride me on his bicycle. You know, there's a bar on the bicycle, and you can put your little sister sitting on that bar. And he was very careful. The whole time he was riding me around town he sang, 'Keep your foot out of the... wheel, keep your foot out of the wheel, keep your foot out of the wheel'. And I never stuck my foot in the wheel. So that worked out okay too. So you get the idea that we were a happy family. There were money troubles sometimes, but that was the Depression. It was not that somebody was doing something they shouldn't, and that's the way it was.When I first got my first interesting job that I really thought I'd like, it had something to do with the interaction of the earth's... particle from the sun on the earth's magnetic field. I always call it Aurora but Aurora is only one aspect of it. So I was feeling very happy about that. I thought, I'll tell my brother. Then I thought, wait a minute – did I tell you this story? – wait a minute, my brother is a very smart man. If I tell my brother what I'm working on, he is going to tell me the answer and I will have no fun. So I went to my brother and explained to him – please keep... we'll divide up. I said, 'How about you and I divide nature into two things? I'll take anything that has to do with the earth-sun relationship and you can take the rest'. And he said, 'Okay'. So one day he went to a lab which did a lot of work on the earth-sun relationship and the head of the laboratory, a guy named Akasofu, asked Richard... he showed him around and showed him all the interesting things and said, 'Wouldn't you like to work on this?' And Richard said, 'Yes, but I have to ask my sister'. So he came home and he asked me and I said no. So he had to report to Akasofu that no, he was not allowed to do that. And a lot of people thought it was a joke. But it wasn't a joke. I wouldn't have any fun, you know, if every time I found something interesting it took him a half hour to tell me the answer. I also for a long time did not use my maiden name when I wrote a paper because my maiden name was Joan Feynman. I used my married name long after I was divorced so that nobody would know I was Richard's sister because I didn't want anything... any special stuff for being Richard's sister. He never helped me on anything. Well, no, that's not true. He one day went to visit some university or other and the guy who was there said, 'I understand you're Joan Feynman's brother'. He said, 'Yes'. That was the only person that ever put it that way. But he was a good brother.

When Richard went to MIT, they decided he was so well prepared that none of the kids from Far Rockaway High School had to present any exams to get in. When you apply to a college, most colleges you apply you want to be a scientist, you want to be an artist, they give you an examination to see if you're up to what they want in their university that they think they can train you. And MIT used to give exams in math to people who were graduating from Far Rockaway High School and wanted to go to MIT. But when he got to MIT, they decided he was so well prepared that they didn't have to give exams from anybody from Far Rockaway. I don't know how long that lasted.[Q] Are you saying that Far Rockaway High School was very special?I guess so. How many Nobel laureates did we have, six?[Q] I know three, Blumberg, Richter, Feynman.There were a couple more.[Q] And a couple more. And Bernie Madoff.Don't say that. You know that name?[Q] Yes, the crook.A great thief.[Q] Yes, the great thief.Whatever they were, they were good at it. When I went to it, most of the kids were from Jewish towns like mine. And on Jewish holidays, they sent a notice around of who was at school, not who was not at school because it was a sensible thing to do. The area also had big areas of black students, which meant that they were often two different kinds of classes, one, mostly white and the other mostly black. Because apparently, the black parents didn't care much about whether their kids did well in school or not so they didn't, but they did very well in baseball and things like that. That was their culture. This was when I was in high school. Let's see, I was 15. I'm now 92. So we're talking about ancient things that should not be believed to continue. And occasionally, there was a black student. So there were two classes. So when I say there was a black class and a white class, that indicates there were the same number of black kids in the big areas as there were white kids. And the black kids would try to tease the white kids, but not me. Because when I was a kid in kindergarten and we had to go down to the bathrooms... The kindergarten that I was in was all white except three little girls. And I noticed that one little girl had nobody to take their hand. So I got in line next to her and took her hand and she was so pleased and so were all the other black kids. So all through my grammar school, I would hear people say, 'She's okay with black kids. She's okay'. So that was nice. [Q] Far Rockaway High School, was it a good school?Depending on? It was a good school. It was a public school. It was as good as the students who came to it. And what was it we did? We had a principal for a while who decided we should not wear galoshes and raincoats to go to school. And we should not wear slacks, the girls should wear dresses. Well, it's raining there. So we took it for a while and then we quit going and she had to change the rules. We either quit going or everybody came in slacks or something like that, but we revolted. OK. I had some very good teachers. It really did that... It was during the Depression, the '30s Depression, and so a lot of people couldn't find jobs. And they found jobs in high schools teaching where they had PhDs. And so yes, there were some very good teachers. Besides the gang of gangs which was in high school. There is, by the way, a street now in Far Rockaway called the Feynman Way in honor of Richard Feynman. It goes from where we live to the high school.

The stars were in the sky and in one place we lived... he [Richard] was in college but he took me up to the flat roof of the building whenever he was home and showed me the stars and told me about the individual ones. It was this one, this was very... was a red giant and that one was such and such and so on. So it was constant. My father was constantly at it, too. So there was never a time when I discovered science. It was always around me. And then my mother told me women's brains couldn't do science and I sat and cried for quite a while with that information. My brother was in graduate school, and it was my birthday – maybe 12, 13th birthday – and he left a book when he went back to school. And I saw it and I picked it up. I said, 'Richard left the book on astronomy'. And I opened it up and it had my name and then 'happy birthday'. And it was a book for a science class. And I said to him, 'How do I read this? It's a difficult book'. He says, 'It's easy. You start at the beginning and you read it until you don't understand it anymore. Then you start at the beginning and you read it till you don't understand anymore and you'll find you're further along and you keep going. You keep doing that until you can understand the whole book'. And I kept doing that. And on page, God only knows what, I still have the book right here. It's had a picture, an illustration of a spectrum of a star, Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin was the name. And Cecilia was a woman's name and Payne-Gaposchkin suggested she was married. So I knew the secret was out. Women could do physics and science. And so ever after that I didn't hesitate. If Payne-Gaposchkin could get her thing in a textbook, then it was possible. And I didn't worry about it anymore.Oberlin College at the time I went to it was the college that had the largest number of graduates who went to graduate school after college. Now, we claimed that that was because we didn't learn very much at Oberlin so we had to go on to the next school, but it wasn't. It had a very excellent reputation. I don't remember much in the way of prejudice against women in Oberlin. It was the first school in the United States to have really... It admitted women in 1837 which was the earliest of any college in the United States that admitted both men and women. So I picked it partly for that. I got a call from another group that was working. They wanted my advice on something. This was at a time when I was elected secretary as a part of the science. I would come and give my opinion.So I got permission to go. I went to the building. The building was a press building or something. And I walked in and I started to go up the stairs and whoop!, someone says, 'Women are not allowed upstairs'. I assumed that women could only be allowed upstairs for certain reasons, but I didn't assume it then. To reiterate, I said, 'What?' And then they said, 'No, you can go with a man in the cafeteria but not upstairs'. Well, this is a big famous place in New York. So I called the head of our organization and said, 'I am not permitted to go upstairs because I'm a woman'. So he talked to the guy who let me go upstairs and went and took care of it. Then I came back. And since I was already a member of a governing part of the American Geophysical Union, I introduced a suggested rule that the American Geophysical Union would not hold any meetings in any organization that did not allow equal admission for all of the people in the American Geophysical Union. That was passed unanimously. And a major... at least one major meeting had to be cancelled because they didn't admit somebody or another and I felt very proud with that. I did several things like that. For example, I looked at the meeting... the programme, the meeting for ten years and not a single woman had been asked to chair a single leading section or to give an invited paper. You could give a contributed paper for 15 minutes, but you never could get an invited paper or to chair. So I just talked to people. They were arranging things. I said, 'Did you know that no woman was ever invited to give a paper or to chair a session?' And they said, 'No' – I mean, the guys – 'No, we didn't know'. And it was the case with ten years or something, and it was the end of that. Women got invited to give invited papers. There was no argument once it was discovered that this was going on. And I feel very good about that because nobody was angry at me. Nobody was trying to do anything. It was just a custom.

One of the things I do to get interesting problems to work on is to notice something curious that I don't understand and to find out more about it and to find out whether it's understood or not. And the last one I did so far has to do with the origin of agriculture. I went once on a trip for pleasure. And we went to the coast of France, where they... there are caves which have been... which have pictures drawn in them. 40,000 years ago, human beings in a dark cave drew pictures of the animals that were there. There were about six horseheads, one below the other, so beautifully done. So clearly... horses... so clearly that the man or woman who did the painting understood art. And so you get an idea of what this person was. He was not an ape. He was not half an ape. He was a human being doing beautiful work. So you look at that and you think, okay, these were intelligent people. They had no agriculture. The question then is, when was agriculture invented? Agriculture was invented 11,000 years ago, separately in about four or five places within a span of 2,000 years. So from 33,000, what is this? They weren't apes and they didn't have agriculture. Now, what happened? Why? But we now have data which gives us information about climate for 40,000, 50,000 years, 60,000 years in ice and that is a continual... it varies at times. At different periods, some of them are 100 years. It's going like that. Some of them are further but we have the whole... it's available to any scientist who wants it. It's this complicated thing, but there are methods of finding out what the frequencies and the variations were, which that guy did because his wife suggested it. But he did it. I don't know how to do those things.[Q] Your husband?My husband, yes.[Q] You did this together?Yes, this is together. And if you do it you can get for all this time the variation of the climate. And you find that throughout the last – I don't know, we can look up the dates later – it varies very rapidly until 12,000 years ago where it becomes a Holocene, which is flat. Climate doesn't change until yesterday. I don't mean yesterday, I mean it's... there are frightening evidence that we're going back into a period of time when the climate is changing rapidly. It's not determined yet, but there's lots of evidence that it's clobbered again.This period when the climate got quiet, agriculture developed in various places like China and Middle East and Mexico and so on and so forth. Within a short time, within 1,000 or 2,000 years, but in this... that's a short time. And that, I think, it was a great discovery of ours. And it was just taking two pieces of data, which looked to be totally unconnected and discovered there were important connections between them. It didn't take fancy theories or anything like that.He used to tell me that 30,000 years ago, human beings were smart, were capable of doing agriculture because they were certainly capable of it if you see those paintings. But they didn't have agriculture for another 20,000 years, which is no small length of time. So there had to be a reason why there was no agriculture. And the reason was... we found in the climate data that we have for that long. So there's nothing complicated or amazing, except that we've got the data. And the data shows the only way you can put those two things together is it really wasn't possible to make agriculture 30,000 years ago, because if you look at the record that we have of the climate, it's too variable. You know, if it's... it's got to be reasonable that the weather is such that if it grew last year that it had some chance of growing 100 years after that, otherwise you can't base a civilization on it.We've been living in the Holocene with developing civilizations for a long time. But we're having a lot of trouble now. The insects are disappearing. The weather is weird. Now, it has to remain for a long time until we have to understand it yet, but it's quite, to me, quite distressing because we're not trying to do anything about it. We're not trying to hold it. It's not going to hold itself, that the present apparently... The climate data is obtained from ice, looking at ice. The ice near the poles and near the tops of high mountains is thousands of years old. And it's been... they take borings of it, samples all the way down and keep it cold and take little slices of it and look at the chemistry in the water. And they look at the chemistry very carefully. And it's such a marvelous data set. A lot of work has been put into it and a lot of work is put into understanding why the weather is so strange, because the chemistry of the atmosphere is different than it was. So the whole thing is different. Now, what exactly is going to happen? We don't know but we know that things are happening. Like what I said, the insects are disappearing. That's a new finding. I could tell you some of the things that are going on, but things are changing so rapidly that I do not have a little list that I can tell you. First of all, for quite a while we've been changing the chemistry in the atmosphere. The climate is becoming unstable as far as I can tell from reading other people's work. And we have no knowledge of why the Holocene has been quiet all this time. And before that, it had for hundreds of thousands of years been much more variable. So this is... We don't have enough information yet, but every couple of months there's some other crazy, strange things. Like last week, the problem was the insects are dying of... The insects are very important because once they pollinate things they... We're just changing everything, and nobody knows why.

Aurora is a word I mean... I use because everybody knows what an aurora is. What science I did was the processes that went into auroras, the kind of physics that were involved but never the aurora itself. You and I went to Sweden once and I was going to give a talk on the aurora in northern Sweden. When I got there, it was the winter. Everything was perfect for aurora but there were no auroras. So I had to give a talk on why there are no auroras this winter. And the reason was because the sun was very quiet. There were two theories. When the solar wind comes past the earth, it confines the earth's magnetic field to a kind of a bubble thing with a long tail. And the question is, how does that interaction take place? Is it that the momentum of the solar wind? Is it... What is it? And it wasn't known whether it was something like the momentum or something to do with the magnetic field of the two. And I showed that the strongest interaction was when the magnetic field of the earth was confined to the place where the solar wind impinged on the magnetic field of the earth's. Where the two of them, the magnet Z component that is perpendicular to the... to the earth's sunline. When the Z components of them were lined up, which was not the same because of the shape of things, was not the south component of the earth's field. It was the relative direction at the earth that... which it should had. And that was basic in choosing between the two different things.

[Q] This was your main contribution to so-called space weather. But I want to go to take you back to history of aurora and the visit of corona in Sweden. When you reported why there was no aurora at that time, it was because the solar activity was at the minimum of Centennial Cycle. Yes. No, everybody knows about the 11 years cycle of the sunspots. They go... they're a few or no sunspots for a year or two and then they gradually go up to a maximum, then down again. And it takes 11 years for them to go through one cycle. That's the sunspots. But they... if you take two sunspots, say, if you took the one at the center of a cycle, in 1900 it was very small. The next one was a little bigger, but it went down to zero and then it wakes and so on. It turns out there's an 88-year cycle in the sunspot and solar wind business which is solar... something in the sun, and I don't think that to this day we know what it is. But I quit two years ago. That's used to predict the interplanetary condition in planning a spacecraft, you know when it's going to fly, and you could calculate what... from the knowledge now what the interplanetary medium is going to be like. So you can design your... your spacecraft systems so that they can stand that... the way it's going to be without getting knocked out or failing and so on. So that's very important for the solar weather people that they can plan ahead 10 years, 15 years and design their spacecraft and all of its parts to last okay for that time. In the early days they had to overdesign everything. They just made it too heavy too safe and not get as much information as they would now. We had been observing the solar wind particles and fields for a long enough time to be able to make reasonable predictions. It involves an enormous amount of data and analysis of it. And it's a basis of... I believe it's still the basis of predictions for spacecraft design. The sun has a hot corona, I believe and there are particles that come from it. The particles that come from it depend on the organization of the magnetic field on the surface of the sun. So that in some places it's weaker, which allows more particles to come out and some places stronger, so there are fewer particles and the sun's rotating all the time. So what you get at earth would be variable because of that. But more important perhaps is that the sun has flares, solar flares which are events, which at the sun... there's a sudden reorganization of the magnetic field. So that if it was in two arches before, it's now in one larger arch and the solar wind is much stronger and... so that the danger of being upset by the solar wind becomes more important. And that also has to be dealt with by a process of having observed long enough to understand what's going to happen in the next ten years. And that's a thing which I worked on with many... several other people. And I'm sure that since I left it's still being worked on. It has to be kept up to date because the sun doesn't repeat itself every 11 years.[Q] Why is this important? This is important because when you design an experiment, you have to know that the implement that you're putting up there is one that can measure that. Which means that if it's high fluxes you are interested in, you have to design a spacecraft which has instruments which safely observe higher fluxes than you expect to get. Otherwise, you'll never find the maximum. So depending on what it is you're interested in and why, the spacecraft has to be designed so it will last and work throughout the entire project. Now, there are many projects now that are trying to get closer to the sun where the particles are... much more of them and are hotter and more dangerous, but they can't be measured in the other way. And so this is a thing which has been hanging around about the sun for a long time. And I think they have plans to do it again, is that right? Yes, they want to get closer because there's a region in there that we've never been able to send instruments into. That we have to guess from what we have been able to send the instruments and figure out how it goes from one place... how it influences the different areas outside the sun or in the solar atmosphere. There are so many people working in this that it's very hard to say exactly what the situation is. For instance, I wrote a paper in 1973 about the helium abundance in the sun. And I discovered that there were about seven or eight different ways they determined this, but they tested each way against the other ways. So they argued that this one was 2% and that one was 2%. But there was no particular reason why they should be the same. And we, in fact, had no idea. And I published that paper which made quite a stir, but I don't know if we yet have any idea of the distribution in the sun of helium. Helium isn't made like other... Well, never mind, it gets often into an entirely different subject of the origin of different chemicals like carbon and things like that which are made in solar explosions.

You asked at one point if I had problems because I was a woman, and I have a story to tell, which is, I was in high school and some women teachers got together and... to have a meeting where the girls could ask about... I must have been already... I was already a physicist. So I'm not quite sure where it was. But anyway, the girls came and they asked questions and then the teacher asked them questions and so on. It went on for about three quarters of an hour and she never asked me a single question. So I said to her afterwards, 'Why didn't you ask me a question? Physics... science is a very good thing'. And she looked down her nose and said, 'Our girls are interested in nurture, not nature'. And I disagreed with that. So that... those kind of things happened continually. You're in the wrong place when I was growing up. Now it's no longer the wrong place since two women got Nobel Prizes this year in science.The truth, we were all Jews. That's the truth. We were 80% Jewish and Jewish kids study. And Jewish kids know there's a lot of prejudice against them so they study hard and it becomes a hobby... Nobel Prize work hard to get smart. So that's a secret. That's a Jewish secret. We work hard. So please, don't tell anybody else that. They won't understand. The guy... We were a bunch of kids backs of 15 or so and minimum of three or four or five – a bunch of kids who were social friends. And they were the people that would be known as geeks to the outside world. OK. They were socially not too good but they were smart. And they never had a friend who was a football player but they might have somebody who has won a prize in some intellectual thing. And... Like one of my best girlfriends became a justice of one of the highest courts, not the Supreme Court but the one just under it. After getting a degree in chemistry and then in law, that's the sort of thing they did. They were just a bunch of friends.

[Q] What is it that you like about science?Oh, it's a game. What you do is you watch something in nature. It's all around. There's a million things to watch. And then you notice something, and you think, why is that? Like, why do these flowers live in mud or something.  It's not one of those things that I'm working on. I'm working on, do they bloom a second time? Anyway, it's most fun when you notice something that you don't understand. And then you notice maybe six months later, something that might explain it and then you work at getting the data, enough information about these two things to see if they're related. And when they are and it's something new that nobody else has or very few people have started to look at, when it's something new, it's a great feeling. It's really wonderful. Wow, it worked! But it's just pleasure. And it has an advantage for women, which is not much looked at. When I was a teenager, the only thing a woman could be was a grammar school teacher, a first grade or kindergarten, a secretary typing somebody's letters for them, I don't know what else. There were nothing that was exciting and pleasant for women available. And so that's one of the major reasons I... And none of them made any money, nothing to bring a family up on. But people had accidents. Like my father died when I was young and in order to support a family I would need somewhere to make a living. So that besides it's much more fun is why I went into science and it was a very good idea. I don't know how I would have managed without it. So when people tell young women that no, they can't do this or no, they can't do that, it's terrible because it's making them cripples. They think they would like to do something – no, you can't. And the thing always is a high-level thing. Nobody really wants to scrub floors or... It's not the pleasure of cleaning things up. I've never heard of that.

In May 2000, NASA awarded Joan Feynman the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal for her pioneering contributions to the study of solar causes of geomagnetic and climate disturbances.
