anthony.howard

A distinguished British political observer, Anthony Howard (1934-2010) wrote for 'The Guardian', 'The Sunday Times' and 'The Observer' for over 40 years, during which time he has commented on the historical significance of global political issues. He was also editor of 'The Listener' and 'The New Statesman', and a reporter on both 'Newsnight' and 'Panorama'. He was awarded the CBE in 1997.

I was born in 1934... the 12th of February 1934, in, I think, a flat in Kensington - 24 Cheniston Gardens, which is off Kensington High Street. My dad was, at the time, a priest in charge of Christ Church, Victoria Road. He was an Anglican clergyman and it was a very posh neighbourhood in those days, sort of full of major generals and peers and all that kind of thing, and he wasn't vicar of it because the church came under the wing of St Mary Abbots, the main church in Kensington but he was curate in charge or priest in charge. And, I mean, such was it that my mum always told me (I don't know whether it's true) that when I was born, they got 350 woolly coats, which were absolutely useless, had to be given away, that the little baby could wear. But it was that kind of very much upper-class, Edwardian era, which lasted in places like Kensington much longer than people think. And that's where I spent the first two years of my life. Can't remember it at all, clearly, and then in 1936, we moved to Highgate, where my dad was made vicar of Highgate at St Michael's Church there and that's where, I suppose, my formative years were spent, the next ten years indeed, until 1946, until after the war. And we lived, I think, in a not very nice vicarage, which he'd actually had to acquire because the old vicarage was fallen down in Southwood Lane and I went first of all to various, sort of, kindergarten schools. And then, in about 1942 or thereabouts, I went to Highgate Junior School, which was the junior school of Highgate, which was a minor public school, I suppose, but perfectly adequate, and stayed there until '46 when my father moved again to Kensington and to St Peter's, Cranley Gardens, now defunct, or now not… I think it's now sort of taken over by the… oh, what are they called? I don't know. But it's no longer a Church of England church. And we were there for four years and then I went to school at Westminster, which was on the tube. And... I was a day boy at first, became a boarder by the end. That was at my education, partly because… I think this was very odd, they decided to send my sister away to school at Cheltenham Ladies' College and I was left at home on my tod as a boy, really rather lonely. And it became clear to me in time that if you wanted to make progress and, sort of, be in school plays and in, sort of, house teams and stuff, it wasn't much good leaving the school at five o'clock and therefore I agitated, and goodness knows how they afforded it, and I became a boarder. I imagine it must have been about 1948, '49, or something and stayed at Westminster until I went up to Oxford in 1952, to Christ Church. And that was, I suppose… oh it wasn't the end of my education, no, because I decided I wanted to be a barrister, and so I started, sort of… I read law at Oxford, great mistake, very sterile study law, very sterile academic study, anyway. And went… sort of, to eat dinners, you had to do to qualify to be a barrister. And I never, of course, went to the bar. But I was called. I was called to the bar. And I can still sign passports saying, barrister-at-law, that kind of thing. But I did practice a bit in the army, as a defending officer, because you had to do national service in those days. And I… I think they got to know, in the battalion, which was with the Royal Fusiliers, they got to know that Mr Howard is a trained barrister and therefore all the boys on sort of AWOL charges, absence without leave and that kind of thing, said, 'I'll have Mr Howard as my defending officer'. I was only a second lieutenant, but I did rather enjoy it, because it meant that you could stand up before this court-martial and say to your own company commander: 'Major Derkin, would you describe yourself as an experienced officer?' [He said] 'I think I may do that!' [I said] 'I see. Will you now look at this document, which is your annual report on Corporal Hayes Rosario, and compare it with what you just told the court, that he was a thoroughly unreliable NCO? You write here he was an ideal NCO. How do you reconcile those two?' It didn't do me any good in the officer's mess. They loathed it. But I did enjoy it, I think. And that was just two years.
And when I came out of the army, I no longer wanted to be a barrister and that was partly because the army had turned me into a journalist. When I went into national service, I think I said to myself, 'You must always write about what you know'. And there was this great slab of experience in front of me, of being a national serviceman and training and all the rest of it. So I started, strictly against Queen's Regulations, in, sort of, writing for various weekly papers and stuff, including, actually, the New Statesman, what it was like being in the army as a national serviceman. And I can remember at the very end of it, I was suddenly asked out to supper by the editor of a very obscure Sunday paper called Reynold's News, owned by the Co-op... long since defunct. And they took me to some rather grotty restaurant at the bottom of Gray's Inn Road, which is where the Pioneer House... where the paper was published. And we talked about this and that, and then they suddenly said, because there were two of them there, the managing editor and the editor, 'We'd rather like you to join us'. And I said, 'What?' They said, 'Yes, we'd like you to come and write for us'. And I said, 'Well, that's very flattering. Thank you very much'. Then the next thing they said was, 'Terribly sorry, we can't pay very much'. And I, with some skill, I think, said, 'What do you mean by not very much? What is not very much?' And they said, 'Well, we couldn't pay any more than £1500 a year'. Now, we're talking… this is 1958... I was in the army and I think I was earning £5 a week as a second lieutenant so £1500 a year was riches beyond the dreams of avarice. And more or less at that moment, I think I decided I'd become a journalist because you couldn't make a living at the bar in those days, you know. You had to pay for your pupillage and you had a very hard struggle. And people like Jeremy Thorpe hadn't prospered, people like Robin Day hadn't prospered. And I thought to myself, look, if I go to the bar, I'm going to have to go on living at home, I'm going to have to commute (my dad was then vicar of Epsom in Surrey) and it's going to be misery. So I took up the offer from Reynold's News and became a journalist, and that's what I've done ever since.

There were two masters at school who had enormous influence on me. One was not an intellectual at all but when I went to Westminster in 1946, he was my first form master. His name was Stephen Lushington. He’s still alive, aged 90+ and he taught English and he’d been… he was a very colourful figure. He’d been in the army during the war.  He had occasion to wear a, kind of, scarlet sweater and his 'British warm'.  He’d been Secretary of the Oxford University Dramatic Society at Oxford and he used to produce all the school plays. So even after I’d passed out of his care as a teacher because he was the director of the school plays, I saw a lot of him, and he used to produce me in all these plays. A great man. Very bad luck. Should have certainly become a headmaster. I once asked a headmaster… a later headmaster of Westminster, why Stephen never became a headmaster.  And he was a rather gloomy man… called Walter Hamilton, who’d become a headmaster of Rugby, and a tremendous, sort of, power and patronage he had. And I said, 'Mr Hamilton, why did Stephen never get a headship?' ‘Oh’, he said, ‘he would keep marrying these women’. I don’t know who else he was meant to marry but he did have about four wives, it’s true, and that wasn’t a terribly good qualification to be a headmaster. But he was an inspired teacher, and as I say, he was not a great intellect but he knew how to teach.
The other one was an intellect, he was the senior history master at Westminster, called Charles Kealey, who was a, you know, don manqué, and he’d failed to get... which was a great disappointment to him... to get a fellowship at an Oxford college and he… so I think the first time I ever heard him, he came into the seventh form, as it was in those days, classroom, and he said, 'Well, you may wonder why I’m with you here today’. And we thought… 'Well, I’ll tell you why it is. I went to dinner at Christ Church and they said, "How are you, Mr Kealey?" And I said, "Very nice, thank you”. And that’s why I’m here today, teaching you boys’. So he had a sense of humour and a sense of fun, but he was… he was a genuine intellectual. Unfortunately, he wasn’t a great writer.
I got myself into terrible trouble. He was a great authority on Origen, the early church father, and I suddenly saw, when I was editor of the New Statesman, that a book about Origen was coming out. And so I said to the literary editor, 'Look, you probably wouldn’t normally review this but do me a favour. I want this Westminster schoolmaster to review it and, you know, and it’ll be a great act of kindness and an act of piety on my part. I want it done'. So… Claire Tomalin, she was, my literary editor, she said alright, 'Shall I write to him?' I said, 'It’d better come from you rather than me’. So she did and about ten days later, she came to me, holding a, sort of, a piece of exercise paper and said, 'Tony, it’s hopeless. We can’t use this’. And I said, ‘Well, we can’t possibly not use it. Sorry. Give it to me’. And so I then worked on it and tried to improve it and liven it up a bit, and I gave it to her and said, 'Put it in’. We put it in the review and with very bad feeling she did. But that was my paying my debt to Charles Kealey in a way.
No, he was… he stayed at Westminster for years, and became a housemaster, which was a surprise to a lot of people, I think, but he became quite a successful housemaster for his house, and then he became the school archivist. I mean, his whole career was at Westminster. And I’ve never forgiven that very fashionable headmaster, John Rae, in that Charles’ great ambition was to write the school history and I think he did a synopsis or may even have done the first two chapters, and he showed them to Rae and Rae said they were hopeless. Now, I’ve said that his review was hopeless so maybe Rae was right but, you know, it was an act of real brutality and unkindness, and it was given to somebody else who did it pretty inadequately, in my view. And I’ve always held that against John Rae, and indeed when I wrote his – Charles Kealey’s – obit in The Times, I especially put that in, about how Rae had said no, he couldn’t be the school historian, how terribly hurt he’d been by this. Then they reproduced The Times obit with permission in The Elizabethan, the school magazine, and damn me, they’d taken out the whole of that bit about… it wasn’t there. It disappeared as if it had never been. So I think that they may have had a guilty conscience, too, about it.
But he’s dead now, Charles, and he did have a great influence on me. And he was probably… the trouble is, he very nearly ruined my prose style but… in those days, I was very forthright and I used to write in essays, you know, things like, 'Some have argued, blah, blah, blah, this is utter nonsense'. And he’d write in the margin: 'It may perhaps be said that this is not wholly true’. And if I’d followed him down that route, I would never have become a journalist.  But… so he did try and, sort of, drain out a good deal of vigour of my prose style but that was sort of an academic talking, I suppose. But I got away without lasting harm. But he was always trying to, sort of, take things down to that kind of rather modest academic diffident level.

I went up to Oxford in 1952 and I was there till 1955, and it was an extraordinary period. It was, sort of, pre-Suez, none of these great changes had happened, none of the great, sort of, ‘Year of Revolution’ or anything like that. And I can remember, I thought they were out of their toots, but I can remember that there were actually contemporaries of mine who went in 1955 to join the Colonial Service. They went off to be District Officers in places that we called then Kenya, now Kenya. But I thought, you know, that’s not going to last very long. But they went in quite cheerfully and sort of apprenticed themselves to White Man’s Burden. Well, it was quite clear it was coming to an end.
What else went on there? I suppose we were very conventional. I went to a rather conventional college, Christ Church, a rather grand college, full of Etonians. And I threw myself in, I suppose really, to the… because I went straight from school. I wasn’t… I hadn’t been in the army first. And that meant that you were still quite excited by the toys you were given to play with, and the toys were things like university magazines, the Oxford Union, the Oxford Labour Club, as far as I was concerned. And I quite, sort of… I think I was much keener. If I had two years in the army, I would have said, 'Oh come on, let’s be a bit grown up about this. What do these little speeches matter in the Oxford Union?' Instead of which, I went up and, I think, with the dedicated ambition that I would be President of the Oxford Union. I don’t know why I wanted it so much. Partly perhaps because there’d been a boy at school who was quite influential on me. He became Librarian of the Union. Oleg Kerensky, son of the famous Kerensky, the first Russian, sort of, post-tsar Prime Minister. And Oleg, who I got on well with… who was older than me, he’d sort of tried to be President and failed, and so that may have had an influence on me. But he did become Librarian. So I more or less said, 'Well you know, I shall... if I can’t do that, then I’ll have to settle for going off to be a librarian or a schoolmaster or something but if I get there, then I’ll think of a different kind of career’.
Had some trouble, in that it was quite a distinguished year that I was President in. There was... Michael Heseltine was President in the Michaelmas term. Jeremy Isaacs and I then stood against each other in November for the Hilary term, and rather, I have to say to my surprise, Jeremy won, quite handsomely, by about, sort of, 340 to 240 or something like that. And I think I’d become rather unpopular because I’d done a lot of, sort of, writing in Isis and Cherwell and places. And a lot of it was pretty egotistical stuff and I think this rather turned people off. It was also a bit awkward because Jeremy had been pressed into… no Chairman of the Labour Club, I think in the Trinity term of 1954 and I had been, or was, that year I stood for the Union, I was Chairman of the Labour Club in the Michaelmas term. So we were both, sort of, competing for the same vote, as it were. He made a much better speech in the Presidential debate than I did. I made a rather poor speech, I think. But it was a rather big shock to me. He’d been Treasurer… no he’d been Librarian, I was Treasurer, so there were two offices of the Union and you were meant, to keep the show on the road, you were meant, as it were, to have a proper contest for the Presidency. And people who ducked out and said, 'Oh, I’ll let him have it and I’ll have it next after you, Claude’, were not really playing the game. So it was quite right, we should stand against each other. We were great friends and I remember we went off on the day of the voting, went off to Burford together and had lunch in Burford, and I suppose we voted at some time during the day, I don’t know. But, you know, it was all very pally. And he deserved to win.
But then the next term, I was quite lucky in that the opposition was very feeble and therefore, in the Hilary term, I was elected. And so I became President in the Trinity term of ‘55 and had, in a sense, achieved what I wanted to. I was, I think, slightly miffed. Shows what an egomaniac I was that I quite wanted to be editor of Isis as well as being President of the Union. And I think I made it clear to the Holywell Press people, who owned Isis in those days, that if they offered it to me, I would take it. You got £30 a term in those days for being editor of Isis. But they thought I’d be distracted and I couldn’t do both jobs, and gave it to a dumb boy, I think, who went off to be a professor in Canada or something but he wasn’t very lively. But I think they deliberately decided that I couldn’t have both, and as I was already President of the Union, I’d better stick with that. The other thing I sacrificed by being President of the Union, I think, was… and I don’t know who’s right, but when I was defeated, I read law. Very unfortunate subject. Not really an academic subject at all. But I read law at Oxford and I remember on the, sort of, week after the treat going to a tutorial and my very nice tutor at Christ Church, Teddy Burne… Edward Burne, said to me, ‘Well look, at least one good thing can come out of this. If you now knuckle down, I think we can get you a first’. And I said, ‘Well, what are the chances?’ He said, ‘Well, I think the chance is probably 50/50 but you know, they’re about that’. And I said, ‘Well, I don’t know. I think that if I try for the Union again, my chances of winning next time are probably 70/30 and so on an odds basis, I’d better go for running again for the Union’. He said, ‘Well, if you run for the Union, you haven’t got a chance of getting a first’. And I said, ‘Well, I know that’. And that wasn’t just running but it was also being President during the term in which schools took place. So he was perfectly nice about it, but I think that… and I don’t know if he was right or not, but it was very sweet of him to say what he did. So on the whole, I suppose I came out of Oxford feeling that the thing had gone reasonably well. I got a second, quite a good second, I think. But I didn’t get a first. But I had been President of the Union, I had been Chairman of the Labour Club, I had been features editor of Isis, all these toys which, as I say, I wouldn’t have played with, in my view, if I’d come in as a jaundiced and, sort of, slightly cheesed off ex-national serviceman in 1957, which was the alternative.
But I was lucky in the fact that, in those days, Christ Church, if they gave you an award, and they’d given me an exhibition, did insist that you came up straight away because they thought they’d invested their money and that you would have, in two years in the army, you’d forget all the Latin and Greek you’d learned or whatever it was, and you wouldn’t be as good an investment as if you came straight from school. And so not every college did that but Christ Church certainly did, and it meant that I went up at the age of 18 and came out of Oxford at the age of 21.  Which is also true, incidentally, of Jeremy Isaacs, who was on an exhibition at Merton, and true also, and I’m not quite sure how this happened, of Michael Heseltine, who was at Pembroke. And Michael came straight from Shrewsbury, I think, to Oxford, a year ahead of us because he arrived in ‘51 but he didn’t have any awards, certainly not. But I don’t know how he persuaded Pembroke to take him straight away but I think it may have been because he said, ‘I want to be an accountant’. In those days, he did, and therefore he’d become an articled clerk afterwards and then you got a postponement through being an articled clerk. And in fact, Michael Heseltine was one of the last people to go in for national service, which he did when he failed his part two of the accountancy exams and was then yanked into the army rather against his will. Didn’t stay very long, was out within ten months, because he was the first person to do the demob thing of becoming a political candidate and then the War Office let you go. He sort of blazed the trail for all those demob happy boys later. He, of course, was in the, I think, Welsh Guards and was an officer but most of them were private soldiers. But he did blaze that trail. He doesn’t like being reminded of that now because he likes to wear his Guard’s tie and all that stuff, but in fact, he was only in the army for ten months.

I don’t think I felt I was a privileged person at all because certainly at Christ Church, there were all these wealthy Bullingdon, sort of, Hooray Henries and all these old Etonians and stuff, and you know, they drank champagne and made an awful noise and in… what’s that famous…? Oh dear, my mind’s going. The famous quad. But I don’t think I did.  Also… you see, and I was brought up always… I mean, my dad was a parson. We didn’t have much money. Certainly didn’t have grand holidays or anything like that and most of the time when I was at school at Westminster, you know, the other boys were much richer than I was.  And it’s perfectly true that I did have a very lucky upbringing and I went to Westminster School and I then went on to Christ Church, Oxford but I think I was very conscious of being the poor parson’s son. Indeed, at the first school I went to, Highgate School in North London, they used to yell ‘Charity Boy’ at me and I don’t know what that meant because I wasn’t. I think my dad paid normal fees. They weren’t very high in those days. But ‘Charity Boy, Charity Boy’, because my dad was a vicar and he happened to be vicar of the local parish. So I don’t think I came out with any great feeling of being over-privileged and compared with the people I was mixing with, I certainly wasn’t. Though, of course, compared with the broad mass of the population, I had it very easy and I had it in, I suppose, a very privileged way. Public school, Christ Church, all the rest of it. But it didn’t sort of eat me up and I think I just felt that, you know, whereas other people went off on skiing holidays and rode horses, I’d never ridden a horse in my life, I’d never been skiing in my life, for that matter. So you didn’t feel that you belonged to the privileged class, really.

I find it hard to remember. I do remember that the term I was President of the Union, I did keep all the invitations you got and that you were asked because of who you were. And I think that, you know, there were hundreds of them. People’s parties who didn’t know you very well and all the rest of it.
Friends? Well, I found the Union provided most of my friends, I suppose. I remain, after 50 years, a friend of Michael Heseltine’s despite our difference of politics, but I’m quite, you know, favourable disposed towards Michael and was a very keen supporter that he should become Prime Minister. Not within the party, clearly, but I was excited by the fact that he might become Prime Minister in 1990 when he ran against Thatcher. I remain a close friend of Jeremy Isaacs of the Royal Opera House and Channel Four. There were other two... two or three friends I retained from Christ Church. There’s a... Charles Williams, who sits in the House of Lords, Lord Williams of Elvel, who was at Christ Church with me and was captain of cricket. There’s a boy called Robyn Porteus, now a portly gentleman, who went into stockbroking. And I think eventually became Bursar of a Cambridge College. I see him. I don’t see an enormous number of people. Of course, when you get to my age, a lot of your friends have died. There was a boy at school with me whom I liked, a great friend of mine called John King Farlough but he died untimely from cancer, I suppose ten years ago now. But I did keep up with him a bit though he lived in Canada as a professor somewhere so I didn’t see all that much of him. And I’m just trying to think… oh, there were members of the Labour Club, I think, that I remain friends with, who I knew. Some of those have died. A nice boy called Alec Grant, who was a lawyer, became, I think, a Master of the Queen’s Bench or something. I used to see him. But I saw him partly because he was The Observer lawyer and, therefore, when I arrived on The Observer I found this old Oxford contemporary, actually the, sort of, barrister who came in on Friday nights and Saturdays and read all the copy. So that may have had something to do with that.
I don’t have a host of friends, no. I suppose that when I was at Oxford, I did see a lot of people. I obviously went to a lot of committee meetings and that kind of thing at the Labour Club and went to editorial conferences of Isis and the rest of it but I hadn’t kept up with that number of people, though I’ve kept up oddly enough with more people I was at Oxford with than I was at school with, where I hardly know anyone anymore.

I joined the army in January 1956... national serviceman. Joined the East Surrey Regiment, called up to, because I suppose that was where we were living. We were living in Epsom at the time, which is Surrey. Kingston Barracks, gloomy place. And did my basic training, not at Kingston, oddly enough. This is one of the myths about national service. People go on saying it even now: ‘The great thing about national service was you learned how the other half lived, all people mingling together’. Nuts to that. Totally untrue. After I think about a week or ten days, possibly, at Kingston Barracks, all those boys who’d been to public school and it basically was that... was the divide, were plucked out and taken down to Canterbury for the Leadership Squad or the Home Counties Brigade, I think. And we weren’t the only ones. It wasn’t just the Surreys. The Royal West Kents were there and that kind of thing. And we were plucked out and just separated from the others as being potential officer material. And, you know, there were, I think, very few grammar school boys, there were, sort of, Wykehamists and Harrovians and me from Westminster and stuff, and we did our basic training basically segregated from the general run of recruits and being, sort of, held in readiness to go to the War Office Selection Board, which you went to after, I think, about 12 weeks in the army, which was a place called Barton Stacey in Hampshire. And you were, sort of, confronted by a quite grand, sort of, dining area. Well, they see if you can handle a knife and a fork and that kind of thing. And then there was this awful kind of thing with planks, and, sort of... not really an assault course, but sort of putting things together: barrels across rivers and the rest of it. I was absolutely hopeless at that kind of thing, no good at all. But I think I decided early on that the thing to do was to look as if you were in charge and to shout out, ‘Come on number five, pull yourself together’, kind of thing.
And so I somehow managed to get through the War Office Selection Board, which was actually a miracle because I had written that… one of the… you had to write an essay, among other things and I wrote an essay about the colour bar, I think, saying, you know, I was against it in a, sort of, typical wet liberal way, and there was a major in the Grenadiers and he had this essay in front of him and I went into this interview with him and he said, ‘Sit down, Howard, sit down'. And I sat down. He said, ‘I want to put something to you'. He said, ‘You’re in church, your sister’s coming up the aisle and there’s a black man waiting for her at the altar. What are you going to do about it?’ I said, ‘Well, I won’t do anything about it’. He said, ‘You won’t do anything about it?’ And so I thought I’d blown it all at that point but luckily I think I gave a talk on something. You had to give a five-minute lecturette or something and that went reasonably well. So anyway, I came out of Eaton Hall... I came out of Wasby and then I had to go back to Kingston Barracks, not to Canterbury, where I was made... because I was waiting for a vacancy to occur at the officer cadet school at Eaton Hall... and I then had the most power I had in the army, I think. They made me post corporal and that meant that I saw everyone’s letters. And on the very first day, I realised what my power was, because the regimental sergeant major, a terrifying man who, sort of, frightened the life out of me in the ten days I was there before, said, ‘Come in laddie. And I want to say to you, laddie, if you see a letter with that writing on it, it comes straight to me in the orderly room, you understand? It doesn’t go to the married quarters'. And I thought, whoa, I know what that was about. And so from that moment on, I lived a charmed life, really. And it wasn’t only him but I think everyone was slightly, sort of the same, you know. But it was a very easy, cushy number. I had to go down once a week, I think, to turn the… there was a book of remembrance in the Kingston Parish Church and one of my duties was to go down there and turn the page of this book and undo the glass case. It was a very cushy number. And then we went to… I went up to Eaton Hall in about May, I think, of 1956. It was a very strange life, in that Eaton Hall was almost kind of a country house hotel at one side and then a sort of really rough and pretty beastly kind of disciplinary atmosphere at the other. And we had, sort of, every morning we had sort of drills, being shouted at and all the rest of it. And then, in the afternoon, you could go and sort of play on Eaton Hall’s tennis courts and it was a very strange amalgamation of two styles of living. We weren’t within the hall itself, we lived in a hovel, Nissen hut, actually. But, you know, there was a quite nice platoon commander we had, had some grand name as long as his gun, probably, something like Edgerton-Wharburton, or something like Captain Edgerton or something like that. And he was okay but I don’t think he approved of me much. I was older than the others because I’d been to Oxford. I was 21 or 22 and most of the others were 18 or 19.

I think that they thought I was a bit of, sort of, intellectual and that kind of thing and sort of wanted to knock me into shape. And I didn’t do at all well. I was never, sort of, given the Sword of Honour or anything like that but I managed to pass out at the end of July, in fact just about the week that Nasser nationalised the Suez Canal in 1956. And we were given a sort of month’s leave, or quite a long leave, I think, after leaving Eaton Hall, before joining your battalion, which was, you know, what you’d been chosen to go and serve in. And I’d pulled a fast one there a bit, which I think rather annoyed… he wasn’t called Edgerton-Wharburton, he was called Stackpoole or something like that, the platoon commander. And I remember he was astonished. He said, ‘Howard, they’ve asked you to join the Royal Fusiliers! I wouldn’t have done that’, he said. What he didn’t know was that a very nice woman friend of mine, who’d been a very nice patroness to me, was a… she was much older, of course, a woman of about 60... she was a friend of Major General Rome, who was the honorary colonel of the Royal Fusiliers.  And so she’d pulled strings on my behalf to get me put into this regiment, rather grander than the East Surrey. It’s not, of course, as grand as the Guards or anything like that but certainly grander than the regiment I’d come from. And that’s how I got in.
But I, then, when that leave came to an end, went to the Tower of London, which was the depot for the Royal Fusiliers, reported there. Rather grand life, in that there you were, living in the Tower, in the officer’s mess. You… I rather brought horror on myself because I hadn’t got a hat, I didn’t believe in hats, and therefore you weren’t allowed to go out in civvies unless you wore a hat. And therefore I had always to go out with my, sort of, military cap on and uniform because I hadn’t got a civilian hat. I think, in the end, I bought myself a horrible cap, which is not what they had in mind. They had a bowler hat in mind, I think, or a trilby or something but I had this horrible green cap and that allowed me to go out in civilian dress. And then really, by the end of September, I think, I was yanked down to Dover to join the battalion, which was already on orders to sail for the Mediterranean and all its equipment was riding off some bay in Wales, waiting to be, sort of, transported to Cyprus or something.  And I had about, I suppose, three weeks there, a perfectly normal life, and then suddenly, after one night when I’d gone down with a couple of other subalterns to a restaurant in Dover, we came back to find the place alive with lights and move and anger and lorries and stuff, and the order had come for us to go down the next morning to Southampton to join a troopship and sail out to Port Said. We didn’t know it was going to Port Said at the time but sailed for the Mediterranean anyway. And on this troopship, which was the New Australia, which was an immigrant liner to Australia for those £10, you know, immigrant passages they had in those days. I think there were, in a cabin that was meant to have four bunks in it, there were eight of us. And so four had to sleep on the floor and four slept in bunks and it was terribly overcrowded. And I suppose we were mildly excited, although I do remember that it was very rough in the Bay of Biscay and everyone got very seasick but after that it was alright in the Mediterranean. We churned our way through the Mediterranean until we got to Malta, and I thought that’s where we’re going to get off, we’ll stop at Malta. I’m sure it’s going to be alright. But we sailed by Malta, and therefore it was then either is it going to be Cyprus or where's it going to be...? And eventually, after we’d gone, I suppose, about a day’s sale after Malta, we were told we were headed for Port Said, where the fighting had already begun, such as it was.
But when we arrived, the fighting was all over, which was on Armistice Day, November 11th, 1956. And there was a certain amount, of course, sniping going on in Port Said itself. We spent the first night, I remember, bivouacked on the beach, as it were, and that was because, I don’t know quite why, but we moved the next day into a maternity hospital in Port Said, which became the, sort of, headquarters of the Royal Fusiliers. And after about four weeks patrolling there, we went up to El Cap, which was the front line, where… it’s as far down the Suez Canal as the British and the French had got, and there we just sort of stayed looking... gazing across at the Egyptians, about a, sort of, 600 yards away across the desert sand. And on our left-hand side, by the Sweet Water Canal, were the French Foreign Legion, who behaved in a very irresponsible way and kept going every night to snatch an Egyptian from their lines. And I was very much against it. I thought it would start a Third World War if they don’t look out.
But then we all had to come back by... was it Christmas we were back? With our tails between our legs because obviously the United Nations and the American government had said, ‘Stop this nonsense’, and it was a great humiliation. And within a month, Eden was gone as Prime Minister, and it was, I suppose, the last puny little roar of the British lion, which ended up in sounding like a mouse. And I did feel… I remember coming back on the boat, on the ship, I really did feel for the regular army officers. They’d gone out so gun-ho, and coming back, they really felt the humiliation of it. And I can hear it now. When we got to Dover Marine on... it must have been the December 22nd, before Christmas, we'd marched out with a, sort of, band playing and that kind of thing, and here was this humiliation of a return to Connaught Barracks, Dover, and there was a small child standing on the platform, I heard it say distinctly (a she I think), she said, ‘What? Were you kicked out or something?’ Well, I don’t know if any field officers heard it but that was the, sort of, last humiliation: ‘What? Were you kicked out or something?’

I’m a journalist. I’ve joined Reynold's News. This is 1958, the very beginning of. And I immediately ran slap into a problem. In those days, the NUJ were a very strong trade union among journalists, and their rule was that you had to serve an apprenticeship for three years in the provinces before you were to work in London, and they’d signed a deal with what was then called the Newspaper Proprietors Association, I think, the NPA, saying that that was what was to happen. And so when I arrived at Reynold's, you know, straight out of the army, I suppose I was nearly 24... 23 or 24... all the loyal staff members said, ‘No, we can’t have him here. He hasn’t qualified as a journalist'. So there was a tremendous, sort of, battle about whether I could actually even join the staff, even though the job had been offered to me. And in the end, we outwitted them because I went round the back door, to the London freelance branch, and because I’d been earning so little in the army from the War Office, £5 a week, I was able, I think with a little stretching of the point, to claim that in the previous year, my earnings from journalism had exceeded that from my main employer, the army at the time. And I think it involved a slight stretch of the truth but it was nearly there because I’d written for a lot of papers. I’d written for Reynold's News, indeed, which had offered me the job. I’d written for the New Statesman fairly regularly. I’d, I think, written once or twice for an obscure weekly at the time, called Truth magazine, now out of business. And so we could get it up to sort of, after all, £5 a week was £250 and we could get it up to the very near there. And so I got my card to be a journalist, NUJ card from the London freelance branch. And that meant that the opposition to having me in Reynold's collapsed. I think there were some old sweats there who rather disapproved of my arrival.
And anyway, they were on the whole, very nice to me, and it was a baptism of fire, in that I think the first week I was writing a political column for it, goodness knows why. I think they knew I was a Labour candidate. That reassured the ownership of Reynold's, who were... the cooperative movement. And I was a very young prospective Labour parliamentary candidate and they thought that meant that I was reliable and safe and all that, but the very first week I arrived, we had the resignation of the Treasury, of Thorneycroft who was the chancellor, Enoch Powell and Nigel Birch. So I was thrown in at the deep end and frankly, I knew nothing. I mean, I’d been, you know, I'd never been near… I’d been to, I think, sitting in the press gallery at the House of Commons… well, not the press gallery, the public gallery of the House of Commons once or twice but I didn’t know anything about how a lobby worked or anything like that, and so I was thrown in, this very raw recruit, very, sort of, naïve. And I hadn’t helped matters, as a matter of fact, because I… before I think I… no, that was later, I think. I’m just trying to work out. I’d written a very unwise article in Town magazine, owned by Michael Heseltine and that was all about how politics was covered and individual lobby correspondents named but I think I’m jumping ahead of myself. I think that was before I joined the New Statesmen, which came afterwards, so better not go into that now.
Instead of that, I found myself in this newsroom in Reynold's, and Reynold's was a very worthy paper, but there was something terribly depressing about it, that all the photographs looked as if they’d been taken in the 1920s. And whereas the Sunday pic would have, sort of, ravishing girls in bikinis, we had sort of ladies in... wholly covering their skin swimsuits and all the rest of it. That was because the Co-operative Women’s Guild wouldn’t have anything else. But there was something very depressing about it and I can hear it now in my mind’s ear. You know, you’d sit there on a Saturday afternoon and there’d be reporters who’d brought in... you’d hear this hum going: ‘No, no, not the Empire News, Reynold's News here, Reynold's News’. And people had never heard of Reynold's or quite a lot of people you were ringing up or reporters were ringing up. There was one man I greatly admired, in that he wouldn’t go through any of this. He’d just say, ‘Will you tell his lordship that Mr Jack London called from London'. And I thought he had more self-confidence than all the rest.
Anyway, I would probably have stayed there for quite a time but I’d only been there about three months and I got a mysterious message to go and see Lord Beaverbrook, who was the great press panjandrum of the age... owned the Daily Express, Sunday Express, the Evening Standard. And this mysterious phone call, not made, of course, by Beaverbrook himself, came from some minion saying, ‘Lord Beaverbrook would very much like to see you. Will you go and see him next Monday afternoon at Arlington House?’ Which is a very grand block of flats just behind… down from the Ritz off St James’ in Piccadilly. So I went and duly presented myself, and there was some kind of manservant who admitted you. And he said, ‘Sit down, his lordship will be with you shortly'. And I sat in this rather alarming drawing room and eventually I heard the sort of patter of feet, and sort of from behind my back, Beaverbrook appeared. And he had this, you know, slightly unnerving habit of talking to you from behind your back. And he walked up and down and I couldn’t see him, he could see me, and he was perfectly agreeable. He finally said, ‘Do you want to make mischief? he said ‘Yes, I like making mischief.’ He said, ‘Good! Come and make mischief at my papers'.
So I suppose you could say it was a job offer and certainly, shortly afterwards, I received approaches, I think, both from the Evening Standard, from the editor of the Evening Standard, and from the editor of the Sunday Express, asking me in the latter case to go and be cross-bencher, which was then the political column, and had quite a lot of impact in those days. And that was Sir John Junor, the editor… not Sir John then, he was just John Junor. And we had a long negotiation, lasted through alot of the summer, and eventually I said, ‘Yes, I’ll come'. And they were going to pay me about double what Reynold's were paying and it was obviously a step up in the journalistic world. But I remember I went on holiday to Paris and I just couldn’t reconcile myself to a life of being a journalist or indeed a life on the Sunday Express, and it so happened that that very Sunday, and I think I must have seen it in Paris, the Sunday Express had a really disgraceful story about some poor ordinand who’d been ordained in Ripon Cathedral and whom they had dug up some kind of gay episode in his past, and here was this man pilloried on the front page of the Sunday Express. He was only about 25 or something, just about to be ordained deacon. And I thought, do I want to live with that as the kind of paper I work for? And I made up my mind I didn’t. So I came back to London and I wrote as nice a letter as I could to John Junor, saying I’d changed my mind, very sorry. Never heard from him and I think he always held it against me, and I went back to work for Reynold's.

I had been unsettled, there’s no doubt about it, and so because of the, sort of, intervention from Beaverbrook, I was no longer really content with my lot there, and I think as late as about November, I actually wrote a letter to the editor of The Guardian or then the Manchester Guardian in those days, it was, called Alastair Hetherington and I said, ‘Could I have a job on The Guardian?' And he wrote back a slightly guarded reply but he said, ‘Well, come up and see us'. And so I went up to Manchester and thinking I was going to see the great man, Alastair Hetherington. When I got there, the news editor, a very nice man called Harry Whewell said, ‘I’m terribly sorry, the editor’s been called away on important business and therefore isn’t able to see you but he’s asked me to interview you'. So that was fine. And we went quite well with the interview but I'd sent some cuttings up and at the end of the interview, Harry said, ‘Well, you better have these back’, and he reached in his drawer and handed the cuttings over. What he hadn’t realised is that attached to the cuttings was a note by Alastair Hetherington saying, ‘I’m afraid when this young man arrives I shall be over the hills and far away'. No important business at all, just taking a day off walking in the Lake District. Anyway, 'I do not much care for the tone of many of these pieces. He strikes me as being rather supercilious'. So all this was handed over to me, along with the cuttings and I went back to London saying, ‘Well, that’s that. I’m not going to do very well out of that'.
But to my surprise, about a... I suppose, a week or ten days later, Hetherington rang me up, I think, and said, ‘Look, I’m going to be in London at the Manchester Guardian London office on next Tuesday. Would you be able to come and see me there?’ So I said, ‘Sure’. So I went to see him in the then offices above the post office in Fleet Street and he was very agreeable and didn’t say anything. Then he wrote me a letter, saying, ‘We’re prepared to offer you a job at £20 a week as a reporter in Manchester, covering politics outside Westminster’, which meant by-elections, that kind of thing, and sort of trade union conferences. Anyway, it was a, sort of, 33.3% cut in what I was earning. So I was earning 1500 from Reynold's but I didn’t have any hesitation.
And I took the job, and I think on the 1st January 1959, drove up in my little Ford Anglia car which I had, all the way from Epsom where my dad lived, mum lived to Manchester and went to live first of all in digs there, then I got a flat. And I had a very happy... very happy 18 months, that’s all it was, covering the 1959 election, among other things and going around, you know, the last really old-fashioned election campaign in a sense with big mass public meetings addressed by people like Nye Bevan and this kind of thing. And I did some of the West Country doing the Liberals and Jeremy Thorpe and Mark Bonham Carter and people like that down in Devon. And it was very jolly. And the reporters' room on Croft Street was really an extraordinary mixture in those days. It had people like me, who hadn’t actually come straight from university because I had done the year on Reynold's but I counted as a kind of graduate recruit. It had Michael Frayn, who’d come straight from Cambridge, went on to be a famous playwright. It had Michael Parkinson who was, again, not a graduate recruit at all, but had left school at 15 and come up a much harder way, through papers in Yorkshire and the Barnsley Chronicle and that kind of thing. And, of course, it had a whole corps of old sweats, who covered things like the town hall and that kind of thing. So it was a mixture of, sort of, young and academic and, sort of, I suppose a bit snooty, who’d been to, sort of… well, certainly been to Oxbridge and these people who had really worked in all their life in journalism. But we, I think, merged and gelled quite well. And as I say, I greatly enjoyed it and I think I would have stayed there if Hetherington, the editor, who was very kind to me and encouraged me a lot, hadn’t said to me, ‘Look, have you ever thought of going to America because there’s these things called Harkness Fellowships? And I had one when I was about your age and they’re very well worth doing. Why don’t you put in for one of those?’ And I said, ‘Well, you know…’, and he said, ‘No, no, I think you ought to do it. I think it’ll be a very good experience for you'.
So I did put in for Harkness and he, I think, was my referee and to my slight surprise, after an interview first of all in the Midland Hotel, Manchester with some kind of plenipotentiary of the Harkness Foundation, and then a full interview in London with the kind of Harkness board, they awarded me a fellowship in journalism for the year 1960 to 61. One of the reasons, I think, why I was attracted to it was that I knew there was a presidential election going on, Kennedy against Nixon and this kind of thing. And it was a very generous fellowship in that they not only paid you quite well but not anything like as well as I was earning from The Guardian. I had another string to my bow at that time, too. But, you know, it was better than most of those fellowship things.
And they gave you four months with a motorcar in which you were meant to drive around the United States, which Alistair Cooke had done back in the 1930s. You did that a lot. I went to the South, I remember, and drove all through the, sort of, deep south in those days and learned much more than you’d ever learn from being in New York or in Washington or anything like that. But I think… I don’t know whether it was a mistake or not because I did find it very frustrating in that I’d been… I was lucky. On The Guardian, in the latter days, I had actually been producing a television programme, as well, called ABC of the North, for ABC Television. And that, sort of, you know, had... it was only a 20 minute local news programme really. And before that, I’d had a column in the Sunday Pictorial, then run by… I think called the International Publishing Corporation. And Hugh Cudlipp had hired me and, you know, from the Sunday Pictorial I earned double what I was earning from The Guardian. No, three times. I earned £60 a week from the Sunday Pic, £20 a week from The Guardian. And I think then, when I got the ABC programme, I got £50 a week. So I was doing quite well for those days, with, you know, £5000 a year... in those days, a lot of money. So it was a slight comedown being on this Harkness Fellowship, but I wasn’t to know it at the time but it was absolutely invaluable to me because although I’d written it off slightly as experience and I’d been excited by the election and Kennedy winning against Nixon and all the rest of it, I hadn’t really enjoyed it all that much. You’re very much on your own and I shared a flat for a time, or an apartment, in New York, with a man called Andrew Sinclair, who went on to write a number of novels and stuff but he and I didn’t get on all that well. We still see each other occasionally, but it wasn’t, sort of, a most buddy-buddy relationship. And I got a little bit, I think, sort of, homesick. And so in… about that Christmas, after the election, Christmas 1960, just before Kennedy came in, the Inauguration Day on January 20th, 1961, I got out of the blue a letter, originally, from John Freeman.

John Freeman was then the star of Face to Face on BBC Television, and was a very, very, sort of, famous man. But he was about to take over the New Statesman from Kingsley Martin, who’d been editor for about 30 years. And John wrote to me and said, would I like to come and join him. And he was thinking of having a full-time political column in the paper every week, and he’d like me to write it.
Well, I’d had a very firm understanding that I was going back to The Guardian, as it had now become, it was no longer the Manchester Guardian, it changed its name, I think, in August… no, it changed its name possibly earlier. August 1960, I think it changed its name. So I didn’t do anything about it. I sat on the letter and I was pretty, sort of, unhappy. I didn’t know whether I wanted to go back to The Guardian or there was this tempting invitation from the New Statesman. And finally, I got a rather peremptory telegram or cable from John Freeman, saying, 'Must have your answer'. And so, within, sort of, 24 hours, I made up my mind and without, I think, even consulting The Guardian or Alastair Hetherington, I said yes to John Freeman. And... although I continued being in America until April or May, I then knew it was going to come to an end and I was going to come back to London from working in Manchester.
I suppose it’s true that if The Guardian had said to me, no, you can join our Westminster staff or something, I might have thought again, but I knew that that way was pretty well blocked, in that in those days people had very few political people working at Westminster. There was a political correspondent called Francis Boyd, there was a gallery reporter called Norman Shrapnel, and there was one sidekick called Edward Greenfield, who was sort of understudy for them both. And that was the size of the political staff. And none of them were about to retire, so I didn’t see the way I was going to get in on that. So really, sort of, progress on The Guardian looked to me as if it was blocked. But to be fair, I didn’t even consult Alastair Hetherington, the editor, who had been very good to me and taught me more about journalism, I think, than any other editor I ever worked for.
Strange, ascetic man, who used to, sort of, very generously give supper parties at this quite grand house. Well, we thought it was quite grand in those days, in Didsbury Park. He was newly married to Miranda Oliver, who was the daughter of a professor, I think. And they gave these, sort of, Saturday night supper parties, and the young reporters were asked. And we all went, sort of, full of excitement. And I can remember the first time I went, and about… it had been quite nice food. I think there’d been some sherry before supper... before dinner... not very nice sherry, and I don’t think there was any wine with the meal, but you could have, I think, cider or possibly beer. But then, about sort of ten o’clock, when things were rather flagging, Alastair suddenly said, 'Now who’d like a drink?' And we all perked up no end, and said, 'Oh, lovely'. And he then retired to the kitchen and came in with a tray with six glasses of lemon squash and six glasses of orange squash. So our faces fell. But that was rather what it was like. It was high thinking and plain living. But he had been very kind to me, and he used to take me for walks on Saturday and again, you know, we’d go… sometimes pouring with rain, and we’d go past some lovely looking hostelry and I’d say, 'Look, Alastair, that’s a lovely pub'. 'Oh yes, very nice', he would say, and stride on.
So he wasn’t a great, sort of, hedonist, but he had been... and he was a very good editor.  He was only about 38 when I arrived there, and of course he stayed editor of The Guardian until, oh, I think 1975 or something like that. He did about 19 years.  Became editor in '56, at the time of Suez. And I’ve always thought how unfair life is, that Alastair, who’d been, by any judgement, a much more distinguished editor of The Guardian than, say, William Rees-Mogg had been of The Times. They were… Rees-Mogg a little later, but… Alastair got nothing. He went to join the BBC, they made him BBC controller of Scotland. He then fell out with Ian Trethowan, I think he was called, who was Director-General. So he ended up as station manager, Aberdeen. And he was never given a single honour. He never got even a, sort of, CBE. There’s Rees-Mogg, not a very successful editor of The Times, sort of becomes Sir William, becomes Lord Rees-Mogg, made chairman of the Broadcasting Standards Committee, made Vice-Chairman of the BBC, this kind of thing. There’s no justice in this world. I mean, Alastair was, in my view, a much more considerable figure than William Rees-Mogg, but one belonged to the establishment and the other didn’t, and so Alastair, who ended up as, sort of, kind of part-time academic, I think, at Stirling University, really had a rather rough deal. I suppose it’s true that it didn’t help that he’d had this row with the BBC, that when he was taken on by the BBC, I think the idea was that if he prospered as controller of Scotland, as ex-editor of The Guardian he might well become Director-General. After all, Sir William Haley had gone the other way, and gone from being Director-General to being editor of The Times, but he’d also come out of The Guardian stable originally, having been editor of the Manchester Evening News, and I think that may have been the notion at the back of their minds.
I think that the row with the managers at the BBC didn’t help. I don’t quite understand what the row was about. I think it was slightly a sort of preview of the row over Scottish nationalism, that Alastair took the view that if the BBC was to survive in Scotland, then Glasgow, where the headquarters was, should be much more an autonomous state than the BBC people in London thought it should be, and that, I think, was the root of the conflict.
But I saw him a bit in retirement. Very nice man. Unfortunately, he got Alzheimer’s, and the last time I saw him, when I was doing a programme about Alistair Cook for BBC radio, he was… I mean, it was very sad. He was scarcely able to speak. I said, 'Now look, I want you to say something about Alistair and the black question in America'. And he said, 'Oh, what should I say?' And I said, 'Well, all you have to do is to mention the word civil rights'. And he had great difficult in, sort of, getting this into his head, because he was far gone in Alzheimer’s. So he was quite healthy. He could drive the car and that kind of thing, but the brain had gone, really, and it was very sad. And he died, I suppose, about now... what? Must be, oh I think, six, seven years ago. And he’d married again, and I think was happy, which was the main thing. But I think in the end, his second wife had to put him in a home, which, for a man of his abilities, was rather sad.
Anyway, I owe him a lot.

I think I owe John Freeman quite a lot, who took me on at the New Statesman, too. John was a very cold fish. He wasn’t at all… warmth, no warmth in that personality. He was rather… anyone who watches Face to Face can probably see for themselves because he used to have people like Gilbert Harding reduced to tears and that kind of thing. But he could be very funny and he had a gift of self-mockery and above all, he was very loyal. And if you got into trouble, he really stood up for you.
I remember once, and I think it must have been about quite early on when I was on the [New] Statesman, probably '62, I’d written a column. There were some nuclear tests going on in Nevada, I think, which were to test the… I think the American bomb, don’t think it was the British bomb, but I’d written that the left-wing Labour backbenchers had not been at all reassured to learn that these past few days, Mr Harold Wilson, who wasn’t then leader, has been entirely preoccupied with the affairs of the Public Accounts committee, of which he was Chairman. And I can remember... hear it now because I think I was in the room, in the editor’s office, and the phone rang, it was probably Monday, and I gathered from John’s side of the conversation this was Harold Wilson and he said, ‘Look, it’s a very serious matter. It’s bound to be a breach of privilege. I’ll do my best, but I think I must insist that you print in the next issue a full retraction and apology for what Tony Howard so irresponsibly said. The Public Accounts Committee doesn’t exist. You know, people aren’t… no one has been meeting and this an absolute clear-cut case of breach of privilege.’ And I remember John saying, ‘Howard, am I to believe what I think I’m hearing?’ And this kind of thing. Anyway, he sent him away with a flea in his ear and we never heard another word about it, so he was quite tough in that way, John. Of course, it was a help to him that he’d been a politician himself, he’d been a Labour MP from 1945 to 1955. He’d been a junior minister. He even resigned with Harold Wilson and with Nye Bevan in 1951 over the cost of the Rearmament Programme, so he knew how to look after himself. And he was a very successful editor. I mean, he took the paper… well, he didn’t actually take it because his successor got the benefit of it, Paul Johnson, but he took the paper from a circulation when he took over of about, I don’t know 72,000 to 94,000 or thereabouts and everyone in those days who cared about politics, sort of, or was involved in politics, really did, I think, read the New Statesman. Not only that, it also had a great appeal abroad, that all the emerging African leaders, people like Julius Nyerere, Kenneth Kaunda, even I think Hastings Banda of Nyasaland, they all were, sort of, New Statesman subscribers. And that was a great help to me, when I became political columnist on it because I, you know, very again… like when I went to lobby for Reynold's, I knew no one and very, very little about anything.
I remember in the first week I was there, I wrote to… then, I think, he was the Tory, probably, Secretary of State for the Colonies, Iain Macleod. And I wrote, ‘Dear Mr Macleod, I wonder if sometime I could come and see you. I am just starting out writing this column in the New Statesman and I know nothing about the Conservative Party and I’d be most grateful if you would give me some instruction'. Typical Macleod, he wrote back, ‘Dear Howard, no one who wrote the column you did last week can possibly claim to know nothing about the Conservative Party.’ Anyway, he was very kind and he asked me to tea and had me round and all that kind of thing. And I got to know him very well and I think he saw me as much as he saw any other journalist. And it took years for the penny to drop with me but I finally realised that what Ian Macleod, who was a very clever politician, bridge player, saw, was that one sure means he had of communicating to the emerging African leaders that he was on the side of light and that he was a good chap, was to get a good write-up in the New Statesman because he knew that people like Kenneth Kaunda and Julius Nyerere, he knew they read it and it was their Bible. And I’m sure and it didn’t occur to me at the time, that one of the reasons why he was so free with his time with me and so ready to help was that here was he trying to bring forward the decolonisation of these countries in southern Africa and the one thing he had to make sure was that the African leaders, the emerging African leaders, believed in what he was doing and believed that he was somebody they could trust. So I think that was why but he was very generous to me, as indeed was Reggie Maudling, who took over from him when Macleod was made Chairman of the Party and leader of the House of Commons, and I saw a lot of Reggie in those days.
I never, to my regret, saw Harold Macmillan, who was Prime Minister. Years later, Harold Evans... not the Harold Evans who edited The Sunday Times but a civil servant in Number 10, who was actually Harold Macmillan’s press secretary, said to me, ‘Why didn’t you, when you were writing that column in the New Statesman, why didn’t you ever ask to see the Prime Minister?’ I said, ‘Well, I didn’t think he’d ever see me'. He said, ‘You couldn’t have been more wrong. He’d have loved to have seen you'. And I think I ought to have spotted that, that here was a man who was a publisher, after all, and therefore knew about papers like the New Statesman, and I think he also, because he was a bit of a snob, he thought it was nice to sort of see some journalists who were graduates and this kind of thing. And so he would… I think he probably would have seen me but I never even asked and I always regretted that.

I did actually finally, put up by John Freeman who said, ‘Why don’t you ever go and see Rab Butler? You’d find it very entertaining'. So I did, when Rab was already, I think, Foreign Secretary, ask to see Rab, and we got on rather well. And of course, many years later, I wrote Rab’s official life at his request. But that just shows that, you know, you mustn’t be shy of asking and if you ask, quite often you’ll get an affirmative reply. I don’t think I had any difficulty with contacts in the Labour Party, because they knew about the New Statesman being a left-wing magazine. I got on pretty well with George Brown, who was the Deputy Leader, and of course, then, stood against Harold Wilson in 1963 for the leadership. So did Jim Callaghan. I saw quite a lot of them. But I also saw a lot of curious backbenchers in those days. I mean, very odd, some of them rather sinister figures like Tom Driberg, Ben Parkin. And there was never any difficulty, I think, in having access to the Labour Party.
And indeed, that went before, because... great proof to me then, when I was working for the Sunday Pictorial, when I was sort of on the staff of the Manchester Guardian at the same time, I was astonished in that I hadn’t been writing the column in the Sunday Pictorial for more than a week or two when the political editor of the group, Sydney Jacobson, said to me, ‘You know, Hugh Gaitskell said the other day [he was then leader of the Labour Party] that he’d very much like to see you. Why don’t you try and fix an appointment with him?’ And I went to see Hugh Gaitskell, then leader of the Labour Party, and we had a chat and he was helpful. And then he said, ‘Would you like to come and see me every Friday?’ Friday was the day I wrote the column and I came up to London. And I said, ‘Well, that's very kind'.  He said, ‘Well, no, I think I can fit you in. Why don’t we try and make a standing arrangement? You’ll be here at 2:30 on Fridays'... in his room in the House of Commons. And he’d see me every week!
Now obviously, I think he exaggerated the importance but he knew that the Sunday Pictorial had a circulation of five million in those days, I think. And for him, it was a way, I suppose, of talking to Labour voters. But it didn’t work out all that well, I have to say, because he was very, sort of, in some ways, pedagogic, Hugh. And I liked him but he was very, sort of, headmasterly. And I’d go in on a Friday afternoon, he’d say, ‘My dear boy, I told you last week what was going on. You then wrote the exact opposite. I mean, what is the point of my telling you things if you won’t pay attention?’ Obviously, I thought he was just giving me a sort of whole lot of propaganda, so I paid no attention to it, but we did have our little ups and downs. But he was very nice and I think I went on seeing him on a weekly basis until I went to America, in that year 1960.
So it’s true that politicians in those days and I think probably it still is true, they bothered a great deal about what the press was writing. And of course, in Hugh’s case, the Sunday Pictorial was a mass circulation paper and had to be kept on side and he thought that I was the channel and vessel with which he could do so. In that aspiration, I fear, he was frequently disappointed but there we are. And I suppose the same went for Labour MPs.
I was quite close to Wilson, in those days, in the days he was leader of the opposition. And I became very critical of Wilson but one thing you can’t take away from Harold Wilson is that between February 1963 and October 1964, when he won the election and became Prime Minister, no one has ever been a better or more effective leader of the opposition than he was. He was brilliant. Absolutely superb. Never put a foot wrong. Ah! Never put a foot wrong... he did put one foot wrong and I was there at the time. He was addressing a meeting in the 1964 election campaign. The meeting was in the dockyard, then town of Chatham. And Wilson, who was usually much [unclear] than that, made the mistake of saying, from the platform, and he said, ‘Why do I emphasise the importance of the Royal Navy?’ And a voice shouted from the back: ‘Because you’re in Chatham, you bloody fool!’ And I’ve never seen Wilson collapsed, because there was nothing do about that. It shows the peril of asking rhetorical questions. But basically, it was an absolute triumph that he had no support from Transport House. Absolutely hopeless, in those days, the headquarters of the Labour Party. Dreadful man, Sir Len Williams, went on to be governor of some… I think governor of Madagascar or somewhere like that. No, I can’t remember but anyway, absolutely useless general secretary of the party. Not much better national agent.
And so he and one other, Marcia Williams, his faithful private secretary, really had to do everything themselves. And the way they organised, that it was… you know, they had to… they did the whole, kind of, itineraries and the times of meetings and all the rest of it. That 1964 election campaign was incredible, that there they were, these two individuals matched against the cohorts of the Conservative Central Office, and, true, Labour only won by, I think, five seats, but it was a great triumph and up to that moment, Wilson looked like a wonderworker. And my view is he went on doing quite well, with a very, very tiny House of Commons majority because he lost a by-election early on, and so the majority went down to three from five, because Patrick Gordon Walker lost the by-election in East London there, and so he… But he did pretty well, until the election of 1966, on March 31st, when after that everything went wrong. Started with Seamen's strike, and he’d got paranoia about, you know, Communists on the NUS executive committee, and went around making dark hints about this, that and the other.  And then the Sterling got into terrible trouble, and the whole thing fell apart.
His great moment of triumph was, on March 31st, 1966, when he converted what had been this majority of three in the House of Commons to a majority of 97, which in those days, was considered a very hefty in parliamentary majority. But that was the highpoint, and it was downhill all the way thereafter.

I find it very hard to know why I first became interested in politics. My father and mother had no interest in politics, really. I think my father was a liberal conservative, he was entirely opposed to capital punishment and things like that. He thought the whole Suez expedition in 1956, which I was engaged in as a national serviceman, was absolute, if not criminal, was at least lunacy. And he was quite right, of course. My mother, I think, eventually became a kind of… possibly even on my account, occasionally a Labour voter, but probably much more likely SDP material. I think my father probably always voted Conservative.
So where did it come from? I don’t really know. I was at school at Westminster with the son of a man who, at that stage, was very much, sort of, persecuted in the press, and that was John Strachey, who was the Minister of Food in the Labour Government at that time. And Charles Strachey, who was in the same house as I was, you know, I began to feel, sort of, rather protective towards him, because every day brought these terrible headlines about his dad in all the papers and all the rest of it. And so I think it was when I was at school that I converted from being, you know, a conventional schoolboy Tory, really, to being a supporter of the Labour Party. I didn’t join the Labour Party until, I think, just before I went to Oxford when I was 18. And I suppose the interest in politics came from, at that stage, to have been trained to be a political activist, that I became the youngest prospective parliamentary candidate in the country when I was 22, I think. Admittedly a hopeless seat, where my dad was vicar in Epsom. The seat was Epsom and Ewell. And I think it was first of all wanting to play the game, and then when that didn’t prove possible, mainly because of journalism... in those days it was very hard to ride the two horses of journalism and, at least it was in the Labour Party, because the Labour Party had gotten very suspicious of journalists. And so not playing the game, but becoming a kind of analyser and, you know, a spectator at it, was my… what happened.
And I think I did go on being fascinated by politics for a long time. But I remember thinking one of the attractions of America was that American politics was much, much more fun and more rewarding to study than British politics, in that they were so many more permutations. You become a governor of a state, you become a senator, you become, you know, a congressman, mayor of New York, mayor of Chicago. So there really were many more options open to you, whereas in Britain, all roads lead to Westminster. And you will not prosper unless you become an MP. And then, of course, it’s just the luck of the draw whether you’re… the tide is running with your party, which means that your party’s in government, and indeed whether you attract the favour of the leader of your party who, if the party is in government, will be Prime Minister. And I’ve known lots of politicians of great ability who’ve never really made it to the top at all.
I mean, let’s take the example of Dick Crossman. Brilliant man. Been an Oxford don, ran psychological warfare in wartime, elected to parliament for a safe seat in Coventry in 1945. And with one very brief, I think, period of about two months, when he sat on the Opposition frontbench when Gaitskell was still leader of the party, he had no kind of opportunity to shine on his frontbench at all. Never was given a job by Attlee during the period of the Attlee government, except somebody, I think it was Gaitskell, went to see Attlee once, said, 'I think you ought to do something for Dick Crossman. He’s very able, you know'.' Not a question of ability', he said, 'question of character. That’s the trouble there'. So Attlee didn’t like him, and that was partly because he’d been to… he’d been a friend of his parents, and he thought Dick had behaved in a very overbearing way as a young Wykehamist scholar, and as a young undergraduate. And he didn’t like him, so he’d taken against him in a big way.
So, you know, 19 years sitting there on the backbenches before becoming a minister. Much the same, too, of Barbara Castle, who… you know, she waited all that time to get into the cabinet. Now, it’s true they were very lucky. They vaulted from the backbenches straight into the cabinet. Normally, you have to sort of serve a progression: undersecretary, minister of state, cabinet minister or minister of cabinet rank, and then you go into the cabinet. But when you get a dramatic change like took place in 1964, you do get people… indeed, the same happened to Macleod... Iain Macleod. He went straight from the backbenches into the cabinet as Minister of Health. But it’s pretty rare.
So yes, I suppose it adds to the adventure of the trade, but it isn’t a trade in which you can assume you will get a reward because of your abilities at all. Some people have the luck, some don’t. And there were a lot of very, sort of, embittered politicians, you know, who may or may not end up in the House of Lords, because people have a guilty conscience about them and think it’s bad luck that they never became an undersecretary, even. I can think of one or two cases, better not mention them. And so their… out of guilt, their party leaders nominate them to go into the House of Lords. But it’s still… you know, after 20 years in the House of Commons, then to go into that upper chamber where it’s really life after death, it’s a pretty miserable life.

And of  course, frankly, being an MP is not, and a lot of people won’t like  this, but it is not really a full-time job, however assiduous you are  with your constituency. If it were a full-time job you couldn’t possibly  be an MP and be a minister. Because a minister is a full-time job. And I  think most politicians think that the only thing that counts is  actually, you know, being in charge of a government department. And  that’s what you wait for and that’s what you hope for. And, of course,  in a sense, you know, you have a better chance of getting there than  perhaps you do, as a journalist of becoming an editor, because there are  what? Now about 23 members of the cabinet, they’ve all got departments  to run, and they’re not… well, they’re… I don’t think there are 23  national newspaper editors. Obviously, with provincial ones, there are,  but if you want to edit a national newspaper, you’ve got less chance,  really, than if you want to be a cabinet minister.
But I  don’t know. I suppose the fascination started off with, as I say,  wanting to be a politician myself, then realising, and accepting that it  wasn’t going to work, because the moment I suppose I went to the New Statesman to...  in 1961... although it was a left-wing paper, I think that people  thought, well, you know, he’s decided to be a journalist. And it was all  right when I was on Reynold’s News, because that was okay, I was a Labour candidate at the same time, but I had to give that up when I went to work for The Guardian, because, quite rightly, Alastair Hetherington, the editor of The Guardian made it a condition of my employment that I must give up being a Labour  candidate. He said, 'Look, I may believe that you’re being straight and  honest, but the readers won’t'. The readers will write in and say, can  we be surprised that your reporter writes... because in those days we  didn’t have any by-lines... as we all know, he is himself a prospective  Labour candidate. He said, 'I can’t have that, so you must sacrifice it  and give it up'. And it wasn’t a great sacrifice, because it wasn’t a  seat I had the faintest hope of winning. But I think from that moment  on, I realised that you couldn’t ride the two horses. So, to be fair, to  my own folly, I suppose, I did, when I left the New Statesman as editor, which I became in 1972 and stayed there six years, when I  left in 1978, I did make some rather timid attempts to, sort of, get  back on to the political horse and wrote off to one or two  constituencies and was even interviewed here and there, but never, I  think, at the level of a full selection conference.
But it  became clear to me that, such was the suspicion of journalism and of  the, sort of, you know, anti-Labour bias of all journalists, that it  wasn’t going to succeed. And when it became clear that I wouldn’t have  got a seat in the 1979 election, I gave that aspiration up. Thank  goodness I did, because stretching ahead, though I didn’t know that at  the time, were 14 years of Labour… 18 years, no 18 years of Labour in  opposition. And I think that I would have felt pretty frustrated if, at  the age of 46, I’d gone into the House of Commons and had to sit there  until I was over pensionable age, 65, knowing I’d never get office  because simply the tide was not with the Labour Party at that time. It  wasn’t until 1997 that Tony Blair won the election of that year, ending  an 18-year exile from power of the Labour Party. And if I had gone into  the House at the time… and some of my friends tried very much to help  me. People like Roy Hattersley tried very hard on my behalf, and kind of  people like that. Then, you know, what I’d have sentenced myself to  would have been much less rewarding than running the New Statesman had been. And indeed, then later on, which I went on to edit The Listener and then I went to The Observer, so I think they’d have been much less fulfilling years than they were by returning to journalism.

[Q] Being an editor is, of course, having power, isn’t it? Can you say a little about power?
Being an editor, you don’t have all that much power, but I suppose I’ve never been editor of a national paper, I’ve only been editor of weeklies. What I suppose the… yeah, I think you’re right. I mean, the editor of the Daily Mail is a very powerful individual, no doubt about it, and, you know, much more powerful, probably than a cabinet minister. And when I was younger, I used to say to myself, when I indeed was working on The Guardian, which would you prefer to be? Would you prefer to be a cabinet minister in the fullness of time, or would you prefer to editor of The Guardian? And the answer I always gave myself is I’d prefer to be the editor of The Guardian. I never would have got within striking distance of becoming editor of The Guardian, but I might have done if I’d stayed there and spent my life there, I suppose.
No, I mean, being editor is like being a conductor of an orchestra, really. You mustn’t push yourself forward all the time. A writing editor is a great mistake, that somebody who’s only interested in what he himself does, will never, I think, be an effective team leader in a newspaper or a magazine.
One of the troubles with Dick Crossman, who was a friend of mine, when he became editor of the New Statesman much too late, because he was about 63 years old, in 1970, was he was basically only interested in what he wrote himself. And he wrote quite well himself. He wrote book reviews, he wrote the diary, he wrote leaders, but everything else in the paper wasn’t really of interest to him. He wanted to be the star. And I don’t think you can do that. I think that I always knew, when I was editor of the New Statesman, that I had far more talented writers on the staff than ever I would be, and my intention and hope was to give them their heads, and whether it was Martin Amis or Christopher Hitchens or James Fenton or Julian Barnes, you know, they were very talented young men, younger than me. And I did write myself, occasionally. Not occasionally, because I wrote quite a lot, because I did the diary quite a lot, but I never thought that I should be the star turn of the paper. And I think that is a good rule. I think one of the problems, perhaps, with Rees-Mogg, was that Rees-Mogg was far too much a writing editor when he was editor of The Times. Now he doesn’t write a lot of signed articles, but he wrote the leaders most days.
Somebody like Peter Stothard, who became editor long after Rees-Mogg, but was editor of The Times what, between about 1992 and 2002, you know, very seldom wrote anything. And I think that’s quite a good thing. He played with other people’s articles, he’d improve them, he’d sort of rewrite the leader, recast it, but he wouldn’t actually… he wasn’t a writing editor. And on the whole, I think it’s probably an advantage not to be a writing editor. And you’ve got to show that, I think, you know how to do it, but you mustn’t sort of always put on the cover, if you can, in the weekly papers, you know, Anthony Howard on… it should be… that’s a bad sign if it’s the editor who’s doing that.
I certainly found that I wrote more when I started in the New Statesman than I did in the later years, and I became more interested in, you know, the whole package, rather than anything I was doing. And I became particularly interested, and one of the odd things about it was that journalism really is a young person’s career. It’s marvellous until you get to be about 35. You’re earning more money than most of your contemporaries, you certainly have a more interesting time than those friends of yours who are second secretaries in British embassies abroad, or whatever it may be, or assistant principals in the civil service, and everything seems to be in the garden, seems to be lovely. And then gradually, and this is only just, things reverse themselves. Your contemporaries who joined the diplomatic service become ambassadors. You are already on a downhill descent, that, you know, always there will be… editors will be looking for young people. And therefore, a journalist who’s carried on, and some of them have done it with great distinction, people like James Cameron, but doing the same thing for 30 or 40 years, I think have a very tough job of it, in that they’re really not improving their performance, even though they’ve got greater experience, but they’re not really improving their performance, what they were doing in their 30s, and they’re still doing the same thing.
I was jolly lucky, in that in 1972, when I was 38, I got the option, really, of changing my whole way of life, that, certainly in a small paper like the New Statesman, although in those days it was a rather more substantial paper than it is today, you know, the whole… what I used to call the whole sweet shop side of the business opened up. Budgets, sales, projections, all of this kind of thing. And you came from being a sort of shop assistant, you became, you know, the kind of… what shall we say the... not the chairman of the company, but sort of the manager of the place, anyway, and because you have a board above you... even if you’re in journalism. And I did find, to my great surprise, that whole sort of sweet shop side of running a small business was, you know, really quite interesting, quite rewarding. And certainly, if I hadn’t had that gear change at the age of 38, I think I’d have found it hard to keep going. And I admire tremendously those people who have, people like Alan Watkins doing the same thing today as he was doing 30 years ago. People like Peter Jenkins, now dead. But, you know, they kept on going on, kept on at the last, doing their thing. But I think I’d have found that very difficult.
And so, from the moment I became editor of the New Statesman in those days, because I was quite a young age, not that young now, it looks to me, but at 38, until I left when I was 44, and then I went out of work, I think, for a year, and then I went to The Listener, which was a BBC publication in those days. And that was rather different, because you were part of a bureaucracy, and I didn’t find it entirely rewarding, that side of it, being under the sort of BBC General Manager of Publications. Dreadful man. Dreadful. Called Holmes. I used to go and see him and say, 'John, I wonder if we might do X, Y or Z', and he'd say, 'Tony, I don’t think that’d be wise. If we were to go down the road, who can tell where it would end?' That was the kind of basis of BBC management in those days, and… so I did find that a bit depressing. And so when, out of the blue, Donald Trelford, who was then editor of The Observer, said would I come as number two on The Observer newspaper, after some thought, because it’s not the same as being number one, after some thought, I said, 'Yes', and went to The Observer in 1981, I think, end of 1981, after only doing The Listener for less than two years.
[Q] As Deputy Editor?
As Deputy Editor of The Observer.

It was… I mean I liked it pretty well, at first, anyway. And I was very lucky, in that Donald, though a hardworking editor when he was there, did take a lot of time off. And I think one year, I worked out that out of the 51 issues we produced, which was not 52, because of Christmas, I think, you know, I had produced 18 out of the 51, because he’d been away, writing a book and this kind of thing. I’m not saying he was idle. He wasn’t, but he had various distractions on.
And I always liked him. I mean, there was a spring in my step when I knew the week I was in charge and I was going to run the paper was much different from when he came back from his hol or whatever it was. I knew then, sort of Cinderella, you know, the whole coach turned into a pumpkin again. So I didn’t find… I would have very much liked to have been editor of The Observer, and I think when I first went there, I thought that might happen, because Donald had already been editor for five or six years, and I thought that, you know, he might go on and do something else, and it was possible. But it gradually became clear, mainly because the paper was owned by Lonrho, who were a merchant adventurer’s company in Africa, Tiny Rowland, the chairman of Lonrho, had this tremendous fight over Harrods with Mohamed Al-Fayed, and it gradually became clear that I wasn’t the favourite son of the ownership, or indeed of Tiny Rowland. And I think I knew.
I stayed way too long. I think I knew by about 1986 that it was unlikely that I was ever going to inherit the paper from Donald. And gradually, the, sort of, encroachments of Lonrho’s own interests in the paper, the row with Al-Fayed, Harrods, the… frankly, and this was quite helpful to me, the absolute passionate hatred of Mrs Thatcher that took over, wasn’t there when I first went there. Tiny Rowland was very keen on Mrs Thatcher, and was very much against the paper not being full-blooded in support of her, but because of the waving through of Al-Fayed’s application to become owner of Harrods by the Tory government, he conceived a passionate hatred for her and we used to run all sorts of odd stories about Mark Thatcher getting, sort of, bribes. I think a lot of them were true, but it was certainly, from his point of view, Roland’s point of view, that… and he said to me once, 'As far as I’m concerned, she and her son should both be in the dock at the Old Bailey'.
And so that was, in fact, quite helpful to me, because up to that point I’d been regarded as a rather dangerous left-winger. And they’d been… I think Sir Edward du Cann... was a Conservative MP, I think he was chairman of Lonrho, not that chairman meant anything. Only thing that mattered was being chief executive, which is what Tiny Rowland was. But once he fell out with Thatcher in the political sense, things became easier. But I did become more and more unhappy about the way the ownership was influencing the policy of the paper.
I don’t think we were heroic, either Donald or I, that early on, because he’d only just taken the paper over when I joined, the paper had been owned by an American oil company called Atlantic Richfield, but we more or less said to ourselves, or to each other, 'Look, if Tiny wants the business news of the paper, we’ll have to let him have it, and he can do what he likes with that. That’s his interest'. And therefore, sure enough, he soon put in a complete stoolpigeon of his as business editor. And the business news became a kind of Lonrho propaganda sheet. But you don’t… and there’s the other sort of danger, once you do that, they’re not satisfied. So having got the business news, he wanted the main paper. He wanted the news pages, he wanted the leaders, and it gradually got worse and worse. Very bizarre stories. Sort of, you know, stories about mysterious, sort of, Indian mystics who, we had to, sort of, pretend were people of great significance because Tiny had taken a shine to them.
And it was… it became… one day, I remember, I think it was after I’d gone, the whole splash was about Al-Fayed’s tax returns. That was the lead story in the paper. Well, you can’t run a paper like that. And I think the reason that readers began to fall away, a lot of them went to buy the new Independent on Sunday, was because The Observer reader didn’t like things like that being in… they thought Mr Rowland was corrupt. And they saw what was going on and they didn’t like it, and so therefore the last days of The Observer, under the ownership of Lonrho, were very sad. And I wouldn’t criticise Donald Trelford, who’d stayed there long after I left, but I think that he gradually put up his hands and let the Lonrho board walk all over him.

One of the odd things about being a newspaper proprietor is you don’t have to go into the office to impose your will. Lord Beaverbrook virtually never went into the Daily Express offices. Did everything by telephone and Dictaphone. Messages sent to editors and stuff. Mr Rowland, who was the effective owner of The Observer at the time I was there, only, to my knowledge, came into the office, I think probably three times in seven years. Once to entertain a sort of strange Indian mystic on the top floor. Once to a very unsuccessful lunch where he had a row with the staff, and once, I think, when the building was opened, by Princess Alexandra... the new building we’d moved to. But he hardly ever came in. On the other hand, he kept a very firm control.
I didn’t know it at the time, but the man he appointed to be business editor, whose name I unfortunately can’t remember, used to have a supper with Tiny Rowland every Wednesday evening. Tiny Rowland lived in some style in Chester Square in Belgravia, and this man used to go to supper there and get his instructions for the week. And I only found out about that long after I’d left. With the rest of us, he tended to use the telephone. He was a man of exquisite courtesy, and when I was in charge of the paper when Donald was away, you would always get a phone call, and he normally… because he was busy with Lonrho during the week, it normally was Saturday at about… you knew at about 12:15 on Saturday, you’d get a phone call, your secretary would come in and say, 'Oh it’s Mr Rowland, Sir', and he’d say, 'Oh'… I didn’t know him that well in those days, I think he always called me Mr Howard then. And he’d say, 'Oh Mr Howard, is this a convenient moment? You’re not too busy?' I said, 'No, Mr Rowland, perfectly fine. No worry at all'. 'Well, just one or two things I wanted to mention'. And he’d then go into a screed about, sort of, various leaders in the Sudan whose name I couldn’t even spell. I had to try and sort of scribble away, and basically you ignored it. But he would always say, 'And what are you going to lead on? What’s the story going to be?' And so, I suppose, rather much as you knew by noon on Saturday, papers go into the first edition at six o’clock, you told him what was being planned. And he’d say, 'Well, who’s the profile?' I remember once I had to say, 'The profile is Edward Heath'. 'Is what?' Because he hated Heath. And I said, 'Yeah, well, it’s not all that flattering'. 'I should hope not!' Sort of thing. And anyway, he took a very, very close control.
He also had a, sort of, man of affairs, who was his viceroy for The Observer, and he would come into the office. He was called Terry Robinson. I think they had a fall-out later and poor Mr Robinson went off to do some other job, but for a time, he was the rising star in Lonrho, and he did come into the office. And would always be a bit of a nuisance, I remember. A man of very limited accomplishments, who was, sort of, an accountant, basically.
Mr Rowland was not a man of limited accomplishments. He knew a lot. He had great, sort of, German charm. He was, of course, German by origin. He was incredibly good-looking, looked rather like George Sanders, a famous film star of the 1940s, had beautiful manners, but was thoroughly sinister. I don’t know. I mean, my view is that what really happened, and this perhaps may be difficult, and I hope I don’t defame anyone, but what happened is that Rowland liked to have people in his power, and Donald Trelford had been very brave at one stage. He’d gone out to Zimbabwe and had come back with a hair-raising report of the massacres going on in Matabeleland and all the rest of it. And I don’t think he got back until actually the Saturday evening, so I was at the seat of custom, and I did say to him, Donald, 'You know that it’s going to hit the roof, this'... because he’d gone out to celebrate five years of independence for Zimbabwe... 'and we all know that the boss, Mr Rowland, is very keen on the Zimbabwe regime, and there is going to be a terrible row'. He said, 'Well, I know, I know. I’ll be able to handle that'.
Nonetheless, it caused a tremendous explosion. Rowland was absolutely furious, and from that moment on, I think Donald became slightly of a marked man. He saved himself by submitting his resignation and Rowland saying, 'That was very generous of you, but I’m not going to accept it'. So that, sort of, bought him time. But I think they watched him, and unfortunately there were one or two indiscretions in Donald’s private life which all surfaced in, I think, the Daily Mail, with an Indian lady called Pamella Bordes, and from that moment on, I think Rowland felt that he had the editor of The Observer in the palm of his hand. And I mean, I think in any other regime, an editor who had been, sort of, blazoned over the pages of a not-very-friendly hostile daily paper for the affair he was conducting – Donald was married at the time, got a family and all the rest of it – would have been lucky to survive. I think Rowland took the view that, from now on, he’ll do as he’s told. And roughly, basically, I have to say, I think that’s what happened.
Of course, when the ownership changed, and when The Guardian bought The Observer in, what was it... 1993 or thereabouts... then Donald didn’t survive after that and immediately there was a change in editor. But I think he was protected, and he was editor for 19 years or thereabouts, I think. 17, 19, something like that. He was protected by Lonrho and Mr Rowland in particular, feeling that he would now become biddable, because they had been alarmed about him before and now they thought that they’d got him and therefore they could make him do what they wanted to.
Now that maybe very hostile, and no doubt Donald will tell a different story himself, but that’s how I see it from outside. And I’m not saying that he hadn’t, earlier on, shown considerable courage and independence. In fact, I mean so… at the time that the great Zimbabwe row was going on, he actually came to my office and said, 'Look, I’ve got some papers here. Have you got a safe?' I said, 'No, I haven’t got a safe, I’ve got a lock-up filing cabinet'. He said, 'Well, I think they better go into that, because I’m sure those Lonrho people will come around at the weekend and they’ll break into the safe and they’ll have a look at one of these depositions I’ve got', and the rest of it. So they went into my filing cabinet, and it showed how suspicious he was of them and they were of him at that time. But then it all changed.

I mean, it’s fashionable to say, and I think it’s true, that The Observer really was the creation of one man, and that was David Astor, who was Donald’s immediate predecessor and was both editor and owner of the paper, because he was proprietor, in effect, and although he had a kind of shop window board of trustees, everyone knew that the person who paid the bills, you know, and made any money was David Astor. And it was a hard thing to follow, the 19 years Donald had been… I mean, Astor had been editor for, I think from 19… well, technically, from 1948 to 1975, but basically he was editor from 1944 onwards, with a stooge, sort of, put in the office. But he was actually running the paper.
And that was a hard act to follow. It was a very idiosyncratic paper, reflected Astor’s beliefs and all the rest of it, and of course in those days, it was much easier, in that, you know, the Astor Observer was able to campaign against capital punishment, it was able to campaign in favour of self-determination, decolonisation, freedom for Africa, freedom for India, that kind of thing. And all those big issues were there. In our day, we didn’t have them, and it was sometimes difficult. I remember once... 1983 election, it was perfectly clear that Michael Foot was going to lose and, although we had backed Callaghan, and I wasn’t there in the 1979 election, it was perfectly clear to me that it was futile to come out with a sort of rousing endorsement of the Labour party and how Labour should be elected to government, and I think our heading, or the leader in 1983 was 'Keep the Tories Tame'. And that was the best we could do, because there was no point in pretending that Mrs Thatcher wasn’t going to win. And so were saying, oh, don’t let her have too big a majority, basically. Pretty wet thing to say, but it was about the only realistic thing you could say. And so I think it was easier, perhaps, for Astor in those days than it was for Donald Trelford and, first of all, John Cole, who was his first deputy, and then me, but nonetheless, I think, you know, things could have gone better. And I look back on all that talent, even still in that paper, and think it was allowed to go to waste, really. And it was rather sad what happened to it.
It staggers on. I mean, The Observer now sells, I think, about 450,000 a Sunday. In my day, the lowest, I think when I went there, we were losing sales, and I went there because at The Sunday Times, having been out for a year, we were still, through the strike, we were still selling something like 850,000. By the time I left, in '88, we were selling 700,000, but in no time that went down to 500,000 and below 500,000. And now it went down to nearly 400,000. It’s now very slowly climbed to about 450. But it’s nothing like the power in the land that it was.
On the other hand, it’s having to compete, which... we only had The Sunday Telegraph. They’ve got to compete with The Sunday Telegraph and the Independent on Sunday in the quality market. So it’s a tougher road to follow now than it was in David Astor's day when there were just two Sunday papers of quality, The Sunday Times and The Observer. And that then changed, of course, when The Sunday Telegraph came on stream in the beginning of the 1960s. And for a time, The Sunday Telegraph went to number two, and at least for the period I was on The Observer, we were still The Observer in second place, and The Sunday Telegraph trailed back in third place.
But I think a lot of it does depend on having inspired ownership. I mean, why have the Express papers gone to the wall – and they have – the way they have? The answer is that Lord Beaverbrook was the genius presiding over Express newspapers, and really, from the moment Beaverbrook died, in 1964, I think, you know, the lifeblood went out of them, and I think that quite often that happens with papers. The Rothermeres have been lucky. I mean, for some strange reason, through four generations of the Rothermere family, the Daily Mail and first of all the Sunday Dispatch, now The Mail on Sunday, have gone on prospering. One or two wobbles along the way when the particular owner of the titles at the time was not all that bright, perhaps, but on the whole, they’ve kept going pretty well for a family-owned paper. But that’s rare.
I think, in the end of the day, it is the proprietor that counts in, sort of, shaping the whole, sort of, ethos of a newspaper. Now editors come and go much more rapidly than proprietors do, on the whole, but that makes the shock when a proprietor dies or is given the heave-ho all the greater. I think I’d have to make one qualification, though. I think Mirror Group newspapers in the days of their great prosperity were not the creation, really, of Cecil Harmsworth King, who was the nearest thing to a proprietor they had. They were the creation of the editor-in-chief, Hugh Cudlipp.
Cudlipp was a genius, and the greatest tabloid journalist of his day. He did end up as chairman of the, I think, International Publishing Corporation, and no good at that at all, absolutely hopeless. But as an editorial director, he was marvellous. And that’s one exception where perhaps the editorial side mattered more than the ownership. On the other hand, the Mirror never had a single owner. It was always, sort of, a public company, and the reason why King was pushed out with the ease that he was, was that he was wasn’t the proprietor, and he thought he behaved as if he was the owner. He wasn't the owner and therefore, the rest of the board could get rid of him like that, and they did.
But I think proprietors do shape the ethos of a paper. That would certainly be true of Beaverbrook, it would certainly be true, in my view, of David Astor. And I suppose for a brief and unhappy period, it was true of Lonrho with The Observer.

It’s very hard, isn’t it? I mean, the politicians journalists admire are all those who make a splash and cut a dash. Not necessarily does that make you admired by your own colleagues. I mean, the last person that one would think was in any way glamorous was Mr Attlee, who presided over the Labour government from '45 to '51. Most working politicians, who maybe… there are many of them dead by now, but who knew anything about Attlee would have put him almost top of 20th century Prime Ministers, but that was without any gifts of showmanship or anything like that. But that was the view from within. I think the view from without would always be that Churchill was a much greater Prime Minister than Attlee. I think he was a greater war Prime Minister, I think that’s probably true. Attlee wasn’t a war... he was Deputy Premier in the war, but I think as a peacetime Prime Minister, Attlee left Churchill standing. Churchill wasn’t a very effective peacetime Prime Minister between '51 and '55. He was too old, he ended up being over 80. I mean... ridiculous. But... so I think it’s not just the flashy qualities, but it is, of course, this sense being a politician is being a performer. It is the politician who can make a phrase, deliver a dazzling speech, who attracts attention.
Why do we talk about Nye Bevan? Because he was a wonderful orator. Superb orator, both on the platform and in the House of Commons. Why do people like me, of my age, still sort of remember Iain Macleod? Because he was a wonderful speaker. And... he wasn’t much good on telly, because... see that’s a different technique, but on a public platform, from the frontbench in the House of Commons, he was, you know, far and away the best orator in the Conservative Party. On the other hand, you take someone like Rab Butler, a most faithful servant of the Conservative Party, down 40 years. No, never a great performer, never a tremendous orator. Harold Macmillan, on the other hand, could do it. He was a showman. He knew how to do it.
But it is, I think... to go into politics and not have any of the showman qualities, which is what Attlee did, is taking a very high risk. The day Attlee became leader of the Labour Party, Hugh Dalton, who was a pretty ghastly old brute, an Old Etonian Labour MP, wrote in his diary, 'And a little mouse shall lead them'. And, you know, in a sense, Dalton was right, Attlee did look like a little mouse. But my goodness, that mouse roared and went on to lead the Labour Party for 20 years. 20 years! And be Prime Minister twice. So I think Dalton really got it wrong, but that’s how Attlee was regarded.
And some of the more flashy characters, of course, don’t make it at all. I mean I don’t want to be able to go into private grief, but someone like Jonathan Aitken looks as if he came out of a sort of political novel, but his whole career came to grief. And that has tended to happen with perhaps the more flashy political operators. John Stonehouse, remember too, who went to jug, too. So I think it’s a high-level, high-wire act. And I can’t quite see what’s so attractive to it to someone who wants to be a quiet administrator. And you can do that as a civil servant. Why buy into the public dimension if you’re not very happy with it? And of course, most politicians are, I think, show-offs, and even if they’re not very talented, they think they are, and they think they’re Demosthenes when they’re not. But on the whole, I think you’ve got to have a part of your makeup... there has to be part actor. And it’s quite important, the acting side of politics, I think. And above all, because after all, speech is your trade, that’s what you’re engaged in, I think you’ve got to be a good speaker. And if you can’t, it’s rather pathetic.
I mean, there have been some very, very bad politicians who just couldn’t put one word next to the other. Frank Cousins, who became, sort of, cabinet minister in the Wilson government, absolutely hopeless. People like Fred Mulley, who was a long-serving Labour cabinet minister, hopeless at making speeches. Those who tend to capture the public imagination are people like Barbara Castle. And Barbara Castle was a splendid speaker, really was very, very good. My goodness, she was an actress. She understood all about dress and appearance and all the rest of it, but she was really a performing politician.
In my view, but for Barbara Castle, there would never have been Margaret Thatcher. It was Barbara Castle who blazed the trail. Up to that moment, people had been terribly patronising to women politicians. The gracious lady in her usual charming way, this kind of thing. Barbara put a stop to all that. As far as she was concerned, the age of chivalry was dead, and she’d go after men just as much as any male politician would go after his colleagues. And she was a great performer. She wasn’t a great intellect, unlike Dick Crossman. Intellect doesn’t help you a great deal in politics, I don’t think. The towering intellectuals of the period I knew about, well Dick Crossman certainly, Keith Joseph. Total flop as a politician, really. I mean, a wonderful guru for Margaret Thatcher, but as a departmental head of a ministry, no good at all. Agonised all the time. So I think being an intellectual isn’t a great aid often. I mean, it’s a good thing to have some good brainpower, but not to be a sort of agonised, sort of, monk. The mad monk, they called, I think, old Keith Joseph, and that’s what you run the danger of being if you’re too obviously an intellectual. Even Dick. I mean, Dick, though he was a very good speaker of an expository kind, not a moving kind, wasn’t a terrible success as a minister. Not a great success as a minister, really, because I think he was too… he intellectualised things too much.

To be a successful politician, it’s very difficult to say what you need. I mean, I think there’s no point in being a politician if you are not able to perform. I.e., if you’re hopeless as a speaker, forget about being a politician. If you are no good as a debater, forget about it. If you have complete kind of nondescript qualities, forget about it. I’ve said all that, and what do I now have to say?
Who was the greatest Prime Minister of the 20th century? Clement Attlee. Attlee had no kind of, sort of, you know, messianic qualities about him at all. He was a very poor speaker, he sounded as if he was sort of like a country bank manager, he couldn’t… he had no sense of command. I remember him coming to the Oxford Union once, and he made a long speech and the last words of it were, 'All men are brothers'. And he sat down. And it was hopeless, hopeless. His wife had the sense to go to the cinema while he was speaking, and only joined up with him afterwards. He was a very, very poor speaker. Yet, there he was. And in the politicians’ trade union, he is very highly regarded. People like Harold Macmillan thought he was a wonderful Prime Minister. And I think he was very good at being Prime Minister.
When the day he was elected… I may have told this story already, but Dalton wrote in his diary that night, 'And a little mouse shall lead them'. And the little mouse did lead them, and a very effective mouse he became.
So having said that, I mean I think I’m broadly right, but you have to make exceptions. Now how much is politics a performing art? I think probably I incline to overrate the performing side of it, but it seems to me to be a successful politician, you’ve got to be a bit of an actor. You’ve got to be able to lay on a performance. Now other people would say, no, no, what matters is intellectual firepower, and I think that does matter. You’ve got to be able to understand what’s going on, particularly in this day and age. You know, if you’re Minister of Defence or if you’re Chancellor of the Exchequer, you’ve got to understand what all these things are about, and they’re quite complicated. So intellectual firepower does come into it. But I think more important, myself, because there have been a lot of politicians with very little brain, but quite successful public careers behind them, and a lot of politicians with very big brains who’ve gone nowhere. Keith Joseph, poor old Keith Joseph, you know, great intellectual, but no good as a politician, in my view. Dick Crossman, to some extent, a very formidable intellect, but a failed politician, really.
So I don’t think intellect is as important, myself, as showmanship, as I might call it rudely. I think that’s all important, and of course if you want to go into public life, you must be a bit of an extrovert. It really won’t do if you’re shy and diffident and, you know, backing away from the limelight. None of that stuff will work if you want to go and be a public figure. So I’m amazed at the number of politicians there are who seem to me ill-equipped by nature for the trade they’ve chosen. And sometimes, they don’t do all that badly. But, you know, the really successful politicians, it seems to me, whether you choose Lloyd George or whether you choose Michael Heseltine or whether you choose Joseph Chamberlain, they’ve all been a bit of a showman, really, and that is an adequate, or an integral, part of the equipment of the successful politician.
You can, of course, be a quiet showman. You don’t have to be noisy. Stanley Baldwin was a great politician. Stanley Baldwin wasn’t a great, sort of, matinee idol or anything like that. He didn’t have any tremendous kind of showbiz qualities, except he was a very good broadcaster. But he understood the character of the British people, knew how they liked to be talked to, you know, and I think, in his own way, was a quiet showman. John Major, well, very quiet showman, but nonetheless, clearly a… well, you know, he got to be Prime Minister. I mean, you know, a successful politician in those terms. Other people with much more flashy kind of, you know, qualities, whether you look at somebody like Bob Boothby, never got anywhere. Defects of character there, I’m afraid, but, you know, one might have thought he would have been up there with the greats. One might have thought, I suppose, someone like Gerald Nabarro, long since forgotten, a man with handlebar moustaches, loud voice, show-off, all that kind of thing. Didn’t do him any good, never got any office anywhere. So it’s not enough. It’s not a sort of sine qua non. You can do without it, probably, but on the other hand, if you are not in some ways outgoing, I don’t see any purpose in going into that business.
You can become a librarian, you can become a schoolteacher, you can become a… I don’t know, a scholar. But don’t go into politics if you don’t actually enjoy being with other people and, as it were, showing other people that you know what they want. And that’s what, I suppose, what a politician has to do, is to have to register with the public that he understands what their aspirations are. And if you’re a shrinking violet, that doesn’t often happen.

I suppose it’s true that being a political commentator is a bit like being a dramatic critic. There are, of course, dramatic critics as such who sit in the gallery. They are the sketch writers and they are the people who actually review the performance. When I started out, if you were writing... a gallery reporter, you were meant to give a fairly faithful account of what had taken place in that day’s Commons debate. That’s long since ceased to be the case. People don’t now carry parliamentary reports in the same way, and all the political sketch writers, as they’re now called, are actually sort of pranksters and jokers who are there to write lively copy and, you know, make people smile, make them laugh. And therefore it’s no longer a faithful account of what took place in the House of Commons, but it’s a jolly read, and that goes for whether it’s a Simon Hoggart or Quentin Letts, whoever it is. That’s what they do. And they do it very effectively and very well. Being a political commentator, a columnist, is slightly different.
There you’re partly engaged in the job of analysis, of, you know, you’re perhaps more like a football journalist, that you’re analysing the game and where the mistakes were made, and you’re not just giving a report. You’re saying where the weaknesses lie. And they, of course, have increased enormously in number, political columnists and commentators, in the last 20 years. I mean, there used to be probably one commentator per paper. Now there are about four a day. And I think probably the trade is overmanned. I suppose you’re… you know, you are meant to have ideas of your own. I mean, I think the idea or the notion, in years gone by, that the journalist should not have views, has really gone out of the window, and now, partly because I think newspaper owners have seen that it sells papers to have a viewy columnist, whether he’s Matthew Parris or whoever it may be, writing an enormous amount every week in various publications, and really basically giving his own views. Now, that would have been, when I was young, that would have been sort of quite out of court. The politicians gave views, journalists reported what politicians said. But now, some of the columnists are, you know, every bit as influential as a working politician.

I mean, Polly Toynbee is an outstanding example of a journalist who’s basically concerned, I think she wouldn’t take it amiss, with giving her own views, and they’re trenchant views, and they’re strong views, and I think she has as much influence as a cabinet minister, perhaps more than most women cabinet ministers, anyway. And it’s not just her. I mean, there’s a lady been writing for many years in the Daily Mail called Ann Leslie. Now Ann Leslie is very trenchant in what she has to say. Of course, nowadays, which journalists didn’t have in the past, they all have the opportunity of appearing on television.   And someone like Polly seems hardly to be off the box, and Ann Leslie does a great deal of programmes like Question Time... normally have one journalist on. And all that wasn’t there. I mean, it seems to me extraordinary to remember, but when I started out, journalism was an anonymous trade. If you looked at the paper, certainly in the quality market, it would say, 'By our diplomatic correspondent', 'By our political correspondent', 'By our labour correspondent'. No one got a by-line. Now we don’t only have by-lines, we have sodding great features, photographs of the person who’s writing the story. So it has all changed enormously. And I think one of the things that brought about that change was the belief by newspaper managements that it did them good if their own staff appeared on radio or television. And years ago, when I used to work on The World at One, I was always staggered that papers like the Financial Times would send you a list of their experts... their specialists in various fields, to encourage you to put them… that’s just sound radio, puff puff radio. And now, I think some people are judged, you know, as to how successful they are by how much they actually appear on the box.
I was very struck the other day; I was looking through a list of some sort of trade paper called All Politics [sic] or something, of the 100 best-known political correspondents. And I read it with some interest. And I suddenly realised that on it didn’t once appear the doyen of all political correspondents, Alan Watkins. Why? Because Watkins does very little broadcasting. On it didn’t appear Bruce Anderson. Well, Bruce Anderson doesn’t do much broadcasting, he wasn’t on it. So now if you’re going to make your name as a political journalist, you really have, I think, to have a regular spot or something, at least to be... appear on Newsnight, appear on at least News 24 [sic] on BBC, appear on Sky Television. People like Michael White appear on Sky all the time, The Guardian’s Michael White, and that’s what gives them their kind of public identity. And I think newspaper managements realised that, and I’ve often wondered about this, why did they move from anonymity to absolutely glorying by-lines, and I think it was because they thought this was a way of getting free advertising off the airwaves, and every time you say, and with me is so-and-so of such-and-such paper, and that is considered free advertising for the paper. And therefore they had no choice but to give up the whole discreet thing, and certainly, as I say, when I went to The Guardian, one by-line used to appear every day. If you wrote the leader page article, which was on the page which had the leaders on it, and had the letters down below, you actually got your by-line. It would say, by Anthony Howard. That was the only place in the paper, when I started, where a name of a journalist appeared, and the prize of writing the LPA was that you saw your name in print. Otherwise, it was always, 'By our own reporter'.

Well, if you're a political commentator, your life is dominated by, sort of, when you have to deliver your copy. And in the last… well, I think I was already over 65, I wrote a weekly column in The Times. And therefore, that dictated my timetable and, you know, I'd begin thinking about it the moment one was published, which I think was… Tuesday was the day they were published, I'd begin worrying about the next one. And try and find, sort of, topics. You have to self-create, you know. You can't actually bounce off a debate. Other people are doing that in the paper. You have to be a self-starter, so you had to think of topics and what you wanted to write about. So it is, I think, the deadline that determines your week, in those days. Of course, when I was working properly full-time, it was a daily grind. Though I never really… I mean, I suppose I spent more time on weekly papers, whether on papers like the New Statesman and The Listener or on a Sunday paper like The Observer, than I ever did on a Daily. In fact, the only time I worked for a Daily was the brief 18 months I worked for the Manchester Guardian, and then The Guardian.
And then, of course, when you're young, you do as the news editor tells you. He says, 'I want you to cover this and...' And the great difference between then and now is that in those days, if the news editor saw you sitting in the office, even if you were typing something, he'd say, 'What are you doing?' And you'd say, 'X', and he'd say, 'Well, come on, I think it's time you went out to Altrincham, because the oldest cart-horse in Cheshire is there, today. You go and look at that'. And it was considered a sin to be, sort of, sitting in the office. Now, if you go into a newsroom, everyone's crouched over their computers. They never leave. They never go out at all. They use the telephone a bit, but it's a tremendous change, and I think a change much for the worse, in that journalists never see the outside world. They may hear about it, they watch it on the screen, tellies are probably playing, they've got their own computers, but they are chained to a desk. And it's no longer the life that I joined 50 years ago.
How did you plan the week? I suppose that the… once you become an editor, of course, you're thinking all the time. You're thinking forward all the time, and I used to sometimes say to myself when I was editor of the New Statesman, what on earth would happen if I were run over by a bus tomorrow? No one would know what was… because I was very bad. I didn't have any wall charts up or anything like that. Everything was planned.  It was all in my head. Other people who were more efficient always have tremendous, sort of, wall charts. You know, forthcoming issues. I didn't like that kind of thing, so I just thought I'd carry it around with me. But it did mean that if anything had happened to me, they would have left completely at sea. So you would, I think… you know, if you are editing a Sunday paper or a weekly paper, you are always planning, you know, what's going to be next week, what features we brought, what review fronts have we got, what serials are we going to run? So a lot of it is not just instantaneous at all. But I suppose if you are Polly Toynbee, you have to say to yourself… she writes now in The Guardian, doesn't she, at least twice a week. You know, well, she must go to bed fretting if she's got the right subject for that next day.
And it is a worry. I mean I miss having... not having an outlet now, I miss not having a column, but my goodness, I grumbled at the time. So the tyranny of this, sort of, week after week, having to produce this stuff. But now it's gone, I miss it so... you mustn't be perverse, but I suppose you do map things out. You think ahead as to what the events are, you sort of plan for doing things. You make plan for making an expedition to go someplace, hear something, watch something. And you have to live with it all the time.
But as I say, when you're younger and you start out, you are really… your labour is directed by your immediate boss, normally. And the average reporter goes into the office not knowing at all what he's going to do that day until he's told. And that's true, even if you're crouched over a computer. You're told that what I want you to look at is X, Y or Z. So you're a man under authority, as it were, and that would be true of, I suppose, a majority of journalists, whether they work on a national paper or a local paper, their work is directed for them.

Michael Heseltine I’ve known for more than 50 years now. And we remain great friends. Don’t see him all that much, I suppose. I see him three or four times a year, that kind of thing. Usually go and stay one weekend a year at his grand house down in… it’s actually Northamptonshire, but he likes to think it’s in Oxfordshire. It’s actually on the Northampton side of the border, Thenford House. Lovely Palladian building.
And, of course, he has a butler and he has, sort of, troupes of servants. It’s all very grand. And you have to dress for dinner and all that kind of thing. But I’m very fond of Michael. He’s rather like Soames Forsyte, a sort of [The] Man of Property, as one of the books of that Forsyte Saga is called. And I never knew he was going to be a successful politician. Indeed, oddly enough, he was at Oxford, and his great friend at Oxford was a man who later became a Tory MP, too, now dead, Julian Critchley. And I remember thinking at the time that Julian was more likely to be a success in politics than Michael was. He was very good-looking, dark-haired and distinguished, and they’d both been to the same school, Shrewsbury, but I thought Julian might, sort of, prosper in politics more than Michael would. But the one thing I never had any doubt about Michael, that actually is in The Isis Idol I wrote about him when I was up at Oxford, is that he was going to make a lot of money. I said, one day there’ll be golden papers, and Michael Heseltine will walk along them, or some rather pompous phrase of that kind, in The Isis Idol. I always knew he was going to have success in business. Why did I know that?
Partly because one of the things that brought us together was that the Oxford Union, in our day, was really ailing. It wasn’t doing at all well. And when Michael became treasurer, which was in, I think, the summer term of 1954, called at Oxford the Trinity term, he revolutionised the whole place. He brought in a whole sort of thing of half-crown lunches. He opened a... cellars for dancing, a sort of nightclub. He… membership shot up. He was a real natural entrepreneur, and I saw him do this, and he… you know, the half-crown lunches were a great success. And I think they all were bit of a steal, you know. It was sort of… I think it was a bit of old mish-mash fish that we sort of mocked up as turbot, but it wasn’t turbot at all, that kind of thing. I don’t know how much Michael knew about that, but I later learned from one of the chefs… or no, a steward there, that this kind of thing had gone on. But anyway, he started making money, and he turned the thing around as a business. So I thought if he can do that, he’ll probably be a great success as a businessman.
Of course, his original intention was to become a chartered accountant, and he stuck with that for three or four years, but he had great difficult with the exams. And one of the things about Heseltine that isn’t widely understood is he is a bit dyslexic, and he has great difficulty in reading, and therefore he always wanted everything, when he was in the government, the cabinet, to be read to him. And he wouldn’t take great documentation. This held him back, I think, a bit with the accountancy exams. But he’d already started making a pile as a landlord. One of the first things he did when he came down from Oxford, where he was a partner of a man, not Clive Labovitch, who became his partner later, but a man called Ian Josephs, who ended up, I think, running a language school in Ramsgate, or something. But anyway, they were co-partners at the time. And Ian Josephs had a fairly wealthy father, and on his 21st birthday, the father said to Ian, who was Jewish, he said, 'What would you like for a present?' And Ian said, 'Dad, what I’d like is I’d like that boarding house that you’ve been boasting about you’ve bought at a knockdown price. Why can’t I have that?'And I think with slightly ill grace, Josephs’ père said 'Alright', but I think he was a bit miffed about it. And so Josephs became the half-owner of a big building just off Notting Hill Gate, 39 Clanricarde Gardens. And Michael came in as his partner. Michael only had, I think, £1000 that had been left him by his grandmother, or something, and that was his investment in this, which probably must have cost… in those days, it wouldn’t have cost, probably, more than £5000. I don’t know. But anyway, he was a sort of minor investor beside Josephs. And they made a success of this place, and they changed it into, sort of, executive apartments, and one snowy night, I always say one day I'd tell this story, a whole lot of elderly frail people were thrown out on the street, the locks were changed, and it became executive apartments.
And I lived there for a bit. He always said I was a very bad tenant, because I didn’t pay the rent. I said, 'Well, I’ll pay the rent when the skylight is repaired'. The skylight above my bed, on the top floor, leaked, and all the rain came down. And I said, 'Well Michael, you get the skylight repaired, and I’ll start paying you rent'. He never did get the skylight repaired. And I don’t think I ever did pay him a penny piece for rent, oddly enough. We were friendly, in those days, had been in the Union together and all the rest of it.
But then he proceeded from there to buy a hotel in Inverness Terrace, the New Inverness Hotel, I think, which was a much bigger enterprise. And that went pretty well. He got a lot of medical students in to decorate it, sort of just for their keep over the weekend, and that kind of thing. I always used to tease him, and say, 'Look, you say it’s a hotel. It’s not even like that, Michael, because there were a lot of American troops around in those days. It’s just a knocking shop for GIs. That’s what you’ve got here: a knocking shop for GIs'. He got rather annoyed by that, but I think there was some truth in what I said.
And then he proceeded from there, goodness... bless my soul. He bought half a side of a street in South Kensington... Stafford Terrace. And he by now, I think, had ceased to be in partnership with Josephs, and had become a partner of a man called Clive Labovich. And Clive Labovich came from quite a wealthy Leeds family, and they owned a firm called Darley Mills, which, sort of, made fabrics and suitings and all that kind of thing. And they had an office in Soho, which I remember going to once or twice.

Michael was really, by now, on his way, but he always thought it was important the impression you created. So by about 1961 or perhaps even before that, certainly when I was... because I moved into Stafford Terrace, too, and lived in his own flat there with him, which I think I did pay rent for. But he already had a chauffeur... a chauffeur with a peaked cap and he had a Jaguar, this kind of thing. And the Jaguar used to take me half the way to the New Statesman, where I was then working. And he understood about making an impression and how important these appurtenances of wealth were. And he was doing very well, and the property business was doing very well. And then he made one minor mistake in property, in that he sort of started building, I think it was, a housing estate at Tenterden in Kent.
And these houses just didn't sell. I don't know many there were, there were about, sort of, 12 of them, or something. And he used to go down every weekend to try and, sort of, persuade buyers to put some money down, and no one would, and in the end, a man came along and said, 'You're having a bit of difficulty here, aren't you?' And he said, 'Well, you may say so'. He said, 'I'll tell you what. I'll buy the show house and I'll buy it only for half the asking price', or something. And so he bought it and then gradually, I think they got rid of the rest. And not at a great profit. That was something called Bastion Properties, which was his property company. But then he made his fatal mistake, which was he decided he wanted to go into publishing, and... magazine publishing. And he bought a, sort of, pretty down-at-heel Tailor & Cutter kind of magazine called Town, or Man About Town, it was called, Man About Town at first. And he transformed it. It became quite a good magazine. I mean, it was rival to Queen, which was run by Jocelyn Stevens, and it really did look pretty good. But it never made a penny piece.
And then he bought, very foolishly and against my advice, a British weekly news magazine which had never flourished, but had been through about three owners, and it was called Topic. And he bought Topic in, I think it must have been, 1961, probably. And that ate money. I mean, he had, by now, offices in the Edgware Road, 86 to 88 Edgware Road, I think it was. And he had to hire staff to run this. He hired some very good people: Nick Tomalin, Clive Irving, people like that. Ron Hall. And they produced not too bad a paper, but... I wrote for it once or twice, did some profiles of people for them, and roundups of the week, politics, that kind of thing.
And it staggered on, from… I think Michael must have bought it, and I begged him not to, he must have bought it in about June or May perhaps, and it staggered on till December. Just before Christmas, he had to close it. He was then deeply in debt and was about to go bankrupt, and he went to his bank manager and the bank manager said, you know, he said what he wanted was, I think, to pay the bills for Topic, sort of a quarter of a million pounds. And he said, 'What have you got for security?' So he handed over… by then, I think he'd moved out of the flat, or was living in a house somewhere in Gilston Road, or something. He handed over the deeds of the house, he handed over his watch and everything else, and he got the advance, he got the loan. And the man said at the end of the meeting, he said, 'Well, Mr Heseltine, I hope all goes well. Today is my last day at the bank, I'll wish you luck'. Michael said if it hadn't been his last day at the bank, I don't think he'd have given me the loan. But he got the loan, and gradually, though it took a long time, managed to build up again and within, I think, two or three years, had sort of paid off his creditors, though whether he ever paid them off at sort of 20 shillings to the pound, I don't know. I think they may have had to accept less than that. But he did. And of course he knew that if he'd gone bankrupt, any chance of a political career would have been over. And therefore, it was very important to him to keep, as it were, afloat. And he did keep afloat.
He'd already fought two seats: he'd fought a Welsh seat, Gower, in 1959, which is what got him out of the Guards in the army, because he was a political candidate and you couldn't be that and an officer at the same time, and then he fought against, I think it was Maurice Edelman, in Coventry, in the 1964 election. He took the Coventry seat very seriously, and I think for one period... Macmillan had been Prime Minister, Alec Douglas-Home was now Prime Minister, but he used to go out there a lot in his Jaguar, and I think for a short period, he even persuaded himself he could win it. He didn't win it.
But then he had a real break, and he got this seat in Devon, which was... can't even remember what it was called... oh dear, what was it called now? It's gone from me. But anyway, it was sort of a blue chip seat, and he managed to get adopted for that in succession to a Conservative MP, therefore, you know, he was sitting as tenant-in-possession. And he must have sat… it was… it wasn't… what was it called? Tavistock. Tavistock. And he sat for Tavistock, I think I'm right in saying, from '66 to '74, and then there was a sort of merging of seats, and therefore he was, sort of, out of… I think he could have, sort of, fought for one of the remaining ones, but he decided that the journey was too far and all the rest of it, and, with typical, kind of, confidence, said, 'Okay, I'll just put my bread on the waters and see what happens'. And he had been a, sort of, junior member of the Heath administration, Minister of Aviation, I think it was called, or Aerospace, I think it was called. And he then got the blue chip seat of Henley, which he represented for the next 33 years, or thereabouts, from '64 to '97, was it? '74 to '97, so that's 23 years. And I think it took a bit of nerve to actually give up a seat and say, I'll just put it all at risk, but he had the self-confidence to do that, and I think he was… Henley was happy with him, and he was happy with Henley, it was within, you know, drivable distance from London easily enough, and he bought this great manor house at Thenford.
And there he, you know, he still lives. I think Thenford is just outside the constituency, but it's near enough for it to be run from there, and he used to have great garden parties for the Women's Section and every year... the Young Conservatives and that kind of thing. So he did pretty well. Of course, he always intended to be Prime Minister, and there's this famous story which I think I believe. It's owed to his great friend Julian Critchley. He actually, on the back of an envelope when they were both at Oxford, drew up a battle plan which ended 1990s, Number 10. And I think he did think he could do it.

What went wrong? Well, what went wrong, I suppose, was Margaret Thatcher. He and she never got on. I think partly Michael's fault. Michael is sufficiently old-fashioned to have hated the idea of having a woman boss. In that sense, he is like Soames Forsyte, as I mentioned. And therefore, the chemistry never worked. On the whole, she liked sort of good-looking men, but she didn't like Michael. And there came the great fall-out in 1986 over Westland. He resigned from the government. And of course, the great achievement, and I don't think people pay enough to this… that every other single person who fell out with Margaret and resigned, just sort of went into oblivion.
Michael was able, between those years, 1986, when he resigned, and 1990, when he ran against her for leadership, to keep himself in business. He flogged himself every Friday night around the, sort of, rubber chicken circuit. He went to ever constituency that would invite him. He kept his name in the frame. When people drew up odds as to who would be the next Prime Minister, he was usually right up there in the front. And that was, for a backbench MP, a very considerable achievement. And of course, one of the reasons why he could do it was because he was a very untypical member of parliament of his day and age, that he had made his fortune, and it had become a fortune again, before he went into the House of Commons. That meant he could afford to have a staff, he could afford to have a chauffeur. I mean, the driver who came with him out of the government service, is still with him, and, you know, not many MPs can be able to afford to say to their driver when they'd been a minister, 'Okay, George, are you going to come with me? I'll pay you from now on'. But Michael could do all that, and that was a great help, having that sort of independence of, you know, private wealth, which he'd all made himself, gave him.
So he did it. And he, I think, really did think, when it came to 1990, that he was in with a real chance. And the fact is, he would have become Prime Minister. That if the second ballot had been between Margaret Thatcher and Michael Heseltine… when in the first ballot, she got 204 votes, he got 152, I have not the slightest doubt in my mind that he would have won and she would have been defeated. Because she knew that, and all her cabinet colleagues knew that, that they forced her to stand down, and she really was arm-locked into standing down.
Then, of course, John Major came on the scene and that, for a number of Tory MPs, was enough. There'd been a change and therefore, when Major and Douglas Hurd threw their hats into the ring, it was really all over for Michael. He was, that day, driving to plant a tree, I think in the zoo, when this, sort of, bombshell announcement came, that Margaret Thatcher was giving up and was resigning. I think I once asked him, I said, you know, 'Did you know, from that moment on?' And he said, 'Yeah, I knew. I knew'. And he went through with it, he sort of dug up the earth, put the tree... planted it, but it must have been a pretty gruesome moment, and I think he was enough of a professional politician to know that his chances of beating Major, as opposed to beating Thatcher, were pretty slight. And as it was, his vote went down and he got about 130-odd votes, Major got 180 votes, Douglas Hurd got, sort of, 59 or 60 or something, but it was clear-cut enough for there not to be a second rerun, although technically Major hadn't met the requirements, which were... you know 15% majority and all that kind of thing. Nonetheless, it was clear that Major had got home. It was, of course, a tremendous injustice. I mean, I say nothing against John Major, very nice man. But any idea that Major has the talent that Michael has got, any idea that, you know, he was the kind of public powerful figure that Michael Heseltine was, was absolute nonsense. And I'm afraid the Tory party cut off its nose to spite its face, and was electing Major because they couldn't forgive the regicide, the person who plunged the dagger into the previous leader. They made a terrible mistake.
Now, whether Heseltine would have won the 1997 election or even the 1992 election, which Major did win, to be fair to him, I don't know. I think he'd probably certainly have won in 1992, and oddly enough, he'd done it before. He told me that afterwards. I think he would have been perfectly justified. Had he been elected, the election took place in November 1990, he was going to say, look, I recognise that I've come up to Number 10 by a very unconventional route. I have not been elected, I have come straight into the cabinet from being a backbencher. It is therefore right that the electorate should make their own decision. I am therefore proposing that an election take place in January 1991, and we will have a short break for Christmas, but as soon as the Christmas holiday is over, we will go into campaigning mode. And that's what he would have done. In my mind, there was absolutely no doubt he would have won. Easily, hands-down, he'd then have had five years, anyway, from '91 to '96, and whether he could have won the next election after that, I rather doubt, because Tony Blair, who'd already been leader of the Labour Party, things had changed. But I think he would certainly have won his first election. And it was interesting he took that view, because it is almost unprecedented for someone to vault from the backbenches straight into sitting at the centre of the cabinet table. It's never been done, and I said that to Michael at the time. I said, 'I don't think it can work, Michael, because, you know, there's no precedent for it'. He said, 'I don't care about precedent. It's going to work'. I think the reason why not a single… no, one cabinet minister voted for him, one member of Margaret Thatcher's cabinet voted for him. The reason that all the others didn't wasn't because they necessarily disliked him, it was because they didn't like the idea, or found it uncomfortable, of someone who'd been a backbencher, you now, last week suddenly being their boss, sitting at the middle of the cabinet table the next week. And I think that played a part in the fact that the… all the cabinet on the first ballot, bar one, voted for Thatcher. And they wouldn't have voted for her in the second ballot, all of them, but nonetheless, they didn't like the idea of this kind of, you know, jumped up Johnny-come-lately suddenly being plunged in to being the head of government.

I can do very little about Margaret Thatcher, because she and I didn’t get on, and we really had minimal contact. I think I started off on a bad foot with her. In the early 1970s, I was the presenter of that radio programme on Radio 4, The World This Weekend. And I can’t remember what it was about, but a reporter on The World This Weekend had been down all the way to where she then lived, in Kent, on some sort of National Trust property or something, to interview her. And there was a lot of news that day, for one reason and another, and so it became clear to the producer, rather than to me, that the Thatcher interview wasn’t going to make it into the programme. And he then said, I think rather unfairly, he said, 'Tony, you know Margaret Thatcher'. I said, 'I hardly know her at all'. And he said, 'Well, you know her,' [I said] 'I don’t know her at all', [he said] 'You'd better ring her up, here’s her number, and tell her we’re not using her interview'. I said, 'Oh, come on'. And he said, 'No, no, honestly, it’s better if you did it than if I did it'. And so, with great reluctance, I picked up the phone, dialled the number and said, 'Oh, Mrs Thatcher, it’s Anthony Howard here from The World This Weekend. I just wanted to thank you so much for that splendid interview you gave us, and I’m very, very sorry…' 'Mr Howard? You are telling me that interview is not going to be used?' 'Mrs Thatcher, yes, I’m afraid so'. 'Will you please thank that sweet young man who came all this way to see me for all the trouble he took, and I’m sorry his work has gone for nothing. Thank you, goodbye'.
I mean, she won, absolutely hands-down, and it was an example to me, very early on, that she was quite a formidable politician. But I’d known that, I think, even earlier, that she was a member of parliament from Finchley, and one of my first dealings with her was that there was a great row going on about the Finchley Golf Club, which I think was supported by the local council, having some quota for Jewish members. And I remember, rather nervously… she wasn’t then a minister, I don’t think, she wasn’t even an under-secretary, but I approached her in the lobby of the House of Commons. This must have been in the very early '60s or perhaps even very late 1950s. She was elected in '59. Saying, 'Mrs Thatcher, could I have a word with you about the Finchley Golf Club?' 'Finchley Golf Club? What on earth has that to do with me?' And I said, 'Well, you’ve got a Conservative Council, and I understand…' 'Mr Howard, you have been totally misinformed', she said, and waltzed off. So she was obviously a hard cookie to deal with.
Now then I had a great friend, a Labour MP called Charlie Pannell, who was a trade unionist and he was a member for a Leeds constituency, but he had been a council leader somewhere in Kent. But he was actually Margaret Thatcher’s pair, which meant, you know, they… one voted, you have a member of the opposite party you could reach an arrangement with as to whether you have to take part in anything below a three line whip. And Charlie, who was a great friend of mine, used to tell me, 'You watch that woman', he’d say. 'She’s going to go to the very top'. I didn’t take it seriously then, but my goodness… he was dead by the time it happened, but he was right. And she was a very considerable figure. Of course, Ted Heath couldn’t stand her, and I think it was Jim Prior who forced Ted to take her into the shadow cabinet… or take her into the cabinet. Could it have been Prior? No, maybe it was Willie Whitelaw, but she was taken into the shadow cabinet first, that’s right, the shadow cabinet, because they were saying they had to have a woman.
And so she was first of all in the shadow cabinet, and then, when Ted won the 1970 election, she became Minister of Education. And she ran into all that trouble about 'Margaret Thatcher, milk-snatcher', because she stopped the free milk, in my view quite wisely, because when I was in school, all the free milk used to be tipped down the drain anyway, but there we are. But she became very unpopular, and I think Ted did really consider, sort of, removing her from the cabinet and bringing someone else in, but he let her stay in the cabinet. And then, immediately after, of course, the 1974 election, which Ted lost, the first 1974 election, she became, having... no I'm told not having said boo to a goose during the period with the cabinet discussion, she became very critical of the leadership and the strategy, economic strategy, that Ted had followed in government. And she gradually sort of began to make an impact.
But on the other hand, she never, I think, intended… she intended to be the supporter of Keith Joseph. She greatly admired Keith Joseph. And until Keith blew it by making a very unwise speech about the breeding habits of the working class or something, which didn’t go down a bomb with anyone, she was quite content to be his, sort of, backer. But when he imploded, she then, you know, to people’s astonishment, put herself forward to be the rival to Ted Heath. Ted’s meant to have told her, 'Well, stand if you want to, you won’t get any votes, I’ll tell you that. Won’t get any votes'. And anyway, she pressed on and she had the Daily Mail very firmly on her side, who campaigned for her. She didn’t have the Daily Express, which was then quite a powerful paper, and was very pro-Ted Heath, and she didn’t really get much of press support, apart from the Mail. But her man of affairs, Airey Neave, who was her campaign manager, went around to everyone with a long face saying, 'We’re doing very badly, we’re doing very badly. You know, if you could find it in your hearts to support Margaret, it would save her from humiliation. Otherwise, you know, Ted will get so arrogant if he wins a big victory. You can’t let him have a big victory'. That was the way they played it. And to everyone’s surprise, it ended up with Margaret Thatcher getting 130 votes, I think, and Ted getting 119, and she was there, she’d won. There had to be a run-off, and other people came in, like Willie Whitelaw and Geoffrey Howe and various others, but she romped home on the second ballot, and became leader of the party.

So as I say, I never saw her in all the time she was Prime Minister, I never saw her. She would… I mean, I saw her in the House of Commons, but I never had any private interview or anything. She was very vindictive, as a matter of fact. For example, no reason why she should have asked me, but Donald Trelford, who was editor of The Observer at time, we’d been rather critical of Mark Thatcher and his goings-on with Cementation and contracts and this kind of thing, and all the time that I was at The Observer as number two to Donald, not one single invitation to Number 10 came to the editor of The Observer. That was because we were considered to have behaved very badly over the Mark Thatcher business, we were absolutely right came out [unclear], but she was vindictive in that way. And I really had no dealings with her at all until… Oh, I leave one thing out. I did have dealings with her at a press conference.
1979, Conservative Central Office. For some reason, the Conservatives had left open the possibility in their election manifesto, of restoring capital punishment. They hadn’t said they would do it, but they said there’d be a free vote on the restoration of capital punishment. And so I took it upon myself at this press conference to ask a question. She was then leader of the opposition, to say, 'Mrs Thatcher, this reference to capital punishment in that manifesto, is that to give your own self the freedom to vote in favour of hanging? Is that what lay behind it?' 'Mr Howard, only you would ask a question like that. Next'.
So I didn’t do myself any good with that, either. But she then, very sweetly, as a matter of fact, when I was doing a radio series about prominent politicians, for Radio 4, in I think it must have been 1999 or something like that, or perhaps… anyway, she’d long since… she’d become a back number and she was now Lady Thatcher in the House of Lords, I think I wrote to her and said, look, Keith Joseph is one of the people I’ve chosen, and could I come and talk to you about Keith Joseph? And she immediately wrote back and said, of course, I’d be delighted to talk about Keith. And she did have a tremendous feeling of the debt of obligation she owed Joseph. Hadn’t been helped by the fact that, although Joseph joined her cabinet, he was not a great success, and eventually left, as, I think Secretary of State for Industry, where he’d really been rather a failure. Or did he…? No, I think he left as Minister of Education. He was Industry, he moved from Industry to Education, I think. But he hadn’t been a success. He was a great genuine intellectual, he used to agonise...'Oh God, oh dear...' And she, I think, felt guilty about him, because she thought the leadership had been his inheritance.
Anyway, she saw me that day in that grand, sort of, residence she had… not residence, sort of Embassy place, which was her office in Chesham Place. And she was very nice and very sweet and there was a young man there. But I did notice that her mind wasn’t what it was, and I’m afraid that, even though it’s long before she was declared to be, sort of, no longer going to make speeches or stuff, it was perfectly clear that she wasn’t quite right. That she’d lose the thread in what she was saying, this kind of thing. But as I say, she couldn’t have been more charming, and it was very good of her to do it for me. And I think she did it for Keith, not for me. Keith was already dead by then. But I thank her for that and am grateful for that. That really was the last contact I had with her, and, as I say, my contacts with her were pretty intermittent down the years, and I don’t think she… if she had known that I was a friend of Michael Heseltine, that would have added to my sins, so it was probably well she didn’t know that, really, and I don’t suppose she knew that.
But of course, I had been, and was also when Michael resigned, you know, I was very much on Michael’s side over Westland and all that. And I suppose what I wrote about her was, on the whole, pretty critical in The Observer, too, and that can’t have helped.

Robin Cook was a really extremely formidable parliamentarian, a very good speaker. Very incisive and, when in opposition, some of those speeches he made were really terrific. He wasn’t an easy man. When I was editor of the New Statesman, I had to have somebody… or you had to have... a sort of MP who’d come into your Friday conferences and keep you informed on what was going on. And the first MP I asked, oddly enough, we’re now talking 1972, and he’d just become a member of parliament, was Neil Kinnock. And Neil was a director of Tribune. He said he was a director of Tribune, and I said, 'Well, that is an impediment and I don’t think I could really have that'. And so I don’t know… so I then had Eric Heffer in, before Robin Cook. And Eric became a member of the government in '74, and Robin Cook was elected in '74, and he became the New Statesman, as it were, tame labour MP. And he came, really quite religiously, to every Friday conference we had. We always had a, sort of, policy, kind of planning-ahead conference on Friday, not so much for detail in the paper, but kind of the issues that we should be bearing in mind, should be addressing.
And he came to that. He was always very late. He was always a bit chaotic, I thought. He’d sort of arrive half an hour late, that kind of thing. And he was distinctly, in manner, pedagogic, and I didn’t find him immediately attractive at all. But he did the job and he wrote articles for us. He was always, I always thought, a bit sort of cavalier that… I remember once, he wrote a piece and I got a letter in, sort of, number of corrections and stuff. And I showed it to him, probably at the Friday conference, and said, 'What am I to do about this, Robin?' And he said, 'Oh, junk it... bin it. It’s ridiculous. Trivial point'. So I said, 'Well, I can’t do that. I mean, is he right or is he wrong?' He said, 'Oh, well, it doesn’t matter'. And I was a bit taken aback by that, that, you know, if somebody catches you out, you have to actually say, well, he’s right, you'd better put it in the paper and I’ll put at the bottom, sorry, got it wrong, or something. But he… I did put it in the paper, but he wasn’t at all pleased, and thought it should just be ignored. So he was a difficult man.
I had met him first when he was a lecturer at Edinburgh University, and I’d gone up to talk to the Labour Club there or something. That’s when I first met him. He was then a prospective candidate. And he seemed to me, even in those days, rather like a garden gnome, but he was a good speaker. And of course, I think his tragedy was that if he had, sort of, had the bearing and looks and the appearance of, say, Tony Blair, he would have become leader of the party. The only reason why he was always, sort of, not considered seriously, was because he had this sort of red beard and he was rather small and he had a slightly, sort of, bad voice, too, for politics. Slightly high-pitched and… but as I say, he was a very effective orator. But I think he was always a bit miffed, because after all, he’d gone to the House of Commons nine years before Tony Blair. Tony Blair wasn’t elected until 1983. Robin Cook was elected 1974. So he shouldn’t even have been considered leadership material. It must have been a bit hurtful.
I don’t know what his relations were like with Tony Blair. Of course, his very brave resignation over Iraq obviously poisoned them, but he was right about that, and Blair was wrong. I don’t think they were ever close. Blair admired his skill as a speaker, and certainly sent him a hero-gram in that arms… was it? was the Arms for Iraq scandal, you know, the great report where he made his great speech for the opposition frontbench. And he used… I think he used to have it on his wall in his office, this, sort of hero-gram that Blair sent him for that performance, which was remarkable. But I don’t think they were ever close. He was very much a man who walked alone. I think he made a complete cock-up of being Foreign Secretary, and all that stuff about an ethical foreign policy, or a foreign policy with ethical dimensions... what I think he actually said. But it was bound to rebound and come back to haunt him. I think he behaved… he was a very peppery man. He got very cross on some trip to Israel, and there was a, sort of, terrible scene with some poor, sort of, captain or major in the Israeli army, which you shouldn’t do as a visiting minister. If you’re going to make a row, make it with the Foreign Secretary, don’t throw a row on the spot with a soldier. It wasn’t as if the soldier was doing anything wicked or anything like that.
So I think he wasn’t a very good Foreign Secretary. He was appalled when Blair told him that he was going to shift him, and I think it was touch and go at that moment whether he wouldn’t leave the government. That after just one term as Foreign Secretary between '97 and 2001, Blair said, 'Look, I’m terribly sorry, I’ve got to make changes'. And he’d been given some kind of assurance, not, I think, by Blair, but by someone on Blair’s behalf, that he was going to be alright, and he wasn’t going to be moved into the Foreign Office. I always thought he was going to be moved, because I worked it out that Blair couldn’t shift Gordon Brown and therefore had to make some room at the top. Therefore, the only thing to do was to shift the Foreign Secretary, because Brown was too powerful to be shifted. And I think I actually wrote that he was going to lose his job. He can’t have liked that very much, but I was right in saying that. But it was a terrible blow to him, and I think he almost thought that he’d rather walk out of the government than become leader of the House of Commons, which was the job he was offered. Leader of the House of Commons used to be a very grand job. It’s gradually, sort of, receded and become less and less significant. And he was never happy from that moment on. I mean, I’m not saying he didn’t make a principled stand over Iraq and all that, and the war. I’m sure it was principled, but it certainly was made easier for him by the fact that he thought he’d already been humiliated by Blair, and therefore he was… you know, he wasn’t held back by any sort of personal loyalty feeling for the Prime Minister when the disagreement came over the war in Iraq, and of course he got that right. And he would probably have bounced back, but the tragedy was... what he died within a couple of years, I think it was. As I say, not an immediately attractive, not an engaging, not a lovable man, but a very able man who was probably underestimated by the parliamentary party. And I’m not saying that he’d have been a better leader than Blair, because Blair was clearly a very successful leader, but he certainly, at that time, had the right to think that he should have been considered.
And that he wasn’t, I think was unfair. And it was because, as he himself said, he said, well, it’s where the phrase comes from, 'I’m not leadership material, because I look like a garden gnome'.

Tony Blair was a parliamentary candidate at a by-election in Beaconsfield in, I think, 1982, just about the time of the Falklands Invasion. And poor boy, he lost his deposit. But oddly enough, it made him. That without that Falklands by-election which went so badly wrong and the Tories romped home, he would never have become a member of parliament in 1983. And one reason why he became a member of parliament was that after that by-election, I think probably typical of his generosity of spirit, Michael Foot wrote him a letter saying, you know, you did everything that could have been expected of you, you're not to reproach yourself, you were a wonderful candidate, blah blah blah. When he landed up in his constituency, in the constituency he was going to represent in, oh God, what's it called? Oh dear. Shows that I'm getting senile. Anyway, in Durham… oh what is it? Sedgefield. In Sedgefield in Durham, he brought the letter with him, and that letter was the really 'open sesame', in my view, to his at least getting, sort of, the ward nomination. And from the ward nomination, he went on to… because he was very lucky, in that the man who was put against him was really rather disgraceful... ex-Labour MP, who I think he beat by one vote. But anyway, getting that constituency was the absolute breakthrough. He'd always had a deal, you see, with his wife, with Cherie, that whoever got into parliament first would be the politician, the other one would continue at the bar. And there was poor Cherie fighting a hopeless seat down in Southfield [sic] in Kent or something. Clearly he'd won the race, and therefore he was going to have the career. Though she was academically and intellectually much abler than he was. I never met him during that period at all. I never went to the by-election, so I didn't know him at all until he became a member of parliament. And I don't think I knew him at all well, but one year, at the Labour Party Conference, when he was, I think, probably Home Affairs Spokesman... he wasn't on the National Executive, he didn't speak from the platform, he spoke from the floor, and he made so good a speech that I remember going up to him and saying, 'My name's Tony Howard'. He said, 'I know who you are'. I said, 'Well, I know who you are and I just want to say to you that on that form, one day, you're going to be leader of this party'. He said, 'What?' I said, 'I think you are'.
And so I always rather congratulate myself, having spotted his talent that early on. At that stage, I mean Gordon Brown was considered to be the coming star, but I thought this performance was really top-class. As I say, he was Shadow Home Affairs spokesman, I think, at the time. I used to go and see him, occasionally, when he was… yes, when he was doing Shadow Home Affairs. He once, I remember, came to lunch with me at The Garrick. The thing I remember about it was the speed with which he ate. I've never seen anybody eat so fast in my life. Before I looked up, the plate was clean, this kind of thing. He was very abstemious, though, he'd sort of have a small half-glass of wine, that was all.Talked a lot. And made it clear, and this was when John Smith was still leading the party, so it must be between '92 and '94, he made it absolutely clear that he was very impatient with John Smith and didn't think the party was doing enough. He said, 'Do you think we… I think we've got much more to do and I don't think John's doing it'. So to say that he was, sort of, a Johnny-come-lately about New Labour is nonsense... that he was already restive. And I was slightly, sort of shocked… not shocked, but surprised, anyway, at the way he spoke. 'I think this Safety First policy is no good. I mean, John just believes in one more heave. It's not the way to win'. And this is the kind of thing he was saying when he was a member of his shadow cabinet.
So I was a bit taken aback by that, in a sense, but I also thought, you know, that maybe his… you know... but I actually belonged to the one more heave school. I thought that all John Smith had to do was not to produce another shadow budget like the one that had lost the '92 election, but, you know, to stand firm and he would win the '97 election. And I didn't see anything wrong with his strategy myself, but Blair did. And I had no doubt, I think, that when John died in May 1994, that it was going to be Blair, even from day one. I didn't think it would be Gordon Brown, I think you couldn't succeed one Scotsman with another, bad luck, but there you are, it would look as if the party was a Scottish sect. You had one Scottish leader and then another Scottish leader. Blair had the good luck to... although he'd been to school in Scotland, he sounded… he passed for white. He looked as if he came from Southern England and everything, so I thought he would win it and I never had any doubt about that.
I saw a certain amount about him, with him… I saw a certain amount of him when he was leader of the opposition. Not all that much, but I suppose three or four times, I went to see him, and I remember the last time before the '97 election, I actually said when I was leaving, 'It's an odd thing, isn't it, next time I see you, you'll be Prime Minister'. He said, 'Oh don't say that, don't say that'. He was, even at that stage, nervous that something could go wrong. I said, 'It will be, it will be'. But I even then, I think it's true, that he did never believe that he would get this enormous majority in the '97 election. And the whole of that scheme with Paddy Ashdown was based on the fact that there would be a need for the Labour Party to have Liberal votes in the Commons, as it were, and that would shore the government up. Wouldn't say there wouldn't be a minority government, but you know, it would be useful to have Liberal MPs forming part of it, so that they had a workable, sizeable majority. So I think he never saw the dimension of that '97 victory coming.

I saw him not very often, when he was Prime Minister. I suppose at most… perhaps… I was writing a column in The Times at the time, so I think he paid a certain amount of… not… I always used to, sort of, apply, say could I see him? And I saw him about once a year, kind of thing. He was always very pleasant, affable. Not, I thought, sort of termed it, thought-provoking. And I suppose I'd never quite got over the impression that there was something lightweight about him. And I was never among his greatest admirers. I was never among New Labour's greatest kind of advocates or supporters, but he was… I liked him, he was attractive, he was pleasant and he also was a very good performer. I mean, there's no doubt about it that as a speaker, there's enough of an actor in Tony Blair to make him a very considerable performer indeed. And that one can't take away from him. But even his speech in defence of the war in Iraq, which was the… you know, a tremendous oratorical performance in the Commons. Even those who disagreed with it had to admit it. And he was equally good at the party conference. He took infinite pains with his party conference speech and, you know, he was always effective. But I don't know. I suppose that I belong to those who thought that, in a sense, he was a Tory in disguise or something. I never felt at home with him in that sense. And of course, I had known a lot of Labour leaders, going back to Hugh Gaitskell. And he seemed to me to be the least Labour-minded of all those people. And I used to be offended by people like Mandelson saying, 'I'm perfectly relaxed about people being filthy rich'. I think one of the times when I saw him as Prime Minister, I said, 'Are you really telling me that it doesn't worry you that the gap between rich and poor is getting wider'. He said, 'No, no, it doesn't worry me. What matters is everyone's becoming more prosperous'.
And I did find that very hard to take, that it seems to be one of the jobs the Labour party is in business to do, is to make sure that the gap shrinks, that there isn't that kind of inequality. I mean, what did Gaitskell believe in? Gaitskell believed in equality. A very old-fashioned doctrine now, but there's not a tithe in Tony Blair's being that thinks that equality is important. So we were never, I suppose, natural soulmates. I haven't… have I seen him... I don't think I've seen him once... shows that I'm a not a natural soulmate... since he ceased to be Prime Minister. I don't think I've talked to him on any occasion. And I've no doubt he doesn't feel any great sense of deprivation, but nor, frankly, do I.

Denis Healey was the cat that walks alone in politics. That was true from the very start. He didn’t have, sort of, allies and supporters and subsidiaries. Take Roy Jenkins. Tremendous contrast between Roy Jenkins and Denis Healey. Roy always believed in having a claque of supporters. He was… Healey said it himself: he was a Trollopian politician, it means he came out of Anthony Trollope, 19th century novel, very rude thing to say, but Healey and Jenkins never hit it off. They’d been at Balliol together and they didn’t… I think Healey was a year ahead of Jenkins. They disliked each other in those days and they went on being really incompatible all the way through the politics of the '80s and the '90s. And it’s my view that if they had rubbed along, the whole history of the Labour Party, post-1983, would have been completely different. Maybe post-1980, when Foot became leader. But the lack of… total lack of understanding between Healey and Jenkins was, I think, one of the tragedies that the Labour Party suffered from. They were both able men, firsts at Oxford, this kind of thing. Both been President of the Balliol JCR, but they just never could somehow… and they were… Roy once said to me, we were like chalk and cheese.  And I think though Roy never felt happy with Callaghan, never liked Callaghan, I think he actually disliked Healey more. Oddly enough, the last summer before he died, Jenkins, on the same day, went to lunch with Callaghan and tea with Healey. And I think the tea with Healey was much the greater strain of the two. But they were doing their best, they were both old men by then.
Denis was so arrogant. I mean, this is the real trouble, that he was Mr Know-all. Now he’s obviously much cleverer than most people, certainly much cleverer than me, but he always wanted to know better than you on every single subject. And there were subjects, I think very few, which probably I knew more about than he did, but he would never allow that. And that’s one of the things that grated on people. He was also very thuggish. You know, there was a coarse side to Denis, and he obviously, in a sense, blew the leadership, that he would have won against Foot in 1980 if he hadn’t made himself so unpopular with members of the parliamentary party by being intellectually superior, and also by being brutal, and saying, you know, you’re out of your little Chinese mind, this kind of thing. Well, people don’t like being talked to like that. But he also pretty… he used quite a lot of sort of profane and bad language. He had great ability. He was not a great speaker. Rather a poor speaker, as a matter of fact, both in the House of Commons and on the public platform, but clearly, as a minister, and of course this is the great thing to be said for Healey, that he understood the importance of being on top of a department.
He only held two jobs in government. One was Minister of Defence, which he held from 1964 to 1970, and he really did impose his will on that department. Not the easiest department to run, but he’d stuck there. He wouldn’t… once or twice, Wilson, I think, sounded him about would you like to move? If he’d been offered the Foreign Office, he’d certainly have taken it, but he wasn’t being offered the Foreign Office, so he said, 'No, I’ll stay where I am'. And I think that’s an important thing, to have a politician who realises that if you are to run a department properly, you have got to be really the equal to any argument that’s put against you in the Ministry of Defence, whether by the, you know, chief of the Defence Staff, whether by the Permanent Secretary, you want to be on top of the job. He understood that. And then he became Chancellor in '74, and again, he did five full years as Chancellor... '74 to '79. They were very difficult years, but I think he was right. I mean, at the time when he got the job, he obviously still wanted to be Foreign Secretary more than anything in the world, but as long as Callaghan was prepared to back him, and he was, more or less, he stayed at the Treasury. Again, I think if the Foreign Office had come up, and it did come up, of course, when Tony Crosland died, but that was a very bad moment for him to move, 1977, I think it was. Or was it '76? '77. And so he was stuck there. I think he was a very strong Chancellor.
I think he was lucky in being supported really quite formidably by the Prime Minister, through the IMF cuts and all that kind of thing. He is, of course, a genuine intellectual, and he had a kind of contempt for people who he just thought were wordsmiths, and... you know, journalists were a very low form of life, as far as he was concerned. He thought he knew a great deal about art, and he did know a certain amount. He thought he read widely. He always talked about his hinterland. Terrible show-off, but capable of being genial. So I say, because I was eventually quite a friend of Roy Jenkins, I think I was, sort of, rather turned against Denis Healey, but he was a very considerable public figure, and was, I think, in difficult times, a very successful minister. Whether he would have been a successful leader of the Labour Party, I’ve got a good deal of doubt, because I think he was too altogether, sort of, too hobnail boots and clodhopping and all that. I don’t think he had the gifts for party leadership. And in that sense, though, obviously Michael Foot wasn't qualified for it either but I think the party knew what it was doing when it gave Foot the majority of 10 votes in 1980 to be Callaghan's successor.  There was something flawed in Denis and I don't quite know what it is.
Last time I saw him was a Literary Festival, and it was for Edna who was talking about her book.  Denis, I thought wrongly, though maybe it was up to him, insisted that he join the panel for the second half of the show.  So we had Edna and Denis.  Well, it was Edna's book... what was he doing? And then at the end he, sort of, he dealt this... awful acts of blowing kisses to the audience that I found rather tiresome.  So I never really hit it off with him.  We had lunch that day together... it was perfectly amiable.  But I never was close to him and I think I'm probably not the person to give a fair and accurate appreciation but I think it is right to say that as well as the very great intellectual ability that he had, there were, sort of, defects of character there that probably explain why he never became, which his ability would certainly have entitled him to expect, why he never became Leader of the Labour Party or anything more than Chancellor of the Exchequer.

I can't remember when I first met Enoch Powell. I think it was long before 'Rivers of Blood' and that kind of thing. He was, of course, an extremely awkward colleague for Ted Heath in the shadow cabinet, long before the row took place over race. In 1966, he made a speech during the election, which oddly enough was against the Vietnam War, and he said, in that voice of his, he said, 'Not since the Secret Treaty of Dover...', which not many people in his audience could ever have heard of, but... has there been so, sort of, humiliating a deal done by a leader of the British nation with a foreign nation. The Secret Treaty of Dover was all to do with Louis XIV, this was to do with LBJ and Wilson. So he was very strange. I mean, he was, at that moment, I think, Shadow Minister of Defence. And Ted and he never got on, of course, but Enoch Powell was a very considerable figure. One of the odd things I used to do, and I don't know why, I used to get asked to an election dinner every year at Westminster School, where the game is that you actually, sort of, make up Greek or Latin epigrams and have them sort of slung in and read out. No one else could play the game, but Powell was brilliant. And he was, as a classicist... you know, he'd been a professor at the age of 23 or something in Australia admittedly, but he was very, very brilliant. And he kept all that scholarship up. I know that, because I used to go to his house, mainly for, sort of, radio interviews and stuff, but the bookshelves were heaving with classical texts.
Now I had, I think, a great, sort of, feeling of alienation from him, from the moment in 1968 that he made the 'Rivers of Blood' speech. And I used to say that I would be prepared to have any kind of conservative MP wanting to write for the New Statesman, writing in it if the article is good enough, but I said there's one exception to that: I would not have Enoch Powell. I think, looking back, I was wrong, but there was something about Enoch. There was the air of the fanatic, you see, that there was… I mean, those eyes, and he didn't seem to me to be a fully paid-up member of the human race, I have to say. And that, I think, with even people with greater knowledge of him than I had, people like Ian Macleod, said, you know, the trouble with Enoch is that he's led astray by the remorselessness of his own logic, and you have to get off the train before he crashes it into the bumpers.
And I think there was something about Enoch that was odd. On the other hand, he was a very considerable speaker, no great assets in terms of voice or anything like that, but he really knew how to make a powerful speech. I heard him, and this was very early on indeed, a speech he made in 1958, about the killing of the Kenyans in the time of the Kikuyu and all that stuff, in a... what was basically a concentration camp run by the Kenyan police. And he spoke in the House of Commons. I don't know why I was there, but I was, very early in the morning, about sort of 1:30am or something. And said, you know, we are told that these men are subhuman. So be it, he said, and went on to develop an argument from there. It was powerful stuff. Again, you know, here was he, more than any other person, standing up for the rights of black Africans. So it was hard to, sort of, make a racist out of him. I don't think he ever was a racist myself, at all. I think there were other members of the Tory party who were racist. I don't think Enoch was. But he could sound like one. And of course, it was bitter beyond belief that, I think from the moment Ted became leader of the Conservative Party, Enoch was really unhinged. Enoch stood for the leadership at the same time as Ted did. Ted got about, I think, 137 votes or something, Reggie Maudling got 120, Enoch Powell got 15. And I think this ate into his soul. He knew in every sense that he was an abler man than Ted Heath. And I think every morning, he looked at himself in the shaving mirror and he said, why is that booby leader of the Tory Party and why am I not? I think it really got to him. He had a kind of de Gaulle complex. He knew that he could save the nation, or thought he knew he could save the nation. And I think it ate him up, and that's why I think that, when Ted actually won that 1970 election, he was mightily… more disappointed than Harold Wilson. And for him, it was curtains. That he knew that if Ted had lost that election, he would be back in contention and the party might well turn to him. But when Ted won this election by a comfortable majority, 35 seats or something, in 1970, Powell knew it was the end for him.

And of course, he’s told us himself, and this did show great candour, that when Ted lost the election in 1974, for some reason, apparently, he’d gone to bed early. This is the story he used to tell, maybe it’s true or not, but he sort of woke up to learn the news, and it might have gone on all night, anyway, because the Labour majority was tiny, four seats or something, Wilson had won that election by... and found from his Times newspaper, whatever paper he bought, that the Tories had effectively lost the election. And he said that he went up to the bathroom and he lay in the bath and he sang the Te Deum. Well, it’s a very odd thing to me. Nominally, then, he was still a member of the Conservative Party. But no, he was a bit cranky, it has to be said.
And then of course the... I think the poison chalice.  That having refused to stand in the '74 election and played footsie with the Labour Party over timing when he was going to make his speeches and all that, which made me very unhappy at the time, I remember. I didn’t think it was [unclear], I think Joe Haines was the go-between, with that strange man called Alexander who writes for the Daily Mail, who was a great supporter of Enoch’s. And they, sort of, were the point of contact about the planning and timing and all that. But a very distasteful thing to do. But then he found himself out on a limb, and so when the chance came of becoming an Ulster Unionist MP, he took it. I don’t want to be rude about the Ulster Unionists today, who hardly exist as a party, or indeed necessarily rude about them then, but I think it was Churchill who said once, about somebody who said, well, I could become an Ulster Unionist. Churchill said: 'If you touch pitch, you will be defiled'. And poor Enoch. I mean, he was… there he was with these deadbeats and no-hopers in the Ulster Unionist Party. Here was a man of his tremendous abilities. They wouldn’t even make him leader. A Major Molyneaux or something was leader of the party. And I think those years, Member of Parliament for South Down, was… I think they were pretty grim years.
And... he liked being back in the House of Commons, that is true, but I think that, you know, he knew that it was all over, that he had blown it. And he wasn’t really even determining Ulster Unionist policy, because what he stood for was a kind of unity of the United Kingdom. He would have liked to abolish Stormont for good, have everyone represented in the Imperial Parliament, he probably called it... the old phrase. So he didn’t even stand with them. He wasn’t in favour of having a parliament at Stormont or this kind of thing. Didn’t like it. Didn’t like any of that kind of stuff. So he was basically out of sympathy with them. Then he organised one or two odd things, like all that mass resignation that took place at one stage... didn’t do any good at all, just wasted a lot of time and money.
I think he was a very unhappy fellow. But of course, even more unhappy when he lost the seat in South Down, which he did eventually. And then he was like a man bereft. Oddly enough, I never really was close to Enoch, but because I used to see her socially at one or two things to do with Rab Butler and stuff, I got on well with his wife, Pamela. And it was Pamela who first said to me... I said, you know, it was after his defeat in the Commons, losing his seat... I said, 'How is Enoch?' And she said, 'He’s like a man bereaved. He just doesn’t know what to do', she said. I said, 'Well, couldn’t they put him in the House of Lords?' She said, 'Well, I don’t think Maggie Thatcher will ever do that'. And I think he wouldn’t have accepted, to be fair to him. He’d been so rude about life peerages. They’d have had to come up with a hereditary peerage and offered him that. But of course, Thatcher had done that. She’d done it for Whitelaw. She’d done it for the ex-Speaker, hadn’t she? Mr Speaker Thomas... Viscount Tonypandy, I think. And so she had done it before, but she wasn’t going to do it for Enoch, in my view. And so he never got a peerage at all. I think that was mean. I think he should have. I mean, he was a great student of parliament. He really knew about the history of parliament. And I think not allowing him a peerage in the evening of his days was pretty mean-spirited.
Then he got ill. And the last time I saw him, he wasn’t really himself at all. And I think it was a pretty sad life, really. Two nice daughters, great number of loyal friends, like John Biffen, who was always very loyal to him, and I think gave the panegyric at his funeral, which I didn’t go to. And as I say, I’d known him down the years. We’d always been, I think, reasonably polite. He never wrote for me, because I wouldn’t have him, but I did sort of have to deal with him as a broadcaster quite often. And I interviewed him and that kind of thing and I never had any complaints. And he was, you know, perfectly… not… affable is the last word one would use about Enoch, but he was perfectly civil. But you never really felt you’d got to know him, and I think he lived in a private world of his own.
And of course, his own story, he never really recovered from independence to India. The day that it was declared that India was going to get independence, he was said to have walked the streets of London, trying to come to terms with this terrible event that had happened. 
Churchill thought he was barmy, because he reached… he was a member of the Conservative Research Department at the time, and it reached Churchill’s ears that he’d suggested the British Army should go back into India and should reconquer India, and from that moment on, even Churchill, who was unhappy about Attlee’s Indian policy, thought this man was nuts. And there was, I’m afraid, despite his great brainpower, there was a segment of Enoch’s mental equipment that was nuts, and that’s what let him down.

I'm hopeless on the state of Britain questions. I think they're the most boring books that have been written, called The State of Britain and all the rest of it. What would I say, though?
I mean, I'd say that in many ways, we've made a lot of progress. That when I look back, you know, it is amazing that when I went to the press gallery in the House of Commons in 1958, I was only about 23 years old, one quarter of the Conservative Party, the governing party, came from the same school. One quarter of Conservative MPs were Old Etonians. We went on to have three Prime Ministers on the trot who came from the same school. We went on to have Eden, Macmillan, Douglas-Home. In succession, three Old Etonians. Now I'm not against Mr Cameron being an Old Etonian, good luck to him. But I don't think we'll ever see David Cameron succeeded by two other schoolfellows again. So, in some ways, we've made progress.
We've also made progress, I think, in terms of representation of minorities. Not good enough yet in the House of Commons. Not good enough for women, certainly not good enough for ethnic minorities, but we've made progress and things are better off than they were. Where have we slipped back? I think we've slipped back in creating a Brahmin caste, who are quite different from the rest of us. And this Brahmin caste are the people who become politicians, who go into politics. They're picked off like, say, the Dalai Lama or something, at a very tender age, go into the Conservative Research Department, go into the Trade Union Research Department, and they're about 21. And they've never done anything else in their lives. Never, ever. Now we've already got a civil service that consists of a Brahmin caste, that's how they're recruited. They're sort of recruited from the moment they leave the university, and they spend the next 40 years in Whitehall. Do you want to duplicate that with those who are meant to be the people in the front office? I can't see the point of it. It seems to me that it was better, though some people think it was very old-fashioned, that when I first became a journalist, if you went to the House of Commons, you were enormously… saw all these brigadiers on the backbenches, you saw all these, sort of, Rear Admirals. You saw businessmen, even. You saw people who were, sort of, Sheffield Master Cutler and this kind of thing. None of that exists today. There is no one in politics, really, who's come up the hard way. There is that guy who's in the cabinet... Johnson, I think... he's been a postman and became General Secretary of the Post Office Workers Union. But that's very unusual. When I first went into the press gallery, you looked down and there were quite a lot of ex-union leaders on the floor of the House of Commons. I mean, Bevan blazed the way, but after that there were Alf Robens, people like that. None of that exists anymore. Instead of which, we have a caste, a cadre, that has been sort of trained from the word go, who have never known any other life but the life of being in politics, who have no experience of the world outside, who, I think, are… and I think this is where the political class is rapidly growing apart from the general public, because it is so secluded.
And that, certainly, is one place where, at least I think have got worse rather than better. And it happened, I think, largely by accident. We've had one or two throwbacks along the way. Somebody like Michael Heseltine belongs to the old dispensation. You make your money, you become a businessman, then go into politics. People don't do that anymore. Probably he's the last one we shall see of that kind of person. They may take a job in PR, like David Cameron, with some television company or something. Basically, they've done nothing except what they know about. They become… I think this may be one of the troubles, it may go back to these special advisors that were invented. Not really until about the 19… beginning of the 1970s, I think, or thereabouts, that you got this sort of recruited young men, bright young men, who went to work for secretaries of state here and there, and they immediately got bitten by the bug, so they wanted to become secretaries of state themselves, and therefore they became, first of all, MPs. It may have gone back to that, because we didn't have special advisors, pre-sort of… I think Wilson may have had a special advisor or two as Prime Minister, but most cabinet ministers just rubbed along with their own civil servants. We've suddenly got this breed created of these people who are brought in, and they're once they're inside, they never leave the tent afterwards. So they've had, probably, something to do with the development of this strange political caste that we've seen in this country, which we never used to have, and is now, I think, stronger than it's ever been.
So what else would I say about the state of the nation? Not much. I mean, I think that probably, as far as the media are concerned, we've probably had the best years. I think newspapers are almost bound to die. And I think that we've certainly had the best years as far as television is concerned, that the break-up, even, of the whole regional structure of ITV, I think, history will say was a great mistake. And how long the license fee can keep going for the BBC? God knows, but I wouldn't think it would be forever. So I think we're, in media terms, we are on the cusp of big, big changes.
Other things? Decline, I suppose. People would say the decline of morality. I'm not sure about that. Certainly decline of churchgoing, there's certainly that's something that's changed in my lifetime, quite considerably. Otherwise, I don't think I've got any great message for the nation. I'm against apocalyptic utterances, on the whole. Maybe I've been too apocalypic about this and that over the state of the nation, but I think you always have to remember that life goes on. Life does not, sort of, change in dramatic sequences, that when people say that the world changed in 9/11, balls. It didn't. So think that melodramatic statements of that kind don't do any good, and on the whole, things… it's amazing how little things change. That may be depressing for those with sort of a radical turn of mind, but it is, I think, true that there aren't that many, sort of, Soviet revolutions and stuff that take place, and I suspect that we're wrong in thinking that we are living in our own generation in the end of history. Nonsense titles of that kind is not how life works.

I think, looking back, the great pleasure of reaching even the tiny position of power in journalism, editing a small weekly paper like the New Statesman or indeed being deputy editor of The Observer is the chance you're given to encourage talent.
And I'm amazed at how little a lot of people, or a lot of editors, take of this. That I was very lucky that I was encouraged, I suppose. First of all, basically the editors of Reynold's News were no good at all, but by Alastair Hetherington at The Guardian, he sort of brought me on, as it were, and taught me quite a lot of what I tend to know about journalism. Lucky with John Freeman on the New Statesman, though John was a cold fish, but he was, you know, I think a very good editor for me to work for at that stage of my career. And I tried, I think, when I got to be in my forties myself, or even later, to do that for other young people who I thought were talented. I was… when I was… I mean, the first editor who I worked for was a man called George Scott. He's long-forgotten. He edited an obscure weekly paper, which I think sold about 5,000 copies, called Truth, which went back to the days of Henry Labouchère in the 19th century, when it had been quite a power in the land, but by the time George was there in 1955, '56, it was a pale shadow of what it had been. But my goodness, George knew how to spot talent. I mean, who did he have working for Truth? He had Bernard Levin, he had Alan Brien, he had Philip Oakes. I'm trying to think who else. I'd say me. But considering he only could pay about £10 an article, it's amazing what he did.
And that idea of an editor being a kind of Carroll Levis, he was an old trash and talent man from the BBC, or even a Hughie Green, you know, a sort of talent-spotter is, I think, probably the most important part of what the job of being an editor should be. I was very lucky when I was young and still only in my 30s myself, I had, working for me on the New Statesman, I had working for me then James Fenton, I had Christopher Hitchens, Julian Barnes, Martin Amis, Claire Tomalin, now gone on to be most famous literary biographer of her day, was my literary editor. No, they were very talented people, and I always, I suppose, looking back, saying well, whatever I failed in in the New Statesman, I failed in a lot, but in the six years I was there, I think I did quite a lot to bring on talent. Most of them haven't gone on being journalists. They've gone off to be other things, but at least I spotted at the beginning the potential there. And I think, to some degree, I managed to do the same on The Observer, perhaps not... less dramatically, but people I'm proud of having encouraged there, people like Patrick Bishop, who now writes very successful books, who I took under my wing there. I think Robert Harris, who I brought in from being a television reporter to be our political editor on The Observer, now a, sort of, famed thriller writer and novelist. I'm trying to think who else was there I brought on a bit.
Oh, there was a very bright young man who now writes the column... Tim... in The Daily Telegraph. I can't remember his name because I'm getting senile, but he is Mandrake on the Telegraph and has done very well for himself. Not, I think, perhaps the same harvest that I had when I was younger, but still there were people I'm proud of having brought on. And then, even when I was obits editor of The Times, I took quite a lot of young writers under my wing. And some of them have done very well. They're not yet in their full flush of success, no doubt, but I was always keen, I think, to not have… I can't bear old sweats. I mean, when I went to The Times, to be editor of the obit section, a very humble job, really, but the only staff I had were people who'd been, sort of, thrown out of other departments and who were real old soldiers. They knew how to swing their lead. And I thought, look, and I can't live with this. And I went to see the managing editor, and he said, 'Oh Tony, this is very difficult, very difficult. They've been loyal servants'... and [unclear] 'They're just a crowd of idlers'. [He said] 'And oh, I don't know, Tony I'll do my best for you, I'll do my best'. I think I got rid of one of them. That was pretty hard going. And then I did manage to extend the staff and bring on quite a number of young people, including the present Times art critic, Rachel… oh dear, Johnston... Campbell-Johnston, who's been a great success. She was a secretary when I brought her on, and so I'm very proud of what she's done. And she was a wonderful writer. And I brought on a very bright girl called Lois Letts, who's now married to Quentin Letts.
I think when I was younger, I was less good at bringing on women, but as I got older, I got easier dealing with women, and therefore my two proudest people at The Times, I think, were both women. But I suppose when I was younger, I was more… and I think, oddly enough, one of the people who first wrote for me was… her first articles were published by me, was Tina Brown. And Tina, I think, always thought I was a bit edgy with women, and so, for that matter, did Bel Mooney, who actually wrote somewhere that I wasn't good at dealing with women. It greatly annoyed me at the time, I remember, but we remained friends and I still see her. But I think they were probably right. But in old age, I got perhaps better at it, or more confident, or something.
And no, I think that is the only… looking back, after 50 years, the only, sort of, thing I take pride in, really, is not that I produced excellent papers. They often weren't excellent, but that I did bring on some really excellent people. And that I do think is quite an important job to have done in life.
[Q] And what did you teach them?
Goodness knows. I mean, one of the people I brought on, I remember, was young Patrick Wintour, who came to the New Statesman in my latter years there. And in those days, you got some kind of grant. You got… sort of like employing the disabled, you got a sort of grant if you had young people who were being sort of apprentice journalists. And I can remember going through this pantomime scene with Patrick, where he came to sort of sit beside me on my desk like some inspector taking notes. And I sort of said, well, when we come to write an article, this is what we do. And I don't think it deceived anyone. I think we got the grant, but I didn't really. I think that… well, I hope I gave encouragement. I mean, they always used to say there was a code that… I think I used to get sort of teased about it, that if I said that's fine, it meant the article was pretty average and no good, really. 'That's fine', I'd say. And there were other adjectives that went up the scale.

But I did try and encourage people. And I was conscious, I suppose, because I wasn't a natural writer myself, that sometimes it's an agony. And I do remember that even James Fenton, who is a natural writer, who wrote the political column after Alan Watkins for me, and very well he did it, too, but he did sort of live on his nerves. And once he came to me and he said, 'Tony, I can't finish it'. I said, 'What page are you on?' He said, 'I'm on page three'. 'How far down page three?' 'About halfway'. I said, 'Okay, you come and sit at my desk, I'll finish it for you'. And I had done the job myself years ago, so I did know how to do it and I did finish it for him, which I think was the right thing to do in those circumstances, and got it to the right length and, 'That'll do. James, alright?' He said, 'Oh it's fine'. Fine, he may have said, but anyway. That, I think… I think you've got to be able to do it yourself. But I don't claim that… and with Robert Harris. I mean, Robert, who is a very, very superb natural writer, when Robert was on The Observer, he'd sometimes come to me about Friday 8 o'clock in the office in the evening and say, 'I can't do it. I can't get it together'. And I said, 'Look, Robert, doesn't matter. Don't worry. Tell you what to do: forget about it. Go home. Don't… have one drink. Go to sleep. Wake up at five, start again'. And then he'd come in with a copy in the morning at 10 o'clock, and it would be beautifully done. But he did have… he had great, sort of, nerves trouble, Robert, in those days. And you had to sort of know how to deal with that. You knew how to deal with that if you'd been through it yourself.
So I don't think you can do it if you haven't been through it. As I say, when I used to write the New Statesman column for John Freeman, it always had to be in by sort of 12 o'clock on Wednesdays. And at first, I used to come home on Tuesday night at 6 o'clock, full of nerves and collywobbles and nervous and tummy ache and stuff, sit at the desk and try and write it. And I didn't have great success, so I then changed the routine, and I think it worked better, that I used to sort of think about it, but I'd go to bed early on Tuesday evenings, I'd get up 6 in the morning, and start to sort of write the first page at home, and then I'd write the rest in the office, get it done by 12. It worked better for me than the Tuesday night stand, which really did, sort of, take it out of me, and I was then like a wet rag in the morning, too.
So I think if you've done it, and I don't think you probably can be an editor unless you've tried to be a writer, because a lot of journalists must deal with writing, and you've got to have been through the mangle yourself, and that means you understand what people are going through. But I don't really claim that I had great qualities of sympathy. Some people would say I had very little. But I did try. And I think you have to be able to say, look, it's not the end of the world, but let's get it right. And on the whole, if you persist, you do succeed in getting it right.

Martin always complains that in the two years he worked for me, he wasn't able to do any kind of creative writing of his own, because I took… made such an excessive demand on his energies. He says that on one occasion when he more or less said he wouldn't do something, which I was very cross about… I can't remember what phrase he used. He said that he was… you know, he would exhaust his talents if he did this. I said, exhaust his talents? I went around and I told other people on the staff all day. 'What the hell does he mean, exhaust his talents?' I can now see what he did mean. But no, he was clearly… I mean, I didn't like… I liked The Rachel Papers, which was his first novel. I didn't like Dead Babies at all. And I think Success was published when he was working for me, which wasn't one of his best books. But it was okay. And I think that he must have written it beforehand.
But he did become literary editor and it was a full-time demanding job. He had not just to do the books, but he did the arts as well, it was the sort of theatre critics, the film critic, the radio critic, the television critic, all that came under him, as well as the… and he had an assistant, of course, Julian Barnes, who I don't think was writing in those days at all. But Martin clearly… the trouble with Martin was that he was already a star. Twinkle, twinkle, little star, I used to say sometimes. It used to annoy him, because he's rather small, but he was very definitely the star of his generation, as it were, and this meant that he, sort of, had… you know, of course, he went about very much conscious of the Amis name. And there was one idea I had for a competition once, just to tease him, I said, 'Why don't we do a competition saying unfortunate titles? One of them could be "My Struggle" by Martin Amis'.
And I think he didn't… he didn't like the idea that he'd somehow… but I think it was true, although of course his brother and sister, his sister now dead, poor dear, but they didn't have anything like the success that Martin had had. But he was already a kind of legend. And greatly helped by, sort of, all the rumour about what a ladies' man he was and this kind of stuff. He… I mean, considering how spoiled he'd been... I think he had been spoiled, it was amazing that he was as modest as he was. And I think that he was biddable, on the whole. We used to have one or two rows that I thought that he overindulged Clive James, who was allowed to sort of meander in meadow after meadow, page after page, writing about something he didn't know very much about, in my view, like America, which I thought I knew more about than Clive did. And we had one or two collisions of that kind, but not many. And on the whole, he was a mostly amiable and congenial colleague to have, but he didn't last long under my successor, Bruce Page. He very soon fell out with him, so it wasn't just that he would with anyone. And he left, I think, sort of within a year that I gave up being editor, Martin left being literary editor, because he didn't like the new regime.
But he was obviously, I mean, the golden boy from the start, and was very talented. And I think was probably… had been spoiled a bit, not necessarily by his parents, his mum and dad, but by all sorts of literary editors and stuff, who sort of doted on him. Even… I mean, the reason why he came to work for me was that John Gross, who'd been literary editor when I first became editor, or was appointed by me, went on to be editor of The TLS. John absolutely worshipped him, and I think that was bad for Martin. He could do anything he liked. Write rather disgusting pieces, sort of sexy things calling Coming in Handy, and that kind of thing, which was all about masturbation, and I would never have had that and I don't know how I let John get away with it.

I think I was a great disappointment with that, with Sue Lawley, because she was doing it when I was doing it. And I think I asked for… I suppose I was influenced by having been in the army, and I asked for a camp bed (officers for the use of), which is what you have in the army. And I thought that rather than lie on the ground, this camp bed, and I think I asked also for a mosquito net, because that came with the camp bed, or you could have it added. And I thought if I was on this desert island, that would do. But I think that was really the influence of national service. And I wouldn't have thought of it if I hadn't been a national serviceman. Otherwise, I can't remember much about the programme. What you have to do, I think, if you do it, is you have to pace yourself. You have to say, take bits of music that correspond with the periods of your life, and I think I managed to do that, otherwise I would… I'm not terribly musical, so I wasn't an ideal choice, and I had things, you know, rather hackneyed things like, well, I don't know, the opera with some drinking song from whatever it is. Can't even remember what opera it is. But my wife was some help with it. She's much more musical than I am. But it was pretty…
Oh, I had a lot of speech, including a Nye Bevan speech, which I was delighted to put in. And they thought it was too short, but they let me have it. And I think I had, I had that other American… When You Are Old And Grey. Dear, dear, what is his name? Plays the piano and twiddles, but that was almost speech. But it wasn't high classical music much, no. I mean, it had things even like Vivat Regina!, because having been at Westminster school, and that being the sort of coronation thing we sung, shouted out by the Queen's scholars. So we had all sorts of odd things. I enjoyed doing it. They were quite fun. I was quite old by the time I did it. I think I was… I'd certainly left The Times by the time I did it, I think. Not giving up the columns, I'd left The Times full-time, because I didn't spend.... you know, I spent six years in the Elysian Fields, rowing people across the Styx to their, sort of, obituary notices.
Odd job, that, but a job I quite enjoyed. Very much the hinge of journalism and history, being obits editor, and admittedly, it's an old man's job, because you… only if you're old can you, sort of, remember enough about the people who've died, but it was very much away from the mainstream of journalism, and I did it, I think, between 1993 and 1999, that's right. And a small staff, sort of three or four people, all, sort of, each day putting out the slab and laying out people on it. But I didn't find it unrewarding, and obits had a great vogue at one time. They suddenly became very fashionable. I think they've gone off a bit now, but for a period, mainly because of The Independent, I think, and because The Telegraph, under Montgomery Massinberd did, sort of, produce a new kind of art form, basically. He's dead now, poor chap. But I think we were fighting back against The Telegraph, that's one reason why I was hired to do it, because The Times realised that they were being left standing by these new witty, funny notices that appeared in The Daily Telegraph, which it used not to do obits at all.
And it's quite a feat to get them up to the standard they did, really, only starting in 1986, I think, whereas The Times has done them for… well, not as long as people think. I think The Times regular obits page started about 1920, so it hasn't even been going 100 years yet. But they did occasional pieces before, but that was sort of the death of the Duke of Wellingon, all that kind of thing, you know, the one-day specials.

I think my main conclusion is that everything is exaggerated. That when 9/11 took place, all those announcements, the world is never going to be the same again. Nuts. You know, I'm sorry, it was a horrible tragedy and all that, but the world is the same. And there always is a tendency, particularly on the part of evangelical politicians like Tony Blair, to say everything has now changed, everything is different. It's not. Life goes on. And so I think we have to beware of, sort of, melodramatic pronouncements. And I mean, I suppose you would say the atom bomb… well, everyone did say it changed the world. I'm not sure it did. Two atom bombs were dropped in 1945. What's happened since? It's been a kind of equivalence of terror, I suppose, of fear, but the world was not transformed. And I think I shall always be wary of those who change, you know, the end of history, this kind of thing. It's not how things work out.
So I think, on the whole, I'm saying, you know, avoid exaggerated pronouncements and accept that life goes on and it will go on until such time, no doubt, as we blow each other up, but that looks to me more remote now than it looked, say, 40 years ago at the time of the Cuban Missile Crisis.

Old age is horrid and I don't think you should pretend otherwise. It's no fun, your faculties start failing, you… that's true of your physical faculties as well as any mental ones. And it is, I think… there's no... I don't want to live to be 90 or anything like that. Everyone I know at that... all says I wish I could die. And I think, you know, you ought… I'm frightened, no doubt of… everyone's frightened of death, but I hope I'm not frightened of death as such. I think I'm frightened of the illness and the pain, and that kind of thing, but if I could just heel over, would I mind all that much? I don't know. I was brought up a Christian, of course, I'm afraid now I'm an agnostic, so I don't really believe in life after death or anything like that. Of course, my father did, because he was a clergyman, and that was the whole background I had. But I would… I think probably life after the age of 80 isn't much fun. I'm now 74, so we haven't got long to go on the last lap, final furlong.
And I don't think retirement's much fun, either. I think a lot of people look forward to retirement all their lives, they've got rather dull jobs. But then when they actually embark on it, they don't find it very rewarding and there are an amazing number of people who die very rapidly after they retire, even if they've had drab jobs. It was the job that kept them going. I'm lucky still, in that I do write occasional bits here and there. I do occasional broadcasts here and there. So I'm not entirely unemployed, though the income has dwindled, I'm afraid, drastically, and that's always a slight worry, even if you've made provision, as I've tried to do by sort of private pension schemes and that kind of thing. But it's not the same as being as well paid as you are as a columnist. And once that dries up, you've… you know, you feel the pinch. But I shouldn't whine or grizzle or complain. I'm much better off than most, as I say.
I tend to believe that death is the end, but I'm not, sort of, 99% convinced that is true. I, you know, I could be wrong about that, and I might get an agreeable surprise, although no doubt I'll be punished for not having believed it. But I think that, you know, it's true that most, sort of, doctrines of, you know, eternal life defy human comprehension, but it could be. It could be that it's right. I certainly… I suppose when I was young, I believed it was, being brought up in a vicarage, a rectory and places like that. And I've drifted away from it. Still go to church, but that's largely sort of out of custom, I think, and aesthetic appreciation of church services and stuff. But I don't go as an active believer.
