antony.hewish

Antony Hewish (1924-2021) was a pioneer of radio astronomy known for his study of intergalactic weather patterns and his development of giant telescopes. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1974, together with fellow radio-astronomer Sir Martin Ryle, for his decisive role in the groundbreaking discovery of pulsars. He also received the Eddington Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1969.

Well, I had a wonderful early life. I was born in Fowey, which is South Cornwall, where my father was a banker, but we moved pretty quickly to Newquay on the North Cornish coast, which is well known now as a surfing place. But in pre-war days it was absolutely wonderful, and I was brought up there until I was 18 or 19 actually, and I had a wonderful Cornish childhood. I was sent away to school, but school holidays were fishing and building boats and sailing and fishing and surfing, and doing all those lovely things you do in Cornwall. And I was the youngest of three brothers; my… middle brother, John, we… were close together. He was 3 years older than I was and we did most things together, building boats and just enjoying… enjoying Cornwall during the holidays, and I really can't think of anything nicer than that. When I look back on that I realise how amazingly lucky I was, actually.
[Q] And what were your particular interests at school?
Physics, although we weren't taught terribly well. But I… was always interested in how things worked actually, taking things to bits and usually breaking them in the process. But at home I loved making models, model aircraft and building clocks and playing with explosives, and actually doing quite dangerous things like pulling the electricity out of the wall, you know, dismantling the nearest light switch and connecting up to it, and trying electrolysis experiments and things like that, crazy things which didn't usually work.
And my father was manager of the bank; we lived above the bank in Newquay and I sometimes used to fuse the whole system, of course, and plunge the bank into darkness, so I wasn't very popular. But I just had a wonderful childhood, fairly unrestricted, doing what I wanted to do with my brother, and just got interested in hands on, how things work and that… I think that was what started my interest in physics, really.

During the war it was quite easy to get to Cambridge; you didn't need to get scholarships and things to afford to come here. I don't think my parents could have afforded university fees in those days, but they were so short of technical effort in World War II that they… so long as you read physics with electronics – radio they called it, then physics with radio – you could get a place at the university. And they had an accelerated 2-year course to graduation.
But, being a Cornishman, I wanted to row on the river and I spent too much time rowing in the college boat – you know all about that of course, Dave – and it takes time. And I was on the… in the afternoons I was practising on the river when I should have been in the… in the physics lab, so I didn't do terribly well in my first year's exams.
And they said, well, you'd better go off to the wars and… be a scientist, so they sent me off to Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough. And I was there for a while and then I went on to TRE [Telecommunications Research Establishment], which was the home of radar in Malvern, and that's where I first met Martin Ryle. And that really was when my real interest in physics began; I mean, I began to understand what physics was really about. In my first year at university, because I hadn't been taught too well at school, as I said, I didn't do terribly well. But I began to see what physics was about during the war and that's really where it all began for me. I had three gap years, as it were, doing wartime things.

There was a great shortage then of people who were able to both understand the technology that was going on, which was that equipment was being developed enormously fast and it was being introduced immediately into… into the RAF. And you needed people who were… knew all about the equipment, how it worked on the bench and thoroughly understood it, and who could go with it when it was being installed in the squadrons and teach them actually how to use it and what it was for.
And that's where I first met Martin Ryle because he was involved with radar countermeasures, jamming the German radars, both on the ground and… and in the air. And I got involved there with a device which was jamming airborne interception radar, the thing that you would fit in ME110s or something like that, and this was a device which simply poured out radio interference from the tail end, actually, of a Flying Fortress bomber and blinded the radars of the… of the interception fighters.
Most of our bombing was done by… at night then so that you needed radar to… to catch your target if… if you were a German night fighter pilot, and the idea was that this equipment would radiate noise at high level and just blanket the screens of… of the German night fighters. And so I went out with this… with this device which, as I said, was mounted. They had particular aircraft which were full of antiradar equipment of one sort and another, both jamming the ground radars and also the airborne ones. And I got involved with this particular one which had antennas mounted in the tail of a Flying Fortress. And the idea was to fly these Fortresses in the bomber stream and, as I said, blanket radars of night fighters coming in to intercept. So I had, first of all, to know how the thing worked and I spent some time where it was being fabricated at… General Electric Company, GEC, Wembley. I… I was there when it was actually finally made and built and then I went out to the squadrons which was in Norfolk and oversaw the installation of it and taught them actually how to twiddle the knobs, and… and use it. And that was both instructive, from the point of view of physics – I mean, I learnt all about electronics and a couple of circuits and transmitters and all that kind of thing, but I also learnt hands-on physics and… and what you do to make these things really… really operate.
You had… I wangled flying with it, not on active service because I… I was a civilian scientist and you weren't allowed to do that, but I flew quite a lot over Norfolk getting the thing tuned up. If you're too close to the ground the antennas get interference from the ground reflection, so you had to fly it to get it tuned up nicely. And so I spent time flying over Norfolk doing… doing that, which could be quite exciting, actually, because the pilots would practice manoeuvres and things and I… this equipment was mounted, as I said, in the tail, but the controls were in the middle of the aircraft, and these were Flying Fortresses which have a big observation turret right in the middle. And I once saw the ground out of the turret and thought, my God, this is a Fortress and we're nearly upside down! And when I questioned the pilot afterwards about this, he said, you know… I said, 'Do you normally do this sort of thing?' And he said, 'Oh, just practising countermeasures in flying.' I mean, you… you have to escape sometimes and you do all sorts of things in aircraft, so the fact that you could throw these four-engined bombers around like that was quite… quite a surprise to me.
But at any rate, I mean, the war taught me about physics, electronics and about people and, as far as I was concerned, it focused me in the sense that I wasn't focused when I went straight up from school, so I always recommend students now to have gap years if they can, especially if they're a little bit backward like I was, in a sense. I mean, I… I wasn't a good student in my first year; I spent time rowing but when I got back in three years' time, I didn't. And I was much more serious and I got a good result finally, but it was the war that, I think, did that.

And that, of course, was where I met Martin Ryle, which was… which was a wonderful thing to do. I hadn't planned at all to be doing research finally; I didn't think I was going to be a research scientist, I hadn't… I thought I could teach. And I was… I had a job lined up at the College of Aeronautics at Cranfield, which was then a sort of super polytechnic. It's now Cranfield University. But just before the exam results came out, people said to me, oh, I wouldn't choose a job too quickly if I were you - you just wait and see what results you're going to get. They knew I was going to get quite a good result because they'd been marking the papers, and so I held back. And I got my First, and decided to do research, I got the opportunity to do research and I'd just met a rather interesting girlfriend in Cambridge – she's my wife now. She… I had plenty of reasons for wanting to stay on in Cambridge, rather than go to College of Aeronautics at Cranfield, and that's how I got my foot into research.
I mean, I hadn't got any lifelong ambition to be a research scientist, but it just happened, mainly as a result of my three gap years during the war, and the fact that I worked hard afterwards and got a good exam result and wanted to stay on in Cambridge. But I hadn't a clue what I was going to do.
And I was a late starter in research in the sense that if you plan to do research then you… you go round deciding what research group you're going to join and you're interviewed by them and so on weeks before you actually join. I didn't do that; there wasn't much left when I… when I decided I'd finally do research, but I knew about electronics. So I went to join the group that was then run by Jack Ratcliffe who was an ionospheric scientist, investigating the ionosphere. He'd been a student of Appleton, Edward Appleton of the Cavendish, and so I joined his group. He said there was funny things going on: there was radio waves coming from the sky, why don't you help Martin Ryle investigate those? That seemed to me a pretty good idea. I knew that radio waves came from the sun because that had been a wartime discovery, but I hadn't realised it was coming from other places. And Martin Ryle had then just discovered Cassiopeia A, that was 1948, and so radio astronomy was really just beginning. And I got in right on the ground floor and was incredibly lucky in that respect.
But research, you know, is a funny business when you're starting. I'm sure you know about that. But it's getting… it's getting moving in research, which often is a very tricky and uncertain time. I was given a project, which was to investigate the polarisation of radiation coming from the sun, and I started to do that, but the only time the sun was really strong enough to activate my equipment was when it was active. You know, the sun has active regions, sunspots on it; 1948 was unactive solar period and I had to wait until there were sunspots on the sun before you got these solar flare outbursts and I could pick up radiation.
And, to be honest, I was getting a little bit fed up because I couldn't see where this was going to lead. Just getting data on this didn't seem to me like a terribly exciting thing to be doing. I mean, the sun was up there, we all knew about the sun in a sense and I just hadn't really got my feet properly into research and I didn't really quite understand, you know, that the importance of basic measurements like that. And I went around actually looking for other jobs in my first year; I wasn't at all sure that I was actually going to stay on and… and do research. But then, all of a sudden, something clicked.

We discovered that the radio sources… I was given the task also, as well as my own project, I mean, Martin Ryle got people working on all sorts of different things – I was given the task of analysing the data from some of the very first sky surveys and I noticed that some of the... some of the sources… we knew about four radio sources then: Cygnus, which you know all about; Cass A; The Crab, and Virgo. And I was analysing these data and I realised that they had a fluctuating signal, which only happened at night. And that was a bit of a problem, and I then discovered that this was correlated with an ionospheric disturbance called spread F. You know, Ratcliffe was… and his students were investigating the ionosphere by getting radio waves reflected from it, that was the standard way of doing things in those days, and I saw a connection then between this scintillation and the ionosphere and decided that why don't you investigate the ionosphere using radio waves from outside, from… from these things, whatever they were. We didn't know what they were. And I suddenly saw here was an opening which was a kind of new line of research and I would be the first person in the world to actually know what the atmosphere was doing at 150 miles above the surface of the Earth, because by reflection, you can only get the bottom of the ionospheric layers. With radiation from the outside you'd go all the way through. And if there's any way of detecting what's going on in the upper atmosphere using radio waves from outside, that's… that's a brand new thing to be doing and I could understand all that. And I got going on that. And that really triggered me off. I mean, I got a paper written on that.
First of all, I had to understand the theory; it's not obvious what happens when radio waves pass through an ionised plasma and I got involved with that… that bit of theory. And it's diffraction theory, actually, finally, and wrote a paper about this, and I thought it was pretty straightforward. But when Jack Ratcliffe read the paper he said, 'Hey, this is pretty interesting, you ought to publish this.' And that set me going. I mean, I had a first published paper after two years in… in research and that really set me on course. I mean, I had an achievement which… which was mine. When you're starting off in research everybody knows much more than you do about things normally and you… you feel you're not going to make much headway. And especially that was true in radio astronomy when nobody quite knew what they were doing anyway, but I suddenly… suddenly something… something clicked and I decided I'd got a paper. Ratcliffe said, You should publish that in the Royal Society, Proceedings of the Royal Society. I began to feel a little bit more important rather than just a kind of cog in the wheels. And that… that got me going and that set me on the course actually which defined my whole research career, actually, because that scintillation led on, step by step, eventually to the discovery of pulsars. So that's… that's how it all began, as far as I was concerned.

My PhD was totally to do with the ionosphere and, having worked out the theory and got some observations, I think one of my happiest moments was not just the publication of the papers, but I remember the first time I measured an ionospheric wind. I set up a very simple experiment just a mile from here where we're sitting, on the old rifle range. I set up two simple radio telescopes and looked at Cassiopeia A and got the scintillations at two places on the ground and saw that they were identical almost, but with a time lag which showed that the scintillation pattern – this… this cloud pattern of radiations – was moving across the ground. And I was able to measure the speed of that from the time delay. Of course, I only got one component of the velocity because I only had a single line. I had one antenna just right behind the rugger ground and the other one was a bit… was about half a mile further off. And the delay, so the speed up there at a height of about a 100… 300 km, you know, that's about 200 miles high, something like that, was… what was it that night? It was about 160 miles per hour, which I thought was quite fast. And as I cycled home in the moonlight I realised I was the only person in the whole world who actually knew the speed of the wind was 160 miles up. You know, I'd done something new and this is… this is the stimulus that keeps you going in research, that… that kind of thing. I've still got that record, actually, in my desk. It's a bit faded now but we… we didn't have all this digital recording. We had pens making marks on papers like a medical chart, you know, a heart machine, and you could see the delay as these pens went along and I think that… that was a memorable moment in my research career. That happened after I'd been doing research for about 18 months, 2 years, and that got me… got me moving and that led on. One thing led to another.
My PhD was all to do with the ionosphere but then we discovered radiation coming through the solar corona; we discovered that this solar corona, which in those days you could only see at total eclipse in optical astronomy, was affecting radiation coming from, well, the Crab Nebula in particular because that passes rather close to the Sun, but also the other sources did it too. But you were getting radio scattering of radiation from clouds of plasma surrounding the Sun and I began to do that in the late… late 1950s. And that took my research on, away from terrestrial things, to the Sun again and then I started to research the Sun's atmosphere. And that took me a number of years.

The group was a very coherent group that Martin Ryle had then, and you didn't just do one thing: you had to help with everything because the equipment, it's not like nowadays where you… where you design an equipment and then you write reports on it and you have committees breathing down your neck to approve it and you get the funding and so on. In those days you… the university had the funds, actually – we weren't spending much money to build whatever we wanted to build. And Martin Ryle was building his own radio telescopes for the first surveys and everybody had to help in those things. I had… I spent a lot of time designing dipoles for the feeder arrays that went in the first… the first 2C survey which had four big reflectors. And if you designed something you had to make it work, so I spent a whole lot of time climbing up and down antennas and matching, impedance matching and so on, and all that was quite independent from the… from the research I was actually doing on the Sun's atmosphere and the ionosphere.
But it was amazingly good training to have such hands-on experience of antennas and it gave me the confidence to actually build things and make them work on a larger scale, which eventually led on to the pulsar work, of course. I mean, I'd never have built that antenna. But that came quite a long way… quite a long way down the line. I was building my own antennas as well as building antennas, helping to build antennas for Martin Ryle, and that experience all linked together to make me very much a hands-on person.

That was work which kept me pretty well occupied, building my own antennas and using other people's antennas to measure the angular broadening of sources as they passed behind the Sun, because that gave the information on the solar corona, which in those days, as I think I said, was only observable by radio astronomy every day. The… if you're an optical astronomer studying the solar corona you'd have to wait for a total eclipse and then you've got two minutes at best to do your observations, and it's all rather difficult.
With radio astronomy we could… we could investigate the solar atmosphere continuously, as it were, as radio sources tracked across the sky and went behind the Sun and, over the years – and we're now talking about the late, something like 1955, '54 to '56 – I was tracking the Sun, tracking the solar atmosphere further and further from the Sun by using the interferometers that I'd built, a larger and larger baseline, and I was detecting the solar atmosphere out to about one half the distance from the Sun to the Earth.
And this meant building my own… my own simple antennas because the radio sources I was using for this work were reasonably intense, things like the Crab Nebula, and if you set up interferometers you can just measure how these sources get broadened by the scattering as the radiation comes through the solar plasma. And that was before the discovery of the… of the solar wind, and… and the solar wind measurements which… which I have just sketched very… very briefly. So that… that took me from… I… I think, my… my PhD on to… on to about the late… the late 1950s.

In the early days of our work at the Lord's Bridge Observatory I was… I was still chasing the solar atmosphere, but then we discovered in 1964, eventually, that you could discover twinkling from the… from the… from what was then the solar wind; the Sun's atmosphere actually blows off… off the Sun and we discovered that you could detect on radio galaxies and quite a lot of sources a rapid twinkling effect, which was radio scattering in the… in the solar wind, which is the far out solar atmosphere.
By then we were entering the space age in the 1960s, people had just begun to measure the solar wind in the spacecraft. And with others I… I had discovered that this twinkling, which I knew all about from my ionospheric work, my PhD work, that you could detect the same twinkling if you looked at certain radio galaxies. These were the quasars; the quasars contained tiny bright components, often in the nucleus, and it's those bright components which actually cause the twinkling. Larger sources don't… don't twinkle because the twinkling is… is smeared out and it's the same old story that planets don't twinkle and stars do.
If you look in the sky the planets are too large and angular size and, in the early days of radio astronomy, when we didn't have any kind of imaging techniques, it was a very different area then. We just… we knew that the sources were up there but didn't know how large an angle they subtended. I decided I could use this scintillation effect to measure angular sizes and that led me on to the antenna, which finally led to the discovery of… pulsars. Because I… I thought that this scintillation would be an excellent way of sorting out in the sky which were the quasar sources and which were the standard radio galaxies. We had no other means of doing it in those days. I mean, long baseline and interferometry was only just beginning, there were absolutely no imaging instruments around. And… so while Ryle was, in the early days at Lord's Bridge, was mapping the sky and counting radio galaxies and doing his early cosmological work with students, I… I decided that I'd set up a big antenna to look at this scintillation over the whole sky and then use that to detect which of the radio galaxies… in the 1960s we knew about 1000 radio galaxies; with my antenna I decided that we would be able to look at those and see which of them were the quasars and which were not, and that I thought was a very interesting and useful thing to do. But it needed a special antenna to do that and, because of my background with doing practical things with Martin Ryle, I saw really what I had to do. I… I just built a huge simple antenna on the ground.
It had to operate at a longish wavelength because that's where the solar plasma, the solar wind, shows up best in this scintillation. It had to work at meter wavelengths and that meant dipole antennas and I covered four acres of the – actually four-and-a-half acres - at our site at Lord's Bridge with dipole antennas, about 2000 of them, 2048 to be precise. And this was a very sensitive antenna but it was quite a clever antenna because I wanted to scan the sky and I arranged it as a phased array, so that the antenna reception beam could be pointed at different parts of the sky, and we could look at 16 parts of the sky simultaneously. And it was when I'd got that antenna designed and just beginning to build it that my student, Jocelyn, arrived to help as one of my graduate students in analysing the data – and we're going back now to, what are we? I'm talking about 1965, it was 1965 I designed this huge antenna and built it at Lord's Bridge with help and we started the survey in 1967. And quite by chance it was just an ideal instrument for detecting pulsars, which was the great discovery which really made my name in the… in the field, and that's… that's how that happened.
Now, that kind of luck doesn't happen to many people but if you're in a new field doing something different… I've never actually wanted to follow the… doing exactly what other people are doing. I… I like to have my own project if I can and get something with my students that's not just doing standard research, as it were, but doing something quite new. And that's… that's what happened with the scintillation and it wasn't long before we began to hit upon these rather strange signals we now call pulsars.

By that time, we had moved out to the Mullard [Radio Astronomy] Observatory and, as I said, I… I spent a lot of time designing feeder arrays for Martin Ryle's telescopes but, at the same time, I was operating these… these interferometers. And then when we discovered that we could detect scintillation when we looked at quasars – and that was a total surprise, actually – it came from the very first surveys that Martin Ryle was carrying out. He, I mean… quasars, then it just wasn't known that you could have radio galaxies that had these intense, tiny bright components. We thought that all radio galaxies were like Cas A [Cassiopeia A] and… and the Crab [Crab Nebula], rather… rather large astronomical objects in the sense that they subtended a large angle in the sky, I mean, minutes of arc. And in order to get scintillation you need… you need sources which are a fraction of an arc second, hundreds of times, a hundred times smaller at least. And I thought about this, but… but in the… there's… there's in my notebook I've got… I've got a comment that you wouldn't, you couldn't get scintillation on radio sources other than the ionospheric because they were much too large. I mean, all… all radio sources then known were a minute of arc across or several minutes of arc across and they just wouldn't do it. But during one of Martin Ryle's surveys fluctuations began to be seen on one or two sources; this was the work done by Phil Williams, who got into Welsh politics later. He and his… his research student got onto this but they didn't know what it was. And we used to have great discussions, group discussions, when Martin Ryle and his research team would just, as it were, settled down on a Saturday morning and just discuss the work in general and… and other people's publications and so on, group discussions, and Martin Ryle looked at me and said, 'Well, why couldn't it be scintillation?', you see. And at that time they just detected 3C48 as having an angular size of whatever it is, an arc second or two, and I worked out that, yes, you could, you would get scintillation in the Sun's atmosphere with something that… that small. And that was… was a revelation; I mean, that… that came in in the early 1960s. In fact, we could have discovered quasars in the… 10 years earlier if… if we'd bothered to do the experiment because we had the apparatus to do it. The telescopes were sensitive enough. But I'd ruled it out because obviously radio galaxies couldn't twinkle, but they did because there was something there which we didn't know about.
And so it was, when we first saw… saw the twinkling, I said, hey, I'll measure the speed of the solar wind, just like I did with the ionosphere. And that would be good because the first spacecraft, it was called Lunik – it was one of the Russian… early Russian spacecraft – detected the solar wind which had been predicted theoretically a few years before by… by an American whose name I forget at the moment. You can remind me, perhaps. The solar wind had been predicted but not measured and the Russians found it, and I decided that with radio astronomy we could measure the solar wind on the ground, just as I'd measured ionospheric winds.
And in 1964 we made this discovery of… that… that certain radio galaxies, the quasars, twinkle and I decided to use those to measure the speed of the solar wind by tracking the cloud pattern, defraction pattern, as it moved… as it moved over the ground. But it's moving very fast. It's moving… the solar wind goes typically at 300–600km per second; that's… that's over a million miles per hour, so if you're going to measure a time-lag you need a very big baseline to do it. I mean, it crosses England in a fraction of a second. So I had to build interferometers which were at least 50 miles apart, preferably more, but I started off by putting in antennas using a Cambridge antenna and building one on the… on the way to Newmarket, the other side of Newmarket on the way… on the way to Thetford. And I put one on the East Coast at Clacton, so I had a triangle of very simple radio telescopes, and I could just measure time delays as the solar wind swept across. And so I was able to measure solar wind on the ground and that – we're now talking about the mid 1960s, 1964, '65, that sort of thing – and we did something which was interesting and that the spacecraft couldn't do. Because when you look at quasars, you can see quasars all round the Sun and so you can measure above and below the solar poles, as well in the solar equator. Now, if you're… measuring the solar wind in spacecraft, which was then becoming quite a popular thing to do, you can only launch spacecraft into the plane of the ecliptic – that's the plane in which the planets move – because to get a spacecraft away from the Earth's atmosphere out into far space, you have to use the Earth's orbit velocity as a… as a launch tool. In other words, if you're going to launch… use the spacecraft to measure the solar wind and get clear of the Earth, you can only launch it, an artificial satellite space probe using the Earth's orbital speed, which keeps you into the… into the plane of the ecliptic.
But I was looking at radio galaxies and was able… was able to measure the solar wind anyway, and what we found was that the solar wind coming from the poles was actually about twice the speed as the solar wind coming from the… from the equator. I didn't follow this up too much, but we published it and it took until the 1990s for spacecraft, American spacecraft, to actually confirm that measurement, that the solar wind really was about twice as fast coming from the poles of the Sun. And I thought that was a nice thing to have done, to have been the first to do that, I mean, 30 years earlier, using simple radio astronomy on the ground with antennas that you could build for £10,000 or so, whereas the spacecraft, to… to do that with spacecraft you need to launch a spacecraft out to the planet Jupiter and then use Jupiter's gravitational field to direct the spacecraft out of the plane of the ecliptic and over the pole of the Sun. And that didn't… that didn't happen until the 1990s, the things like the Helios. I think Ulysses spacecraft was the first one to do that. And the Russians, lo and behold, found the same thing that we did and were able to study it, of course, much more closely and seriously than we were able to do. But we at least discovered that and got that published and that's… that's the kind of research which interests me because, you know, you've done something with your own hands and made a brand new result and you've done that with your own graduate students and you hadn't… it didn't cost the earth. I mean, you built quite simple telescopes to do it. And it was that sort of background then that led on to the construction of the very large array which I then built to study, to detect quasars and to map them over… over the sky. And the good fortune there was that it was exactly the right instrument to pick up the fluctuations that… that the pulsars radiate. And that's quite a long story but I suppose it's the thing that still keeps me awake at night, actually.

I mean, it really was a dramatic thing. And it's the sort of research which not… many people are lucky enough to do because, you… you have to be doing these outlandish things like I was doing, doing a rather strange experiment to pick up these unusual signals. But the antenna, it turns out that interplanetary scintillation is just the same timescale. It fluctuates on a timescale of a 10th of a second, which is exactly what you need to pick up the solar wind; the… the solar wind fluctuations are about the same timescale as pulsar periodicities and during that survey, which I set up to map the whole sky, we suddenly discovered pulsars coming in.
And it was my graduate student [Jocelyn Bell Burnell] who has achieved a lot of fame for this who first saw there was something funny going on. We were carrying out a complete sky survey and that was going to take 12 months; we were scanning the sky in strips and using twinkling to measure the angular sizes of things and locate the quasars. And that was going very nicely. But she… it was in August 1967, we'd built… I'd planned the antenna, designed it and got it moving in 1965; it was operating first of all in 1967 and it was only a couple of months after we'd begun the sky survey, and Jocelyn, who'd come in at the beginning of the antenna construction, she pointed out… our records were just pen recordings, it wasn't digital and done in computers, she was analysing it all by hand. We had lots and lots of paper charts and she was rolling these charts on and looking at them on her desk and there was one faint… what we thought was a faint quasar, but it was showing much too strong scintillation in the middle of the night, which… which made it stand out on the… on the records. You see, the solar wind has a density which varies inversely as the distance from the Sun; it goes as… as one over the distance square, as you… as you get out into space, obviously, because of the conservation of energy – conservation of mass rather – and in the middle of the night you only expect sort of 10%, 5% scintillation. And here was a weak source showing 100% scintillation and, not only that, it wasn't always there in the sky for reasons which I won't elaborate on. But… but to measure angular sizes you need… you need many, many measurements as the sources approach the Sun and as… as they go away on the other side at… at different times of the year in order to use the solar wind, as it were, as an… as an angular size measuring instrument. It's an interferometer of varying baselines essentially so… so you have to have many, many observations of a source to measure its angular size properly. And so we had repeated observations; we were making a full sky survey about once per week and some weeks this source wasn't there at all in the sky. Other times there it was, showing… showing this faint twinkling. And so, what… what on earth was it? That… that was the first question. I mean, we looked at it and said, is it real or isn't it? Well, it could easily have been radio interference because interference, as you know, in long wave length radio astronomy, low frequency, you get lots of terrestrial interference of one sort or another and we had plenty of that. But this was repeating at almost but actually not quite the same sidereal time, star time, and that made it look as though it probably was a genuine source in the sky, but it wasn't always there. And why was it showing 100% scintillation in… in the middle of the night?
My first thought was we'd picked up a source like the radio Sun but much further off. I mean, if the Sun can produce radio waves which fluctuate, then other stars can too, obviously and put a star like the Sun much, much further away, then it's going to produce a signal which is sometimes there and sometimes isn't there. And these stars that do this… stars that do this are known as flare stars, and I contacted optical astronomer friends and said, do you know of a flare star with these coordinates? And this was David Dewhurst who was our contact then at the observatories here. I asked him whether there were… there were any sources in that direction and he said, no, he didn't know of any. And then I thought, well, could it be some astronomer doing an experiment causing radio interference, which would, if they were tracking a certain source in the sky, they would be doing things at the same sidereal time, perhaps, and causing radio interference. So I got on to the Royal Greenwich Observatory here, Donald Lynden-Bell, whom I sure you know, was working down there, he was a friend of mine, and I actually… wrote him a letter, he's still got that letter, and I said: 'What do you know about astronomers who might be doing experiments which could cause radio interference at such… and such a time?' He didn't know anything about that and he said, no, nothing there. And then I thought, well, maybe it's signals being reflected from the ionosphere back down into our telescope which would give you a source at some declination, fixed declination, and not at… not at others. I mean, it wasn't normal interference, obviously. And my mind was just going round and round and Jocelyn didn't have any ideas either.
And this was actually the time when I decided that we really had to have a rather closer look at the signal to see what it was. I mean, did it look like radiation from a star like the Sun? Did it have the same time structure? When you're doing a survey you have to economise on… on chart paper and so on, we were only using the slow chart speed. I decided that we must run a chart much faster to see actually what this strange nocturnal scintillation really looks like, what's the intensity of the function of time? Does it look like scintillation or does it look like something else? And Jocelyn fixed up another recorder we had for another experiment, I got her to transfer that to the… to the equipment and she started measuring this source daily and the wretched thing disappeared. I'd said it wasn't always there on… on the recordings. And we're now talking about the autumn of 1967, that's… that's when all this was going on. So Jocelyn, who was a very diligent student, kept on repeating these measurements, but finally got fed up because nothing was there when she looked on this fast chart speed, nothing at all. And so she gave up in disgust and I was of course in mid-term, having a busy teaching term anyway, so I didn't bother too much about it then and began to think, well, it's all gone away, you know, it was interference after all.
But then, in November, it suddenly reappeared quite strongly and Jocelyn got back onto it and ran a fast record and bonk, bonk, bonk… and there were… there were these pulses coming through. Well, an artificial signal like that, what… what on earth could it be? So I mean, my instant reaction was, well, it has to be some terrestrial interfering signal because no natural source is going to produce clock-like… clock-like pulses. And would you believe it, at that moment I had to spend all my time as an examiner marking. In those days we had a scholarship examination which had to be marked at great speed round… round about Christmas time and, instead of being able to get to the lab and do… do follow-up work on this, I was in Churchill College, which you know well, and marking scholarship papers. And I was doing that for a whole week.
During that time… we obviously didn't say anything about these signals because I knew that if it was leaked that we were picking up strange signals with the… with the new radio telescope the place would fill up with the press and the media and so on and serious work would be impossible. This had happened once before because when Sputnik first went up we were the first people outside of Russia to know the orbit of that satellite because we used simple interferometers when the Lunik went up to locate its… its orbit. And the press descended on… on us at the… at the radio observatory, which was then, we hadn't moved out to… well, we had moved to Lord's Bridge but we were still operating close to Cambridge and we set up the interferometer there. And this was Bruce Elsmore and colleagues, who actually did this. The press invaded and you just can't do serious research work with the press around falling over things.

We decided to keep our tongues quiet until… until we knew what was going on. But there I was in Churchill College marking away, and at night wondering what the heck was going on. And I mentioned this quietly one day to a very distinguished man called Sir Edward Bullard, he was a fellow of Churchill College, and the advantage of Cambridge is that you have lunch with important people sitting next to you every now and again, and I mentioned it quietly to him, and said, 'Look, I'm getting this very odd signal at Lord's Bridge, what do you think it is?' He was a man of very wide experience and he said, 'Well, if it's narrow band have you thought about intelligent signals from outer space? Perhaps you're the first person to pick up aliens'. And, well, the thought had crossed my mind, but I dismissed it as being totally ludicrous. But there I was, sitting marking examination papers and couldn't do anything.
Well, a week later, I was able to get back to the lab and the first thing I did was to set up accurate timing. I got time, seconds, time pips on the… on the record and compared those with the… the pulses we were getting and found out that this thing was keeping time to better than a millionth of a second per day. I mean, it was absolutely repeatable; that was the first thing that happened and that was a shock. I mean, it was better than our clocks and, whatever it was, it was very odd. I mean, that… that was the first result.
The second was following up, actually, what Teddy Bullard had said, if it's narrow band… we were measuring the bandwidth, we were doing that anyway, but it turned out that this was a narrow band signal and that strengthened the… the possibility that we were picking up alien signals and, furthermore, the signal was… was dispersed, that's to say we measured the bandwidth of it and… from the shape of the bandwidth you know that the signal has traversed a certain distance of space because pulses travelling through space travel at slightly different speeds and this produces a characteristic… if you pick up over a finite bandwidth, you pick up what we call a dispersed signal, the pulse arrives slightly earlier at… at slightly shorter wavelengths and you can detect this in your… in your equipment. And we measured that and, from what we then knew about the density of electrons in the… in the interstellar space - I did a quick calculation which showed that this thing was… was about 40–50 parsecs away, which is about… what… that's about 100–150 light years or something like that. So here was a signal sending… coming from 150 light years, which is amongst the nearby stars, producing regular pulses. Well, it makes you think, doesn't it? It just looks so… so artificial. And I discussed this with Martin Ryle and we said, well, is it or is it not intelligence? Naturally, we kept our mouths tightly shut because any hint that we'd picked up intelligence from outer space and the lab would have been absolutely full of reporters and media.
So we kept our mouths tightly quiet and decided what we would do, and we decided that we ought to handle this through the Royal Society, which was the top scientific brass at the time and, if they first of all believed what we'd done, and then they… we'd require their advice to sort of handle this, because it isn't astronomy anymore, it's… it's almost politics, isn't it, if you pick up alien signals? But I decided also that the signals were accurate enough that I could detect motion of the source that was sending them using the Doppler effect. If you're picking up life on another planet, that planet is in orbit about some star, and if it's sending regular signals to you, they'll… they'll be Doppler shifted according to the orbit. And I… I would have been able to measure the orbital speed. And so when I got back to the lab and started continuing these timing measurements I decided to look for orbital effects, and that took me 3 weeks. And it's not easy to do because the Earth itself is moving through space and you have a huge effect to subtract first, which is the orbital motion of the Earth. But after 3 weeks I'd subtracted that off and decided there wasn't any orbital effect left. I mean, to begin with, it was a little bit worrying because there was a huge Doppler shift immediately detectable from the day-to-day measurements, but that was all due to the motion of the Earth. And when that was subtracted away there was nothing… nothing left; and that took me about 3 weeks to do.
While I was doing all that, Jocelyn was hunting through the records to see if there were any other sources that looked remotely similar to this because, if there's… there's one, there may be more. And she came up, actually, with another one quite quickly. And that, of course, doesn't remove the fact that it couldn't be intelligence because the moment you picked up intelligence, maybe there are others, too.
But anyway, the… by about January I had concluded in my own mind that it wasn't intelligence because there was no orbital effect detectable at all and Jocelyn had picked up another one which made it seem less likely, perhaps, and we decided to publish the result. But we had to have some theory to go with this and the only possibility… we knew it was a tiny object because only a tiny object can emit sharp pulses. I mean, if you turn the Sun on and off rapidly with a switch at intervals of a second, it wouldn't radiate sharp flashes because the radiation would come from different parts of the Sun at different times and you'd… you'd pick up a much time-broadened flash here. We knew that what was sending the signals couldn't be larger than a small planet like the Earth. And I went to the books and talked to people and saw that, well, there were these things called neutron stars which were only a few kilometres across, 10 or 20 kilometres, 10 miles or so in diameter, and if you flash those they could produce sharp signals. But there were also… there was just a faint possibility that a planet… that a star the size of the Earth could do it also. We all know that there are things called variable stars because the stars pulsate and there's a lot of theory to do with that. These pulsations are much too slow, but the smallest white dwarf star could possibly be a variable star that was almost fast enough. And when we finally published, I mean most of the… when I wrote that paper it was mostly describing exactly what we'd done and so on, rather than theory, but I… I ended up with some possibilities. And we suggested it might be radial pulsations of neutron stars or white dwarf stars. And it turned out in the end that the neutron star was the right answer, but not pulsation as I… as I had thought, but rotation. But we got pretty… pretty close to the… to the right answer and that was a very, very satisfying thing to have done.
Because we'd kept our mouths tightly shut over these months, I mean, I'm really talking about the… the first pulse came in on November 28th, I remember that day very well. I was lecturing at the time and Jocelyn phoned me to say what… what had happened. And it was in February that… that we actually published the paper and we kept our mouths shut. I thought that the local… our friends, as it were, around the group and in Cambridge should know about this before the rest of the world knew about it, but that seems a bit unfair since it's local work, and I gave a seminar in the… in the Cavendish describing all this. And that was early February and it was published… or was it late January? I've got the date somewhere in my diary, but 2 weeks later it was published in Nature. And then the balloon went up and everybody began to confirm it and it was very exciting. But, you know, that bit of work really was the… what I suppose you'd call the landmark in my career, which brought me more fame than I'd had from measuring the solar wind and all these other things. I mean, it was a discovery that opened up a new chapter of astrophysics and I feel immensely proud that we were able to actually do that here in Cambridge with quite modest funding. So that… that was a lovely period of my life.

Well, as I said, we were pretty lucky ourselves to make that discovery but we were just set up to do it and science is full of discoveries like that, actually. And we carried on: one or two students that I had, graduate students, transferred to do what we could with the antenna and the instruments we've got with pulsars, and we did some good work and… and had some publications for the next 2 or 3 years. But because the large antenna that I had had a huge collecting area and was extremely sensitive, but you couldn't steer it, you couldn't track pulsars across the sky. And if you're going to do the follow-up work, you need something like the Lovell telescope at Jodrell Bank; you must be able to track these things. And so we realised that we'll do what we can and other students hunted the records and we came up in the end with about half a dozen pulsars, six or eight, that we've discovered here in… in Cambridge.
One of the things that we missed, which I was always disappointed about, was the… was the discovery of the first millisecond pulsars, the… the classical pulsars that we were used to, I mean, which led to the discovery, were pulsars which… neutron stars – which are rotating about once a second or several times a second, but not… not faster. But there was one source in… in the plane of the galaxy which we knew was a very strong scintillator and in the plane of the galaxy you wouldn't… wouldn't expect that because things… things would be broadened by intergalactic, by… by interstellar broadening and so on. And there was this 4C source, as… as we called it then, I can't remember what number it was now, but we thought could it be another pulsar because it showed rapid fluctuations when mostly things in the galactic plane don't. And we got… looked for pulsar periods down to… this was Peter Duffett-Smith, actually, doing… my colleague, who was doing this work himself. We chased it down to a periodicity of 10 pulses a second, no, 100 pulses a second, 10 milliseconds, and couldn't… and couldn't see any pulses there, and then handed the data over to Jodrell Bank and said, 'Look, can you do better, this thing looks as though it could be a pulsar but, with our equipment, we can't… we can't track it down to periodicities faster than 100 pulses a second'. And they tracked it down to 2 milliseconds, 500 pulses a second, and said, 'Sorry, we can't see any pulses there, I don't think… this… this must be something else'.
And then eventually, after a number of years, the Americans discovered the first millisecond pulsars, that's to say a neutron star spinning 1000 revolutions, roughly 1000 revolutions per second, actually 600. And that was the first of a new class of pulsar that the… neutrons are spinning as rapidly as that. I mean, it's a fantastic thought that you can make a star as heavy as the Sun spin at 600 revolutions per second, it's just doesn't… it's unbelievable. But that was an American discovery and I was sad that the UK didn't do that, but that was the best the UK could do. And that was a pity. But we did what we could with the antenna and did… did sky surveys and… and found… found the first few, and did some follow-up work, things like features about the pulse shape, drifting sub-pulses and things like that. But ultimately the antenna concentrated on the job it was designed for, which was sky surveys to see which of the thousand radio galaxies had fine structure in them, and that work went on right up until the… the 1990s. My colleague, Peter Duffett-Smith, doubled the size of the antenna; it became the 3.6 hectare array, that's to say about 9 acres, because we'd decided that it was a really good way of doing sky surveys. And… so it was observing, doing what it was designed for, for many years after the discovery of pulsars, which was really just a flash in the pan. And another thing it did… but it was working right up until the 1990s. One of my… one of my interests was still the solar wind.

We had discovered that the interplanetary scintillation, as this twinkling is called – is caused by the solar wind – was stronger or weaker in different parts of the sky according to the time you made the observations. And that was because the solar wind contains disturbances in it and, in some directions, you get much denser solar wind than in other directions and this was, actually, related to solar disturbances. And I realised that you could use this twinkling, this scintillation effect, to map disturbances moving away from the Sun into interplanetary space, and we could map what they now call space weather.
Now, this was important, not just scientifically, but also practically because a great deal of damage is done to terrestrial orbiting satellites, things like communication satellites; when the Sun has major disturbances it produces blasts of much faster solar wind, which interact with the Earth's environment, the magnetosphere as we call it, and brings, accelerates energetic particles. And these can damage spacecraft orbiting the Earth; the energetic particles that are accelerated by these solar disturbances can penetrate equipment up there in… in things like communication satellites and actually knock them out of action. The electrons get… high speed electrons can get trapped inside the electronics, they're energetic enough to penetrate. And not only that, you get damaging X-radiation as well, high-frequency radiation and gamma radiation and UV, of course, and these things can damage human beings. They… they are radiation that can penetrate the human body, of course, and if you're doing something in Skylab and you happen to be drifting around in open space on the end of a umbilical cable, as they do, if you got caught in a disturbance like this, which could last several hours, you could get… you could suffer serious physical damage. And there's… there's a big research lab in Boulder, Colorado, in the States, which is set up simply to monitor space weather and to give… to give warning. I mean, they observe the Sun as closely as they can and they also have spacecraft orbiting and the idea is to try to detect disturbances, detect when disturbances are going to leave the Sun and… and rush across space. So that, for example, astronauts could be warned to hop inside again to get the screening effect of the metal of the spacecraft, space station, or whatever. Or if you're in a… in a satellite you could… you could control them, you might turn them into a safe… safe direction, just like on the ground you can, if you have a high speed wind, you can rotate structures so as they don't get damaged.
And this is a big deal… a big deal in the… in the States, they spent a lot of money on these things because it is important for practical purposes to know what space weather is doing. And I decided that if we made… if we could make maps of the scintillation over the whole sky fast enough, for example in 24 hours you could map the whole sky, then you could see from the scintillation in which direction solar disturbances were travelling and… and catch them before they reach the Earth. And… and you could have a space weather prediction service, just like terrestrial weather prediction, and this would be of great practical importance. And we were funded by the Americans to do some preliminary research on this and I'm now talking about which work going on in the 1990s. And… and we did some quite interesting work on… on mapping space weather patterns as they… as they came out of the Sun. But, with our equipment, we can only make one sky map per 24 hours because the antenna is fixed and that's not really quite rapid enough to make a good weather prediction service. To do that, you'd need a number of antennas around the Earth. Perhaps if you had four installations like we have at Cambridge at different longitudes, then you could compare the maps at all those, these sky maps, and… and catch these disturbances moving away from the Sun and map them rather better. But the Indians… you've been to India, you know all about their research, but I don't think you know much about what was going on at Ahmadabad where they copied my array but didn't do it terribly well, I have to say. And the idea was that they would also make maps of interplanetary weather and compare them with ours, and… but they never really got their show on the road.
And that whole programme ultimately fizzled out, but it… it produced a lot of PhD students… I mean, Graham Woan, for example, was the last person. He's studying gravitational waves now, and… or at least he will be, I hope, in the future. But that kept the antenna busy until the mid 1990s and I was really rather pleased about that, because here was this antenna which I decided was – when I designed it, it was designed to last for 5 or 10 years – was operating for about 30 years actually, finally, with Peter Duffett-Smith's modifications and with better electronics with it so that you could make maps, weather maps rather, on a daily basis.
And that kept me interested scientifically. We discovered many useful things and… and had many PhDs and publications about… about space weather and that was really my final original research. We did some… I'd… I had some research on theoretical work, on… on pulsars, but nothing, as it were, very… very world-shaking. We discovered that pulsars are affected by the interstellar medium on short timescales and so you can map moving clouds in interstellar space and that's quite an interesting thing to do. We did… we did that sort of work and I… I put some theoretical work into that using other people's data. I collaborated with the Germans at Effelsberg and… and wrote some papers with… with them, and that kept me busy in research. But, as… as you know, if you're a research scientist in Cambridge, you can't spend all your time doing research, you have to actually teach undergraduates. And teaching is always something I've enjoyed a great deal.

I spent a lot of time doing undergraduate lecture courses of different sorts. You should never give an undergraduate course more than about 3 years running because you get stale, so I was teaching until… until I retired. And that all kept me very busy. And the award of the Nobel Prize means you gain some notoriety and that gives you opportunities to travel round the world and you get invited to lectures and meetings and this and that. And when they’re useful things to do, I tend to do… to do those. I went out to China, for example, a help… a little bit with radio astronomy. I… I’ve been to Korea and you get much more committee work, of course, to do once you’re established with your university chair and you have a reputation. And so that’s really… we stopped pulsars and the antenna continued doing what it was designed for and that led on to space weather. And that… that lasted really throughout my career. And that, with teaching, was… kept me very busy. I suppose you could say the only cloud in the sky over the Nobel award was the nasty remarks that Fred Hoyle made about it all. Fred Hoyle was a famous theoretician, was never a friend of Cambridge because Martin Ryle’s observations undermined and destroyed his steady state theory, which was a lovely theory but it just turned out to be incorrect. And there was great enmity, as… as you know – this has become public knowledge now – between Martin Ryle and… and Fred Hoyle. And when we, Martin Ryle and I, were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize, I was awarded it for the discovery of pulsars and Martin Ryle for the aperture synthesis which led to all his surveying of the skies here in Cambridge, he was really rather nasty about that, and the particular thing that he concentrated on was saying, well, we really kept the work to ourselves and that Jocelyn Bell didn’t get the credit she should have done and so on. That’s all absolute nonsense. She’s on record as saying that as a research student doing what she was asked to do, she really didn’t feel she should have been awarded the prize. And, I mean, she was a jolly good student, but Fred Hoyle somehow got into the press and said nasty things, like we didn’t… we didn’t give her proper credit for what she’d done, which was total nonsense. I mean, she was always… she was second author on the discovery paper, which… and she wasn’t involved with a great deal of the… of the post-discovery work. She was a good, excellent graduate student, she did all I asked her to do and she was extremely thorough and businesslike over it, but when it comes to initiating things she wasn’t involved. And the follow-up work after discovery, she wasn’t involved. I mean, she didn’t know what these things were, it was other people who got on to the neutron star ideas and measuring the distance and so forth. There were many things she could have done off her own bat if she’d wanted to, but she didn’t, and there was no question, I think, really that the Nobel Committee made the right decision there, much as it would have eased my life later if she had been awarded the prize. But… and feminists, of course, jump on the bandwagon here and I’ve had dealings with them as well. But that was the only cloud in the sky. Other than that, I think I’ve been immensely lucky to have been in Cambridge when all these things were happening, to have been led on by Martin Ryle in the sense of encouragement and the experience of working with him, and the group here which has been always immensely supportive. And I can’t really think of a better way of spending your life than to do research and teach at the same time, it’s an absolutely wonderful life and I wouldn’t have had anything… anything else. It was a pity about Fred, but there we are. He was… he was an interesting man but he was a quirky man as well, and life does these things to you, I’m… I’m afraid.

We were, of course, linked totally to the development of computers. When Martin Ryle started to develop his aperture synthesis techniques, when that really began, which was… goes back to about 1952, the only computer that we had here in Cambridge was something called EDSAC and that had a memory of 2k which really, by modern standards, is quite… quite ridiculous. And when we began, computing languages just simply were not there, there wasn’t a computing language. And there were just 20 commands which you could use when you were controlling EDSAC and mostly they were stupid things like add and subtract and multiply, and not much else. And in the group itself there were a lot of technical and engineering people, but nobody who could actually do the computing because the experience wasn’t there. And I was one of the first people to be asked to get involved in this. You wouldn’t think so now, but I was one of the computing experts, if you go right back to about 1953 or ’54. The synthesis, as you know, demands Fourier analysis or Fourier synthesis. You have… you have… you take your measurements with antennas in different positions and put it all together in the computer. You add up the data that you’ve taken sequentially to produce what you would get if you had all those instruments simultaneously present. And this was Martin’s aperture synthesis work for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize, the fact that you could synthesise, using computing, the effect of a huge instrument that you couldn’t possibly build because it would involve much too much hardware and be far too expensive. And, in any case, you can’t build a radio reflector a mile across because it would darken the Cambridge skies and you wouldn’t be allowed to do it, and anyway it would cost billions. But building small pieces that you can move around and add up electronically the data that you get from them was his major contribution. And I was saying in the early days this required the group itself to be able to process the data and the earliest data was obtained with punch paper tape, tickertape, as… as I think it was better known in those… those days, simply five-holed paper tape, and present that to the computer which would then… which would then add it all up. The equipment would sample what was coming in from… from the radio telescope at intervals of whatever it was, 5 seconds or… or 1 second, depending… depending on the survey, and… and you would produce this paper tape. And that then had to be taken to the maths lab and you then queued up with other people who were doing their own research, and presented this tape to the computer. And it sucked it in through an optical reader, and I spent quite a lot of time doing that and writing some of the simplest aperture synthesis programs. In fact, alongside Martin Ryle’s synthesis was a radio telescope built by Graham Smith for a low frequency survey, the first 38 megahertz T survey, and that’s to say it’s a one-dimensional synthesis, you build a very long antenna east-west and have a mobile unit that you can move in a north-south direction. And it was moved to 32 different positions and when you’ve done all that work you have to do what you call a Fourier synthesis addition of all this data to produce what the complete instruments would give you simultaneously. And I wrote the first computer program for that, a 32 element Fourier transform and this was a little tape I was very proud of, this… this control tape, which you fed into the computer. And that just simply added up the data in the… in the right way. But, as you know, I’m not a born computing person and I’m not a mathematician, I’m a physicist. I didn’t want to do that for too long and computing eventually became a job for experts and we began to take on our own computing staff and… and do it that way. But what Martin Ryle was building was… he was able to build larger radio telescopes as computers were able to handle more complicated and more quantities of data. And the two fields actually went… went more or less hand in hand.

The first major telescope that he [Martin Ryle] built at Lord’s Bridge didn’t do a full two-dimensional Fourier synthesis. I mean, the way to synthesise a radio telescope covering an area, the simplest way, is to have two dishes and move them appropriately. Well, in the early days there would have been too many positions of the antennas for the computer to handle, and what Martin Ryle did, when we moved to our observatory, the first antenna he built was a huge linear parabolic reflector, about, what was it, about 400 metres long and that was a real antenna, for which I designed the feed, the focus. And that was moved… that was used in conjunction with a movable element, which was about half a mile away, moved in a north-south direction and combining the data gave… gave you the effect of a huge interferometer of two… two large dishes which were much… much larger than you could possibly build, two 400-metre dishes, which… which in those days would have been fearfully… fearfully costly and impossible to build. And I had a lot to do and some quite interesting times helping Martin Ryle with these early… early telescopes and… and one thing I had to remember always is the problem of – just a pure engineering problem – the long parabolic reflector had enormous lengths of… of wire. It… it was a trough reflector which focused the radiation to… to a linear focus all… all the way down… and… all the way down the line, and… and I was responsible for the… for what you did at the feed to collect… to collect the radiation. But also the problem of… of this reflector, because you could use wires as… as a reflector to save weight and because we were only dealing with one polarisation, electric wires… lengths of wire close together would do. And there were hundreds, literally hundreds of miles of wire in that… in that first antenna of Martin Ryle’s. And we used to get winters in those days with snow on the ground and freezing fog, and the big problem that Martin Ryle was worried about, rightly, was conditions when you have freezing fog, which build up the wires. This is… this is a familiar problem if you’re used to sailing around the Horn and things like that, rigging getting heavier because ice forms on it. But if you have… Martin Ryle’s structures were engineered so that they were only just strong enough to do the job in hand, they weren’t designed to carry the load when all the wires were covered with ice. And instead of being thin, taut wires, they were… they were wires as thick as your finger made of ice. This would have been a load which actually would collapse the telescope and Martin gave me that job to solve. He said: ‘Do something about this because ice can form on that reflecting screen in a matter of hours and we can’t afford for the thing to fall down’.
Well, I spent quite a while in cold chambers here in Cambridge at another lab, seeing how much current you need to pass through the electric wires to warm them up enough to melt the ice as it formed. It turned out you’d need power generators that we couldn’t possibly install at Lord’s Bridge, to send those currents through the whole array. And, in the end, I decided that the only way of solving the problem practically would be to release the reflecting screen from the end towers so that the load was just shed, as… as it were, and the reflecting screen would just simply droop, held up by… by the structures. But it wasn’t just the weight… it wasn’t the weight of the ice that mattered, it was the tension on the end which would pull the structure together and destroy it. So I made a quick release device which you could, essentially from the ground, you could pull a ripcord and the telescope reflector wires were simply released from the end structures so they simply fell to the ground and just sagged over and… and preserved the… preserved the end towers which would have been destroyed. And that was a quick and practical way, it didn’t cost any money. The only thing it cost was man-hours and having people to be around, a crew as it were, to watch the telescope under these conditions and decide when to pull the ripcord. And, because I’d designed that equipment, it was my job to pull the ripcord. And, of course, freezing fog usually happens at night when it’s cold and I spent in the early 1960s – I think it was 1962 when we were having a very severe winter – getting myself prepared to pull the ripcord and actually spending nights at the radio telescope, essentially watching it if the weather was bad.
And this happened one night; it was early New Year 1962 when these things happened, and I had to climb the telescope at night to check what was going on. We had no lights at Lord’s Bridge, no floodlights or anything of that sort, you had to climb up the telescope with a torch and just see what it was doing. And I knew exactly how to climb up the mast and look along, because I’d been up there so many times with… under the construction period, and just watch the load building up. And it was January 1962, I was up there in a freezing fog, about 1am, and the wires were building up an ice load, the whole structure was beginning to sag. And I could see the end towers beginning to pull together because there was sag developing in everything. And I decided that after you had about a metre of sag then that was too dangerous a load to leave, things were about to break. So I simply pulled the ripcord and it all worked absolutely marvellously and the load was released. I went home to bed, not really looking forward to what would happen the following morning. Well, the following morning it didn’t look very… it didn’t look like a radio telescope, it looked like a clothes line that had fallen down and there were frozen wires littering the telescope. But the telescope was still standing and the main structure was there and we spent the rest of that day, and a couple of days after that, hacking down the wires and beginning to rethread the reflecting screen. But that was the sort of practical thing, working with Martin Ryle, that you had to do and perhaps it was as well for me that I went on sabbatical leave to America just shortly after that, so I didn’t have to do all the repair work. And I went to Yale and spent a happy year there.

Radio astronomy in those days was a very, very different game altogether and you were able to design equipment, get the funding for it and start building, you know, within 12 months. And if you had a good track record in research, you were able to get the funding through the Government, the… what was then called the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. There was a committee to look into these things but it was obviously a friendly committee who knew just what you were doing and what you’d done in the past. And if what you were doing was sensible, you got the money rapidly. And Martin Ryle was able to get funding for his large instruments, which would cost millions of pounds if you built them today, relatively quickly, and it was just a totally different world. When I later came to build my 4-acre antenna which discovered the pulsars, I only had to wait 3 or 4 months to get the funding for that. If that was to be built now, well, it would cost about a million pounds to build that and I would have to go through international committees to get that sort of money. I would have Americans who didn’t understand what I was doing trying to… being critical of what I was about to do and say, what a crazy thing, I don’t think Tony Hewish should do that. It was such a different world then, you could just… if you… if you had a good track record you got… you got the cash and could… could get on with it. And… I’m luckily not involved now, but these committees have become international and, if you’re starting out in research, you become part of a team rather than your own master and you just can’t get on exactly with what you want to do. You can have the ideas, but that has to be developed and worked on, and you have to write and approach committees and sell yourself in a very big way. And things just take that much longer. Of course, if you’re building the instruments, as people are, projects have to become international because they can’t be afforded by a single country, and I watch this thing from a distance now and look back to those… what I regard really as the happier times long, long ago when you… when you didn’t have to be a politician really, as well as a scientist. You could, if you were a scientist people knew about you, and if you were a reliable one you got your cash and if you… if you weren’t you didn’t. And it… it was just a totally different… different game; you weren’t criticised by… by foreign committees. When I say foreign, I mean European or American, I don’t use… I use that word perhaps in a rather wrong way. But that is the way science goes, unfortunately, and to be a graduate student, really, I think isn’t… isn’t so much fun. You’re doing something that’s immensely worthwhile but you’re part of a larger team doing your own little bit. But it’s… it’s much more like being a member of a large crew and doing what you can do, rather than being in control. And that is, I think, a bit sad. I mean, you… young people learn to accept this… this way of doing things and, if it’s a really good idea that you’re following, you’re prepared to fight for it and persuade other people. And I suppose that, in its way, is very good practical experience if you’re a scientist but, for example, with the Square Kilometre Array, which is rather like the antenna that I built years and years ago but covering a square kilometre and much more advanced technology and much more computing, that is going to cost billions. And if you’re working on that, you can’t expect results for a decade or so. And, in a way, I find that a bit depressing.
But if science is going to advance, and I can see now in the world of… of pulsars what a wonderful instrument the Square Kilometre Array is going to be, and I look forward to living long enough to see… to see the first results from that, but it’s just… it’s just the way the world is. And I think we’re… we’re fortunate that governments are still sufficiently keen to provide the money that you can… that you can do these things. As we know, the world is desperately short of scientists, in this country particularly, and astrophysics is a very good way of attracting people into science because it’s an exciting field, and I think they’re prepared to give money for exciting projects still. But it all takes a long, long time. And there’s not so much opportunity if you’re a young scientist to do groundbreaking work because you just can’t get on with the job quickly. And I don’t know quite what I’d advise a young scientist to be doing. My son was a physicist and he got into electronics and computing, which is hard to avoid these days, but if I was trying to advise a young graduate student what student… what research he ought to be doing, I’m not quite sure where I would… I would direct him. Where are the fields nowadays which… in which little is known and in which small groups with modest funding can make a breakthrough? It could be something like neuroscience. I mean, medical physics is a big area and the complexity of the human frame is such that it’s going to take decades, I think, to get anywhere with understanding how they… what goes on in our minds, but that is the sort of area, perhaps, where insights and… and doing your own thing could… could be important. I honestly don’t know. But the world has changed a lot and it’s… it’s very interesting to look back and see how things were. Certainly, I think the way we were doing things in the ‘50s and ‘60s developed a sort of team spirit which is hard to get nowadays. Martin Ryle’s influence still exists in this group, luckily, because there are people around who remember those days, and traditions like that do persist. And Cambridge is… is still doing its bit on… on a global scale. We are, as you know, part of the Square Kilometre Array team, but I look forward to those results. But I… I don’t think I would… I would be totally happy and fulfilled taking part, as I was many, many years ago.

Well, it’s an absolutely wonderful time when you… when that happens. The news came to me in a rather strange way, actually, because it was a closely kept secret; I mean, they do keep the Nobel thing under wraps. You haven’t a clue that you’re even in the running, at least I didn’t… didn’t think so and I was on a funding committee meeting down in London in the days when it was called the Science Research Council, SRC. And we were meeting in a rather scruffy London building and they didn’t have their own place to meet and the… the clerk came in with a little scrap of paper on which was scribbled the message, in the middle of the meeting, you know. ‘You’ve been awarded the Nobel Prize with Martin Ryle.’ And I just about fell backwards out of the chair because you just can’t… can’t grasp these things at the time. It was hard to concentrate on the rest of the meeting, I know that, but it really was very lucky for me because I was isolated, I was out of contact of the media. And it was my wife at home getting all the telephone calls and so forth and, by the time I got home after the meeting, round about 7.30 in the evening, most of the hubbub had died down, the telephone was still ringing very hard, but the… the pressure had… had gone out of it. And anyway, I was a busy man; it was the middle of the Michaelmas term, I had a lecture to give on the following morning and if you’d been to meetings all day you have to lecture prepare, so I got on with that. I was actually lecturing electrodynamics in the third year’ course, electrodynamics and relativity, and I had the lecture ready. And the following morning I got a round of applause when I went into the lecture theatre at 9am and that was rather nice, the students had heard all about it. But… but life goes on in the university. I mean, you have all your teaching commitments and I… I had a lot to do. And it wasn’t really until the term ended that it really… the message really got through what I… what I had to do.
The whole business of going to Stockholm to get the prize is… is a major event in your life, it’s… it’s even more of an event nowadays because you’re allowed to invite more people, but… but in my case the Nobel Committee said, bring your immediate friends and… not your immediate friends, bring your immediate family. So I was able to go with… with my wife and son and daughter who were then just becoming teenagers at school, which was rather nice, and so we got to Stockholm in the late afternoon, having flown most of the day. And they greet you like total royalty. How they do it year after year in… in Stockholm, I… I really don’t know, but they provide somebody to… usually a young… a young Foreign Office person who greets you at the airport and… and guides you to the reception room where… where the cameras, the batteries of cameras, are waiting for you. And then they whisk you off… whisk you off to the hotel, which is… which is a wonderful hotel on the… beside of the water in… in Stockholm. But the… the nice thing about… about the Nobel Prize is you meet informally a whole lot of people you’ve… you’ve read about and have the chance just to chat to them over the… over the breakfast table. And I got the opportunity, for example, later – not… I’m digressing a little bit from Stockholm – but I got to know Paul Dirac, the famous quantum physicist, who wasn’t the easiest person to talk to, normally speaking, a rather retiring man, but there’s a meeting of laureates every… every year in.. in Lindau on the side of Lake Constance, where laureates in different subjects meet annually to talk to the students of Europe. You would… would normally have about 500 students meeting also and you give… you give lectures in your subject and so on. But I was having breakfast with… with Dirac, and he was presented with the… the glass of iced water, and he doesn’t like water… ice in his drink, and we were having breakfast in the hotel and there was a terrace of people beneath us, we were on the first floor. And he didn’t like the ice in his drink and he was just throwing it out of the window and there were a lot of other people breakfasting down below. There was no uproar then about that, but that’s what I remember about Paul Dirac which I shall always… always recall with some… with some delight.
But, coming back to Stockholm… I mean, it is an amazing… an amazing occasion. The sad thing for me was that Martin Ryle was then…  had failing health in 1974 when the award was made and he couldn’t come with me to collect his prize. And… and so I had to collect his prize for him, but the ceremony itself, which is, of course, a white tie occasion, you have to hire all these things before you go, but the… you meet in the… in a theatrical… well, you do meet, actually, in a theatre. You’re on stage with the… all the Science Academicians who have done the work in electing and so on, sitting on the stage beside you, and the Royal Family sitting over there and… and the laureates sitting… sitting opposite. And physics, for some reason, is… is the first. I mean, physics takes pride of place in all the five Nobel Prizes, so… so I had to go up first. And they sort of have a… have a standard fanfare of music and you walk to centre stage where there’s a big circle in the carpet with an N on it, and… in all your regalia and white tie and everything, you walk into this and they play the fanfare and you nod to the… to the audience. And then the King comes up and presents you with the prize and of course I had to stagger away with two prizes. And then they play some national music which they think is appropriate for the times, it’s a musical occasion as well. And guess what I had as a piece of music to go with me? Greensleeves. Which I… I thought really wasn’t a terribly good choice, I would have liked something a bit more lively than Greensleeves. But at any rate, that’s what we had.

But you do get the chance to meet people informally. Solzhenitsyn was getting most of the publicity on… on the time I went to Stockholm because, although he won the prize for literature 2 years previously, in ’72 [sic], he wasn’t able to get to Stockholm to receive it. And… but he was there and a wonderful figure, and I straightened his tie before we actually had the proceedings, you know, but that’s the sort of thing you can do for people like that. And he couldn’t speak English very well so we couldn’t converse, but it was just wonderful being able… able to meet people like that. And they do treat you like total royalty. And there was a consequence, well, I’ll come back to that in a minute. But the… following the ceremony, which is… which is this formal onstage proceedings, you then have a banquet, and that is… is like a college feast only more so. You have 2000 people sitting down, all the politicians and the… and the Science Academicians and all the royalty and their relatives and so on and so forth. In those days it was the young King Carl Gustav, he wasn’t married, and there’s a procession from upstairs down into the dining area, where everybody, all these 2000 people, are waiting for you with candlelit tables everywhere. And you come down with the… with the Royal Family and physics takes pride of place.
So my wife came down on the… on the arm of the King, which was rather nice, and I… I came second with the… the Prime Minister’s wife – that was Olof Palme, he was the Prime Minister then – so… so I had his wife, she was a very pleasant person to talk to. And… and you processed down and had this rather… rather lengthy meal at which you have to get up and say a few words. And I forget exactly what I said, but I think I said something about the… the beauty of being an astronomer is that you get a… you get a heavenly view of things. In other words, you… you get taken out of this world and, at that stage, space flight was just beginning and I said something about looking back at the earth and seeing it as a unit, you know, a globe and all that sort of thing. I… I tried to say something entertaining and not… not very technical. But you also have to give a lecture, a Nobel lecture, and what you say at the time isn’t quite the same thing as the written version which gets published later. But I had to give two lectures; I had to give Martin Ryle’s lecture on… on aperture synthesis and my own, the actual wording of the prize was that I got the Nobel Prize for my decisive role in the discovery of pulsars, and I… I said a lot about that. But when I… I saw the… the young King, who was a late teenager then, sitting in the front row of the audience looking a little bit glazed, I thought, but I spoke to him afterwards because I’d heard that he was making a visit to this country in… in the following year, in the summer in 1975. And I said, ‘I’ve heard you’re coming to the UK, if you’d like to know more about radio telescopes do come to Cambridge and visit us at the Observatory’. And I hadn’t… didn’t think for a moment that this would be taken up, but I think there were other Academicians within earshot who… who obviously put their heads together later and said, ‘Well, when you go to England, it would be very good for your image if you showed an interest in science’. And so it happened that in June 1975 the young King Carl Gustav actually came to Cambridge to see the radio telescopes. And as a preliminary to that, I was called up to Edinburgh to meet him on… on his arrival. He flew into Edinburgh, that… that was the way he travelled, and there was a big banquet at Holyrood House, which is a nice place to have a banquet, and my wife and I were invited up there. And you try and dine and make conversation with the… a piped band marching round the table, which isn’t… isn’t the easiest thing. Twelve… it was a dozen pipe majors all in their individual equipment and so on – individual Highland dress – playing bagpipes and marching round the table, and it’s not the easiest thing to talk with that going on.
But, at any rate, a short time later the young King came to Cambridge and we put our heads together and said, well, what on earth can you do to entertain a teenager who’s not really interested in science? He… he was more of a playboy in those… those days and if we talked about swimming or surfing or something that would have been a lot better. But how do you… how do you handle an occasion like that? And I was briefed to meet him at the station because Martin Ryle didn’t like doing things like that, but Martin Ryle met him at… at the Observatory. He came out to the Observatory and we gave him a quick rundown through… through the radio telescopes, in which he seemed moderately interested, but then we thought, well, what do you do with the rest of the day? Well, when you come to Cambridge as a visitor for the first time there’s one thing you can do, which is go punting on the Cam. And… so that’s what we did. We brought him back to Cambridge and we had two punts with research students who were… were good at the… at the business, you know, and they were sitting there with… standing there with bowler hats, and we walked on to the King’s Backs and had these two punts. And I had the great pleasure of being punted down the Cam with the King in the same punt and I have a photograph to prove that somewhere. And that was fun. And then he had a cream tea in Trinity College where one of our graduate students was… well, I’m sorry, he wasn’t a graduate student then, he was… post-doc, and he was a fellow of Trinity and was able to arrange these things, and we gave… we gave the young King a cream tea in the… in the Fellows’ Garden at Trinity. And that was all really a very… very nice occasion, but this is this kind of thing that getting the Nobel Prize involves you… involves you with. And that… that follow-up I… I rather enjoyed.

And then I mentioned the meetings that happened later when – it’s about once every 3 years – physics Nobel laureates get invited to Lindau, to this international meeting, with about 20 or 30 other laureates. I think they usually put physics and chemistry together. And you just give popular lectures to the… to the students of… of the world. The UK is not very good at sending people to that because it costs money, and… but there were about a dozen students from England. But they look after you very well in a nice old-fashioned hotel besides Lake Constance, and lay on trips on the lake and all that sort of thing. And you get the chance to chat to other laureates, totally informally. Perhaps I should have said that when you actually get the prize, they work you quite hard because you give lectures up and down, up and down Stockholm, up and down… well, around universities. I went to give a lecture at Lund and, well, the whole thing is… is just handled so extremely well and, coming back to the ceremony, I mean, how they managed to put that on with such colour and… and enjoyable pomp and circumstance year after year, amazes me. But people tell me that it’s just the same now as it… as it ever was. And it’s… it’s on live television, of course, and the Swedes absolutely love watching it, it’s a bit like the Olympic Games, as far as they’re concerned, I think. Although it’s fully televised and available in this country, this country takes absolutely no interest, as far as I can see, there’s… there’s no coverage of these things. Science just doesn’t… doesn’t really weigh very heavily in the… in the ratings when it comes to TV, and so it doesn’t… doesn’t get on English TV. But the whole thing is… is a wonderful experience. But I often get asked the question, did it… how did it change your life? Well, I suppose, for some people, it might change their life but, for me, it didn’t. I mean, I already had my chair in Cambridge when this happened and I was involved with running research here in Cambridge. And really, there was nowhere else I would rather have been. I mean, Cambridge, until the 1970s, was the top of the radio astronomy league and the… the lead hadn’t then gone to the US. I mean, the US always can… can do more than you can because they can afford it, and they… they can build better telescopes once they know what to build. But … but until about 1970 the 5-km telescope was the best instrument in the world and we were… we were at the cutting edge of it all. I hope we still are at the cutting edge in some areas, but it’s… it’s a different game now altogether.

But coming back to these meetings, they give you the chance to first of all meet the students. There’s… there’s an afternoon when laureates are invited just to sit at a table and students gather round and you spend the afternoon just chatting informally to them and they can ask you any question that they like. And it’s where you… where you have a nice lively afternoon with all sorts of questions being shot at you; not just about your own subject, because they’re not very well versed in that, but those sort of things are very interesting and you get invited to lecture around the world, some of which you can accept and some of which you can’t because it interrupts with life. But I have been to most countries now doing that kind of thing, and Nobel does lead on in a pleasant way to all sorts of opportunities which are jolly… jolly pleasing, if you forget nastiness like Fred Hoyle. The whole thing is really a wonderful experience. It was… it was sad that Martin Ryle’s health was failing and he couldn’t enjoy it himself and that his wife, Rowena, couldn’t… couldn’t go to Stockholm because I think she would… she would have loved it. But let me give you another sort of Nobel memory. They invite you back to Stockholm on… on occasions, like the centenary of the first award, which happened in 2001. That was… that was the centenary of the first Nobel award, and we were all invited back to this ceremony and we had… had to give lectures up and down… up and down Scandinavia and… and I was dispatched to Tromso to give a couple of lectures up there. And while I was there Desmond Tutu happened to be there also because he’s… he’s a peace prize man and he… he was collecting most of the… of publicity of course, because everybody knows about Desmond Tutu. But I had the benefit of sitting next to him at a… at a dinner party, he was enormous fun, great sense of humour, and I was telling him about the time – we shared experiences about getting the prize, and I said that while I was there I went to the… to the Elizabethan theatre they have – they have a wonderful theatre in Stockholm at Drottingholm and… and it’s a sort of Elizabethan era theatre with everything intact, it’s a royal theatre and it was closed down for some reason because royalty didn’t take any interest in it for a while. And so you have this original theatre with all the creaking stagecraft workings still and one of the things that happens is… is they will lower a throne down from the sky, this sort of thing happens in Handel’s operas when people get taken up to heaven, and you can sit on this throne and get winched up into the clouds in the wings. And I did that and I was telling all this to… to Desmond Tutu and, just as we were passing, we said goodbye, he said: ‘See you in heaven!’ Which I thought was rather nice because I’ve been to heaven, you see, I’d told him that. So I said I’d been to heaven and then he looked, his eyes opened wide and I explained how I’d been to heaven, and he was… he was fun to be with. But these are the sort of memories you carry around with you and Nobel does… does have a lasting effect.

But when it comes to how did it affect my career, I think the answer is really ‘not at all’ because I was here doing… involved with teaching, which is what I wanted to do, and there were no offers coming through that really attracted me particularly because Cambridge was the place to be. We get the best students, as… as I think the rankings show, and teaching and researching here in Cambridge, I can’t… can’t really think of… of a nicer life. I think Cambridge colleges play a very valuable role in teaching young scientists because you… you have that close contact, which other universities seem… seem not to have, Oxford perhaps, but we have this supervision system where you meet students, not quite on a one-to-one basis but on a… on a three-to-one basis typically, where you give them weekly tutorials and just talk physics. And if they’re good students they’ll ask you difficult questions and I think I can say that really I learnt most of my physics by teaching it and answering questions and supervisions because that’s where you get the… the really penetrating questions that… that good students ask you. And preparing for supervisions is… is a wonderful way of… of really understanding the subject. I’ve… I’ve been involved with college teaching all my life and when I was first a graduate student I was… I was starting to do it. And I think I really understood the lectures, my own physics teaching for the first time, when I had to teach it to other people. It… that one-to-one contact is an extremely valuable thing and you sometimes have very brilliant students – you try and teach but they often… often teach you. The student I… I remember from Churchill College who was a bit like that was Brian Green, who was one of the founders of string theory, a brilliant… a brilliant theoretician. And as a student he was always… could also… always answer the numerical questions quicker than I could usually and especially the ones on relativity and suchlike, but… because I wasn’t involved in that professionally. But when I asked him to explain what he was doing, he could… he could always write down the mathematics and get the right answer, but I said, ‘Can you explain the physics of that?’ And he was terribly bad at trying… at explaining the physics, and so I… I think there is a division in physics between… between people who sort of have mental images of what goes on and… and people who… juggle equations in their head. And Brian Green, of course, because he’s one of the inventors of string theories, is the equations man and he thinks in terms of equations, not in physical models. And that could be an advantage and it could be a disadvantage because modern physics is a very mysterious subject and following the mathematics through to its conclusions is a very necessary feature of it. And… and if it doesn’t make sense, maybe that’s just because you’re not… you can’t get your mind round it, but the mathematics is the key and he’s one of those sort of people. But… but you meet students of that calibre in Cambridge. I think he’s… he’s the one I… I remember most. But the fact that he couldn’t really explain what he was doing was a revelation to me because it seems to me that you really… if you’re really going to get to the bottom of things, you want to be able to do both. And looking back at Einstein’s writings, he was one of those people who could do both and I think he… he had a bit of a problem with… with mathematics just like I did, because when it came to writing down the mathematics that went to his general theory of relativity, I was interested to read in his biographies that he had to work hard at that and it didn’t come naturally to him.
And that reminded me of my experiences just after leaving university for the first time when… when I got involved with wartime research because the… mathematics I’d been taught in my first year at university in 1942, ’43, they tried to teach me Fourier analysis and so on, and I… I could see the equations and see… see the identities and so on, but it didn’t add up to anything that seemed to me to be a sensible thing to be doing. Why express one function in terms of other functions? It didn’t… it didn’t make a lot of sense. But during the war I had my 3 gap years and… and that’s when I really began to understand the basics of things like that because I suddenly realised in applying Fourier analysis that this is a way of breaking down what could be a really difficult problem into a whole lot of easy ones. And that’s essentially what Fourier analysis does. And when I’d seen that, the penny suddenly dropped and I thought, yes, this is a wonderful tool and I could see how to apply it and I was interested in that sort of thing evermore. But that was something that the mathematicians hadn’t managed to teach me when I was taught about Fourier analysis. It was just a mathematical identity: you can express this function like this in terms of this way, and… but they didn’t say why that was useful and so on. And that came back to me, actually, later on as a… as a teacher when I… I was giving a popular lecture and I talked a little bit about some mathematical functions I’d been using. And a mathematician came up to me after I’d given this popular lecture and he said, you know, you’ve taught me more in half an hour in your lecture – which I’d just dashed off – you’ve taught me more in that half hour than I learnt in a whole term from my mathematics lecturers. So I began to feel encouraged by that, but there really is a… if you’re really going to understand something, if you can put it in physical terms, it’s so much… so much better and even… that works, even for mathematicians. So that gave me some encouragement that the sort of teaching I was involved with, which I’ve always taken great care over and spent time on, is a really worthwhile thing to do.

The lectures I gave right after the Nobel was… was the first time that at this university physics had been taught to all physics students in the first year. By physics students, I mean people who are doing physics but may be chemists later, the natural sciences Tripos where you do physics and chemistry and mathematics and… and a biological science, perhaps, are normally streamed so that those who are going to be physics’ specialists do one course and those who are going to be biologists do another course. And in my year it… they were all thrown together and I had to design a lecture course, which didn’t bore the brightest, but didn’t baffle the weakest, and that was a very challenging course to give. And I gave that for 3 years and I… I enjoyed that, and I think the students enjoyed it too because I tried to make the lectures fun and when you’re teaching about gyroscopes you can have lovely demonstrations where you spin yourself round on stools holding bicycle wheels with lead tyres. And I’ve had students come up to me later on in their life and those are the bits of the lectures that they actually remembered. And I’ve… always enjoyed that sort of teaching. And I don’t know if this happens nowadays, but in… in my teaching career students were perhaps a little more adult than they are these days, where they often come straight from school, and they play tricks on you in… in the last lecture of the Michaelmas term, if that’s the end of the course. And one year they…they served me a lad, a student in pyjamas came down from the back of the class – there were 400 in the class at that time – walked all the way down in pyjamas with a breakfast tray of rather soggy toast and coffee. And I had to give the lecture munching these things and, after that was finished, they gave me a Christmas card which was painted on a square metre of York paving slab about two inches thick. And they expected me to carry that away and I just about managed it, out of the door. But that’s… those are the sort of incidents in teaching that you remember, but it’s always… it’s always for me been a very serious business and I’ve never given exactly the same lecture at course twice, because I think if you do that you become a little bit automatic and you shouldn’t be doing that. So I’ve tended to try and change things a little bit from year to year. But I think that… that mix of teaching and then going off to do some research is… is just a mix that… that works and it’s what Cambridge seems to be particularly good at and… and what the best of our students actually seem to respond to. So that’s always been a major interest of mine right to the very end. And I still enjoy giving popular lectures and try… and try and teach people the simple facts of relativity and physics because pulsars are a jolly good way of… of getting… getting into that.

After the pulsar discovery became public Jocelyn and I were just invaded by… by media of various kinds and the name ‘pulsar’ came about pretty rapidly and people have often asked, did you think of that or did somebody else? And the answer is that we didn’t think about that. The… the name pulsar came, I was told, later by… by a letter from the science correspondent of the Daily Telegraph. I’m trying to think of his name at the moment. Memory fails for me at this… at this age, but I’ve got it down somewhere. He wrote to me years after and said, ‘I invented that name’ and I think it’s a true story because nobody… nobody else has said they invented the name ‘pulsar’. I mean, we were far too busy trying to do the science and… and answer more serious questions than to give these things name tags like that, but it’s a jolly good name, ‘pulsar’, and it’s stuck like ‘quasar’ and other names in astronomy, ‘black holes’. It’s a name with a resonance and I think it means something to people in general now. Pulsars do pulse and it’s an obvious name to call them. But in those days we didn’t know whether they were white dwarfs or neutron stars or whatever they were and when that name was invented, but it was the science correspondent of the… of the Daily Telegraph who actually did it.

One aspect perhaps I should mention is that we were criticised a little bit – well, quite a bit more than a little bit – by the Americans who thought that we’d kept our mouths shut about the discovery for too long. And I’m absolutely unrepentant about that because, first of all, it isn’t really true. But in the press, in journals, things like Time magazine, people like Tommy Gold, for example, was outspoken about this. Tommy Gold was, as you know, was a colleague of Fred Hoyle and America was a little bit, more than a little bit disappointed that they hadn’t made the discovery because they had telescopes that could have done it very easily. And… but we did it, as it were, accidentally. And they mistook what we’d written. When, in my publication, I said that the survey began in… in June 1967 and we observed… only observed the first pulse at the very end of November of that year. But Jocelyn had noticed this unusual strong scintillator at… at the wrong time, when it was observed much too far from the Sun to scintillate strongly in the normal way, and in… actually in early August, and I said that the first recordings of that signal – I was very clear in what I said in the Nature letter – were actually made in… made in August. But somehow the Americans took it that we knew about pulsars in… in August, rather than in late November, at the… the very end of the year, and they criticised us for not being more public about the discovery. But I’m completely unrepentant about that because serious work and getting to the conclusion that we did, which was that they were either neutron stars or white dwarfs, one of which assumptions turned out to be correct, turned out to be right. But I think if you got an interesting experimental result; first of all, you should have time to mull over it and… and decide in your own mind what you think it is before going public. And secondly, if we’d gone public, serious work would have been impossible. If at the time we didn’t know what it was, the secret had been leaked that we were picking up a strange signal from 100 light years or so which was pulsing, I mean there’s absolutely no question that the lab would have been absolutely invaded by… by media. And… and serious work and… and science is just not possible under those conditions. And we’d had that experience when the first Sputnik was launched by the Russians, and we… I wasn’t involved in the work, but we were able to measure the orbit almost as soon as the first signals were detected. And the press invaded our site here at the Old Rifle Range, where radio astronomy began, and for 2 weeks, until they picked it up at Jodrell Bank, where we’d told them to point the telescope, the place was just full every time the thing was in transit across the sky. The press would be there and I was determined that that wouldn’t happen until we knew fairly clearly what these pulsing signals were. And particularly the question of whether they were likely to be aliens or not. So I think we did right there and I’m not the least bit unrepentant. But the Americans, first of all, made a mistake in thinking we’d discovered the pulsars in August, when in fact it was late November, and then not understanding, in fact, the problems we’d already had or experienced with the media in the days of the… of the first Sputnik. So there were those side aspects of the discovery which are… weren’t altogether pleasant and, as I said, I think the Americans were a little bit narked really because they had big dishes that could have discovered them. They had the big 1000-metre dish at Arecibo, which could easily have discovered pulsars and, in fact, it did much good work on them later, and still is. And I think they were disappointed about that. And Fred Hoyle and Tommy Gold were good friends and, of course, Fred Hoyle had it… a big grudge against Cambridge radio astronomers because they demolished his theory and he never forgave Martin Ryle for that, I think.

When I joined in 1948, the name radio astronomy didn’t even exist. What had happened was that Ratcliffe and Martin Ryle knew each other through working at TRE Malvern [Telecommunications Research Establishment], and Ratcliffe knew that Martin was… was very bright and would be a good person to have in… in his research team when he… when he returned to the Cavendish. And he attracted Martin Ryle here, Martin Ryle had been an Oxford man and I think Jack Ratcliffe had been… who was head of the ionosphere group at that time, and as I think I said yesterday, Ratcliffe was originally a student of Edward Appleton who’d been a Cavendish man and Edward Appleton got the Nobel Prize for discovering the ionosphere. So there was a strong tradition of ionospheric physics here in the Cavendish, and when Ratcliffe came back to restart all that and build a research team, he was also interested in… he was very interested in Martin Ryle because he’d met him and knew how bright he was. But Martin Ryle wasn’t interested in the ionosphere and I think what happened was that Ratcliffe said, well, why not have a look at these radio waves from the Sun, which was a wartime discovery which only became known after the war because it was kept secret at the time. But in 1942 James Hey, who was then an operational… operational research person working with the anti-aircraft actually, and he was in charge of… of South Coast radars and they were all put out of action on… in early February 1942 by strange radiation coming in. It was a dull day, one doesn’t know where this radiation was coming from, but all the radars were swamped by a noise interference. And this happened soon after the famous episode when the pocket battleships, which had been trying to get back home to Germany after being damaged in the… off the Spanish coast, I think it was, the Scharnhorst and the Gneisenau, they were called, they made a dash up through the Channel in bad weather and escaped detection and… and made their way through, before we were aware of them. And that was because the Germans set up an intense barrage which… which blinded our coastal radars and we couldn’t… we couldn’t spot them going through the Channel, and they were well into the North Sea before they were actually found. And I… I think we sent some ancient naval Swordfish, you know, lumbering after them and they did their best, but that wasn’t good enough. Well, now when the South Coast radars were again swamped, it was immediately thought, well, what’s going on, is there something else, are they launching an invasion or something? And it wasn’t and… and Hey discovered that his… the radars had, in fact, been pointing more or less at the Sun during that time and he got on to the Royal Greenwich Observatory who said, yes, there is an active sunspot group crossing the middle of the solar disk right now, and the connection was made that the Sun was emitting, could emit bursts of radio which were strong enough actually to… to drown our radars. And this… this, I think, had been known by radio amateurs but it wasn’t widely known. There was a strange sort of interference which radio amateurs, hams, had been picking up also over… over the years, the pre-war years, and it was thought it might be something to do with the Sun. But, at any rate, Hey proved that it was and he himself began research, this was before the research groups were actually disbanded. I’m talking now about sort of ’95… 1945 era when the war in Japan was winding up, and… and the war in Europe was… was over and you had all these research groups who’d been in radar wondering what to do. And Hey began to reinvestigate these radio waves from the Sun and he also discovered radio waves coming from the radio source Cygnus, Cygnus A as we now call it. Well, anyway, that… that was all the background when Ryle was looking around for… for university research, and when he came to Cambridge, Ratcliffe said, well, look, have a look at these radio waves from the… from the Sun, which Martin Ryle did. He started off using old wartime antennas and wartime receivers, actually, linking them together, and that’s when we started at the Old Rifle Range site, just a mile from here.

It was about that time that I… that I joined the group. Ryle had got it all going. He came back, I think, in late 1945 actually and was starting properly in ’46 and I joined the group in ’48. But that summer before I arrived they had discovered the radio source in… in Cassiopeia while looking at the Sun. Apparatus, as I said, was very… very primitive, but this was only part of the radio physics in… in the Cavendish, which was being run by… by Jack Ratcliffe. And most of the work in the group was ionospheric research of one sort or another, theoretical work, with people like Philip Clemmow – I don’t know if you remember him? But he had a theoretical group about the theory of plasmas and so on, and an observational group which was doing work on… on radio wave reflection from the ionosphere. And so it was Martin Ryle with about three research students and some research assistants, that was the group when I… when I arrived. And the term radio star hadn’t even been invented at that time, but… but Ratcliffe said to me, ‘Why don’t you join Ryle and have a look at these waves coming from the sky and try… try and make sense of them’. And so that’s… that’s how it was, but it was only a small part of the… of the ionospheric group. But because Ratcliffe himself wasn’t technically involved with the… with the first radio telescopes, it was Martin Ryle who was doing everything himself with… with help, the radio … astronomers were left to themselves to get on and… and Ratcliffe gave them as much support as… as he could. And I mean, it was extremely hands-on work because Ryle didn’t want to waste any money – well, we didn’t have any money to waste – and everything was done by ourselves.
And my first job as a graduate student, which surprised me rather, having just spent my… my 2 post-war years finishing off the degree, to be told, look, there’s a pile of brass tubing there, we want that cut up into dipoles, you’ll find a hacksaw in the workshop, go and make a dipole array for me. And I mean, I spent my first summer doing… doing that. And we got used to doing all these hard mechanical jobs ourselves, and I mean I can remember cycling out to the… to the site here in Cambridge with…with dipoles across my handlebars; you know, that’s… that’s the sort of life that it… that it was. But then we built the first arrays and began to see that the sky was filled with these so-called radio stars and then Martin Ryle thought they were stars like our Sun but more distant, within our galaxy. And he was convinced that all these things were… were part of our galaxy, but it was only later in… in the early 1950s when Graham Smith, using wartime Wurzburg antennas, was able to fix the positions of four of them with sufficient accuracy to send the positions off to the astronomers in California. The 200-inch optical telescope at Palomar was then the most powerful instrument in the world. And they looked at these… some of these positions and because Graham Smith had fixed the error bars to such tight limits, they were able to identify, in particular Cygnus A, which turned out to be a galaxy just on the very limit of detection with a 200-inch telescope. And that’s,  I think, when the full potential of radio astronomy actually burst upon us because here were we with the very crude instruments, essentially, knocked up over… over a month, over a few months almost, able to locate astronomical objects which you could only just reach with the most powerful optical telescope that existed. And so it was immediately clear then that these were, at least some of them, were distant galaxies on the… on the very edges of the universe as it… as it was then known. And the full potential of the… of the field became evident and Martin Ryle, in particular, was interested in the… in the origin of the universe, once he got over the shock of discovering that these things he was looking at, many of them were not in our own galaxy. Some of them were, of course, supernova remnants like the Crab Nebula. They… that, I think, was first identified by the Australians actually, which was a group in Sydney run by Joe Pawsey, which was very like Martin Ryle’s group. It was ex-wartime scientists coming back looking for something to do and they had the radar gear at their… at their disposal, as it were. And Joe Pawsey’s group had their cliff interferometer, they… they used waves reflected off the sea. They had an antenna mounted along the cliff top and had a simple interferometer working on reflection from the ocean. But the idea that you could get angular resolution by using the Michelson interferometer principle, which was nothing to do with radio astronomy, as… – I mean, that was an optical invention – that was applied immediately and then… then the whole field began to open up. And then Martin Ryle became… I mean, the radio astronomy part of the… of the ionospheric group began to outweigh the ionospheric part because it was much more exciting and growing rapidly. And Ratcliffe was… although he was nominally Head of Radio Physics, he… he gave Martin his own reins and backed him fully and helped, in fact, to… eventually, to establish the Mullard [Radio Astronomy] Observatory, to which we later moved.

It all happened so rapidly from very… very small beginnings and it was really a rather strange world. The fact that with such… simple equipment you could… you could make observations of cosmological importance quite… quite rapidly and, having discovered that these things were distant galaxies, Martin Ryle then, of course, began to realise that there were far too many of them and they followed the wrong distribution in space for a steady state universe. One of the nice things about the steady state theory is that it’s easily contradicted by observation, if you have… if you have a cosmology in which the universe is replenishing itself, it’s… it’s reached a very fine state of balance, and that means that in large scale space as you look to further and further distances, you’re just looking back in time. But if the universe has been there forever and is going to continue forever, just like a changing population of people, but always the same number of people, people being born, people dying, galaxies being born and galaxies dying, then when you look to greater distance you ought to see a universe that’s very like the universe close to you. And when Martin Ryle started doing the statistics of that, he found out that there were far too many radio galaxies, as we then called them, in the more distant parts of the universe. And he saw then that the steady state theory must be wrong and that’s when he got his major cosmological interest going.
But… but for the first few years here, on our site, we were making more and more surveys and the idea that we could actually see what the radio galaxies were, as in an optical faded photograph, that was just nowhere near because you couldn’t get a sharp enough angular resolving power. But Martin Ryle always was thinking well ahead of what… of what he was actually doing and it was the early 50s when he realised that this work had to be extended with instruments of higher sensitivity and… and resolution that he hit on this idea of… of aperture synthesis. The… Bernard Lovell was then planning his 250-foot dish, which was going to be immensely expensive and take him years and years to build, and in the end not really be good enough because the biggest dish you could conceive of then was… was a few hundred feet across. And that was going to be an immense project, as… as we know Jodrell Bank was. And Martin Ryle was a bit scornful because he thought, well, if you don’t adopt conventional antenna building principles, but go for this technique of extending interferometers and moving them about and… and linking up the data from different… adding the data from different positions, that would give you a way of synthesising a huge telescope that you couldn’t possibly build. And it wasn’t… well, in fact, the term aperture synthesis, I… I invented that myself because I helped Martin Ryle write some of his first papers. I wasn’t involved with the fundamental ideas here, but Martin Ryle was always far too busy actually dreaming of the future than… than he was in… in writing up his work. And I did some work on… on the background of aperture synthesis, which had been demonstrated by a graduate student, John Blyth, the great footballer. Did you know John? No, you wouldn’t have known that he was a footballer, perhaps… I know that you’re interested in football yourself. John Blyth demonstrated the principle just a few hundred yards from where we’re sitting, moving at dipole north-south and having an east-west array and… and doing the very first synthesis on EDSAC 1, the computer which was so elementary that it took hours to do the simplest Fourier synthesis.
But at any rate, the principle had been proved and Martin Ryle said, ‘Well, we will begin to think about a much larger instrument’. He then was using conventional reflectors, not in the synthesis mode but as in a Michelson interferometer mode and that gave the first major surveys of the sky which ran the 3C survey, which is a… which is a famous survey in the history of radio astronomy. It went through various versions, becoming more accurate as time went on, but it located two or three hundred accurately located radio galaxies, which optical astronomers could then attempt to identify, and some of them were identified with distant galaxies and others were not, and so on. But that’s when the cosmological story began and, in order to extend all that, Martin said, well, it’s stupid to build a fixed dish which is… I mean, a steerable dish which is 250 feet across because, a) it’s going to be expensive and, b) it won’t do the job. I mean, it had sensitivity but it didn’t have the angular resolving power and you can’t do very much with an angular resolving power which depends upon the diameter of the dish and the dish is only 250 feet. He said, we want a dish which is a mile across, or thereabouts, and that’s when the aperture synthesis began and… and in 1957, to develop this properly, we moved out to Lord’s Bridge Observatory.

Then the subject began to get… get expensive. You don’t call £100,000 expensive nowadays, but we had a grant from the Mullard [Radio] Company, and Ratcliffe was instrumental in… in the politics of that. And Neville Mott was then the Cavendish Professor, he’d taken over from Laurence Bragg. Laurence Bragg, a crystallographer, was very supportive of this work, but he… he didn’t really know what was going on. Ratcliffe knew what was going on and… and gave it strong support and he engineered really the grant with the Mullard Radio Company – they… they were into television then in a big way – and… we formally opened in 1957, but the observatory had been going… I made some of the very first observations actually with my solar coronal scattering work to test the site, and in 1955 I spent a lot of time myself looking around for suitable sites in East Anglia where we could actually do this work. I mean… Martin Ryle was interested in a site about a mile across, if… if you can have it, so that he could develop his interferometry on very wide baselines. And I went round looking with a… with a man from the Department of Estate Management at old airfields because you’d think the obvious place for a radio astronomy site is… is an airfield because they’re large and they’re flat and… and they’re in parts of the country which are not good agricultural… normally good agricultural regions – and East Anglia was really a huge airbase just… just after the war, because obviously bomber command was nearer Europe in East Anglia than anywhere else, and East Anglia being an open, flat… countryside was the ideal place for airbases. And I looked at… oh, I must have looked at… at more than 10 airfields within 30 miles from Cambridge. And we had, in fact, almost decided to move to a new site near Thetford which was an old army firing range, actually, and when eventually with this man from Estate Management we discovered Lord’s Bridge which was… which was an Air Ministry site, not a flying site. But it was very flat and the farmland wasn’t very good and it was being partly farmed but not… not farmed very… very productively. And it… it was up for grabs, as it were, and it was big enough for us to build our first radio telescopes and it was within cycling distance from Cambridge. I discovered that airfields were not really flat enough. You might think that airfields are the flattest place you can be, but it has runways that are flat but they are normally arranged in a triangular fashion and in between anything can go on, whereas Martin Ryle was looking for a big, flat… totally flat area, not… not just flat lines.
And so that’s how it was and we were beginning to move out to Lord’s Bridge and construct things in 1955, and the observatory was formally opened in 1957 by Edward Appleton himself. And we got on rapidly with instruments that were really doing the job and had done the job that… that Lovell was designing his dish for. And his dish only came into operation in 1957 when much of the work, for which the dish had been designed originally, had been done by Martin Ryle using his instruments here… here, at Cambridge. He was all for getting on with the job quickly, rather than trying to think of the best… perhaps the best instruments in the world and taking years and years to build it. And from then on… I mean, the development of instruments at Lord’s Bridge was… was extremely… extremely rapid. I mean, the… the 4C antenna which used a one-dimensional synthesis with a movable element which went north-south and synthesised effectively two large, about… about 400–500 km square areas, dishes, gave us high angular resolution but not… couldn’t map things. It wasn’t… it wasn’t a filled area, it was interferometer, so essentially it put… it put very accurate fringes across the sky and you could locate things and determine and know that they were small and… and they were probably radio galaxies, but you couldn’t actually map them. But his first aperture synthesis came with the… with the one mile – well, I mean, the aperture synthesis as an interferometer was… was the first instrument we built, 4C, and that was beginning to survey in 1957 when Jodrell Bank was just beginning to make its very first measurements also. But I think we were… it’s fair to say we were well ahead on the astronomical side, as… as compared to… to Jodrell Bank, because as Martin Ryle’s wisdom in… in doing these extremely effective scientific things but much more cost-effective from a… from a building point… point of view. But the mapping and knowing what radio galaxies looked like followed the early work and that came with the… the 1-mile telescope which was able to use Earth rotation synthesis. You build a railway line, as you know, and put dishes on it, because you’ve used this yourself, and in 24 hours each antenna is carried in a ring round the other one. And you can synthesise an… an area and, in that way, with a computer, synthesise the telescope which is about 1 mile in aperture as compared to the 250-foot dish that… that Lovell was able to build ultimately at… at Jodrell Bank.
And from the… that was going within a few years, the 1-mile telescope, that was in the early 1960s, and then Martin Ryle was planning an even better instrument, the 5 km, extending that to a baseline of 5 km. And that was the last instrument he built at Lord’s Bridge, that took from 1960 to 1970, more or less, to build, and that was a world… an absolute world beater. And that gave the first detailed maps of radio galaxies which was sufficiently powerful to show the mechanism that drives radio galaxies – the fact that you have a powerful energetic source in the nucleus of a galaxy which sends jets in both directions and… and those jets light up clouds of plasma at the outside. And that explains the… the characteristic shape of many of our… of our radio galaxies. But that was the… I mean, that’s… that was an extremely rapid development when you think of it in the history of radio astronomy because it… it went from the very simplest of instruments to… to a powerful synthesis telescope in… in a matter of just over 15 years or… or so. I mean, from the… from the 1950s to the mid 1960s, you know, Martin Ryle was developing the… the 4C antenna, the… the 1-mile telescope and the 5-km telescope, and they came one after the other in quick succession. And that was simply because, I think, he didn’t require international cooperation, he was a powerful enough figure to get… to get the funding. And we could get on with it with a minimum of effort here, doing most of it totally within the Cavendish infrastructure, essentially.

We’ve always been a Department of Physics and radio astronomy was still a Department of Physics in those days, it’s just that we had this out station at… at Lord’s Bridge and… our… our graduate students were all… were all actually within the Department of Physics. There was no separate Department of Radio Astronomy. And that’s… that’s how things kind of accelerated in… in the very early years and… and Ratcliffe was supported… supportive all that time and… and he engineered our grant. But radio astronomy then began to eclipse the ionospheric work and Ratcliffe himself retired in… I forget exactly when, but he’d gone soon after 1960. And… and he went back to… to run the ionospheric research at the… for the DSIR [Department of Scientific and Industrial Research], as it was then called, at… at Slough. He carried on the work that Appleton had been doing in running the National Ionospheric Research Group, which was then based at… at Slough. It later moved to the Rutherford lab nearer Oxford. But… but Ratcliffe had been supportive all that time but not remotely interested in the… in the data that we were getting and just helping Martin Ryle on the… on the internal university politics side and getting… getting funding. Martin himself wasn’t interested in international collaboration in any way; he wanted to get on with things quickly himself and I think he was a supreme character of that; he did extremely well. I mean, if you look at the development of radio astronomy here, in Cambridge, and compare it with the development of radio astronomy, for example, in America, where they were in a position to have done much better than… than we did because they had more facilities, they had… they had more… more cash, but their… their astronomy was planned by elderly optical astronomers, not by young, revolutionary radio astronomers. We were not really recognised as… as astronomers by the optical astronomical community, we were playing around with radio waves and I think we weren’t really respected… until much, much later on. And, I mean Martin, Ryle was eventually a highly respected figure after… after he had published his results, which overthrew the steady state theory. But in the early days we weren’t really recognised as astronomers and, in fact, we didn’t know very much astronomy, we learned astronomy as we went along. And it was a… it was quite a strange world.
But coming back to what I was saying about the American development, they developed things that looked a bit like optical telescopes, because if you leave it to optical astronomers, you know, they will develop radio telescopes that looked a little bit like the big optical ones and that wasn’t the way to go. And their first national radio astronomy facility at… at Greenbank wasn’t a top quality facility because they built… the first thing they built was a big steerable dish, and it wasn’t very big and it wasn’t a terribly good dish and it took ages to build. And by then it was the 1970s and, you know, most… most of the interesting fundamental work had already been done. When the Americans really came in to build instruments, copying Ryle’s aperture synthesis, of course they overtook us, and that happened after 1970. And 1970 was when the 5-km [telescope] was fully operational. But the strange thing was, that having done that, Martin realised that he wasn’t a healthy man. As I said, he couldn’t come to receive the Nobel Prize. He began to lose interest in radio astronomy. Having solved, having cracked the major cosmological problem, and I think cracked the major cosmological – not cosmological, the astronomical problem of what radio galaxies actually are, you know they are some sort of active nucleus shooting jets of energy in two directions – having got that far, Martin himself seemed to lose interest in forwarding the… purely astronomical, radio astronomical research, and to my mind that was… that was always really rather sad because, having built the 5-km telescope, which was an absolute world leader, he then didn’t use it for his… for his own research. He became interested in things like wind energy. He was a very environmentally conscious person and he saw the problems the world was running into. He was always anti-nuclear energy; he saw the problems and dangers of that. He… he was always against the development of nuclear power because he thought it was simply too dangerous and he thought also that going along in parallel with that was the nuclear weapons side of it, because you generate plutonium, and he was… he was anxious that it would be a destablising factor for the… for the world if… if one went, solved energy that way. And being a great sailor himself, he built his own yachts and he thought that wind energy was the way to go, and he received a lot of criticism in the press about that, that wind energy was hopeless and wind turbines wouldn’t work. It was interesting, really, he was pioneering. He built some of the first wind turbines here, at Lord’s Bridge, and that research has finished now, of course, but in his final years Martin Ryle lost interest in developing radio astronomy as an… as an astronomical tool and got involved with these other things. Now, that was the time I was very busy with the follow-up pulsar work and… and the scintillation surveys that I had developed.

The group then began to run into a slightly uncertain future, I think. Because Martin Ryle was… was backing off from providing leadership in radio astronomy but he was still formally head of the radio astronomers in Cambridge. And he had a very serious operation in 1976 and was essentially an invalid after that, and not going to Lord’s Bridge and not really being a hands-on person to run things, and because I was the second chair in… in radio astronomy in… in Cambridge, I kind of took over the group, but I wasn’t formally appointed head of radio astronomy. Martin was head of radio astronomy until he retired in 1982, and that period when he was not interested in the subject very much, but still head of radio astronomy in Cambridge, was, I think… was not a helpful time for the development of… of research in this… in Cambridge. Because, having built the 5-km telescope which was a world beater… but the Australians… the Americans were then busy developing the very large antenna which was essentially the same principle as Martin Ryle’s 5 km, but with an array of dishes and using full aperture synthesis, was an instrument of much greater power and, as an international facility, was going to actually produce results which put the 5-km telescope – eclipsed our priority in… in that area. And Martin Ryle wasn’t thinking too much about what other things we could develop here, at Cambridge. And that was the time I kind of took over the reins, but wasn’t quite clear where the group should be going because I had my own research to look after and that’s what I’d been doing, but, at the same time, Lord’s Bridge as an observatory needed someone to look after it and organise things. And I… kind of unofficially took… took that over, there was no formal appointment of me as head of radio astronomy, but I virtually became head of radio astronomy after… after Martin Ryle was seriously ill and certainly after he retired in 1982.
Now, by then it was clear that the group had to be doing other things and we were moving then into… into international. This was our first move into… into international facilities and Richard Hills, who became head of radio astronomy not so long ago, became involved with millimetre wavelength astronomy. In the 1970s it had been discovered that there was a lot to do at the very shortest wavelengths in radio astronomy, which needed completely new instrumentation, millimetre wavelength was quite different from standard radio telescopes, you needed… you needed different technology and you needed different dishes, small dishes with extremely accurate surfaces, and such things were going to be extremely expensive. And I was actually chairing a committee for the DSIR [Department of Scientific and Industrial Research], or SRC [Science Research Council], as it was then called, to investigate millimetre wavelength astronomy in this country. And we eventually concluded that building the best millimetre dish in the world, which couldn’t be sited in the UK because it wasn’t a suitable climate, for millimetre wavelength astronomy it’s much like optical astronomy, you need to be up a high mountain in a… in a thin atmosphere with a… with a clear sky above you because the atmosphere makes the difference. In the millimetre waves you… you don’t want atmospheric absorption with water vapour and suchlike. You need clear skies. And I became involved with the… I wasn’t hands-on because that wasn’t my field, but I… I was chairman of this committee which… which decided that what the UK should be doing was building a millimetre wavelength telescope. And at that time young Richard Hills, as we called him, had just finished his PhD and was a graduate student and he was thinking about a millimetre wave telescope. And we began to think very seriously about that and to… what you would need to build. Richard Hills took up research in collaboration with the Rutherford Lab on the engineering project and simultaneously we began to think where to locate such an instrument. In the end we settled initially for the Canary Islands but, ultimately, when we began to seek international partners to help with the funding – and I wasn’t involved with that – I… I then began to hand over the reins to… to other people – but millimetre wave astronomy began to develop. And I think this group missed some opportunities because I wasn’t in an official position to make decisions, powerful decisions about things, and we could have been world leaders in millimetre wavelength radio astronomy. And that probably should have been the way the group went. And if I’d been a proper head of the group, given official freedom to do things, that’s the way we might have gone.
But that… that was the time, I think, when we missed some opportunities because the university, which had just let radio astronomy develop because radio… Martin Ryle was such a powerful figure, didn’t realise that he’d faded, and Cavendish Professors who were also not running the Department of Physics, who are the authority that really runs the group… the radio astronomy group formally within the university – we are part of the department and they’re responsible for funding and… and making appointments – didn’t… didn’t foster these developments, these international developments, and the group didn’t grow as it should have done in that period. And that was the time I was taking over as head of the group and it wasn’t terribly easy, I have to say, for me. But eventually, we sort of found our place, Richard Hills, in collaboration with the Rutherford Appleton Lab, did design the best telescope. We got international partners, initially the Dutch and then the Canadians, and… and the millimetre wavelength telescope, which became the James Clark Maxwell Telescope, JCMT, was mounted in Hawaii, which is the best site in the world. And that really came about as a result of pressure from our international partners who said, ‘Well, an instrument of this quality deserves the very best site in the world and that has to be Hawaii at… at the moment’. And that’s… I mean the JCMT has been a great success but I think Cambridge could have had a more dominant role in that than… than it did if… if Martin Ryle himself had not faded, but not… not retired, as it were, sooner. I mean I think, really, he should have taken early retirement, but I think he obviously didn’t for financial reasons, and that was a bit of group history which could have been better. The pinnacle was establishing the 5-km telescope, but Martin Ryle never carried on from there and clearly the group has… has now developed into international partnership on… on a large scale.

I should also say, of course, another powerful development at that time was John Baldwin’s optical interferometer, which was a world breaking piece of research, devising an optical analogue of our synthesis telescopes, but working at optical wavelengths. That pioneering work – I think John Baldwin hasn’t really received the recognition he should for that, to be honest – it was an amazing piece of work and that… that happened while I was head of the group and… and I was immensely keen to see… see that flourishing. But that… when that became… when it became clear that John Baldwin had made a major breakthrough there and that you could plan a much bigger instrument on a really good site to develop this, just like our early work on synthesis led to the 5-km telescope, John Baldwin himself wasn’t interested in… in building a huge international team, not the slightest bit. He was a bit more like me: he was interested in running his own research, doing new things and developing as far as he could. And… and he really handed over the international development of his ideas to other younger scientists who had been research students with him. And now the… the optical interferometer in Socorro, in New Mexico rather, is… is proceeding in an expensive way and… and, really, the Cavendish could have had a much bigger role in that than it had. But, you know… things develop in Cambridge and I think, in a sense, radio astronomy suffered a little bit from… from that fading which followed Martin Ryle’s illness, but his… his holding onto the reins until almost… almost he died – he died in 1984 and then the group went through a slight – I wouldn’t call it a slack period, but we…we could have… we could have developed things faster and… and been a greater power, I think, in the development of… of millimetre wavelength astronomy than… than we were. It’s done very well and I think the group now, as a university group doing lots of different things as it is, is doing extremely well. But we missed an opportunity there.

One of the features of pulsars which has always interested me is the fact that even after 40 years… last year we celebrated the 40th anniversary of the discovery of pulsars in 1967 and I went to a meeting, a big international meeting with about 100 scientists from all over the world. And the enormous amount of interest in so many different directions, which the discovery initiated, I mean the… there’s so many different things involved with pulsar research now. And this… this links up also with the future of the group in the sense that we are a very active part of the development of the next international radio telescope called the Square Kilometre Array, which is a vast project in which, I think, almost every active radio astronomy group in the world is involved in some way or another. In… in building a complex instrument which is going to have an enormous high sensitivity but, in a sense, is a grand enlargement of… of the work I was doing with my array when I built the array that discovered pulsars. It’s a huge number of elements covering a large area of ground, in this case a square kilometre, so it has enormously high sensitivity. And, unlike my array which had just a simple receiver, this will have many receivers at many different wavelengths and will… not only will it have an enormously high sensitivity, but will have enormous coverage of different wavebands which open up all kinds of different fields of research. And the whole pulsar field now is still… although… although the Square Kilometre Array when it’s ultimately built will not be confined to pulsar research, it will be the instrument for radio astronomy, but pulsars will be a big part of it.

Pulsars are still a major… will be a very major part of… of the research done by… done by the Square Kilometre Array, and the number of different things that have emerged from the pulsar discovery always give me great pleasure to think that, you know, you were the trigger that… and your work at Cambridge was the trigger that set… set this thing off. The… going back in history, it… it wasn’t long, actually, after the pulsar discovery that I received a letter from a graduate student in the United States – he was called Joe Taylor and he was then a research student looking for something to do and he wrote me a letter saying, do you think it would be a good idea to build an antenna array, something like this, something like yours. And I said, yes, I think… I think that would be a wonderful thing to do, and I gave him a lot of support. But it was Joe Taylor whose research went on from that to bigger instruments using… using major facilities like… like the 1000-feet dish in Arecibo, which led him on to using pulsars for extremely fundamental physics research. And because pulsars are such accurate clocks, they’re immediately useful for testing Einstein’s theory of general relativity. And one of the predictions of Einstein’s theory is that if you wave sufficiently massive objects around sufficiently fast, they generate ripples in spacetime, they distort space and time around them. And… and these distortions in space and time propagate outwards at the speed of light and they’re called gravitational waves, and there’s enormous interest now and enormous amounts of money being spent around the world in various instruments, attempting to detect these distortions of space and time. But the pulsars, because they’re such, they generate… because they generate such intense gravitational fields near them, that they become in themselves physics labs for… for testing general relativity. And Joe Taylor, who was a graduate student, when he, when he first wrote to me and got interested in pulsars, was finally awarded the Nobel Prize for… for demonstrating that gravitational waves must exist. In 1975 he discovered a pulsar which was in orbit about a neutron star, it became known as the first binary pulsar. And the orbit of this… of these neutron stars is extremely rapid: they orbit each other in just over 7 hours, which is… which is an incredibly close and rapid orbit, and they’re… they’re generators of gravitational waves. And Joe Taylor was able to demonstrate from careful timing of his pulsar that, over the years, the… the orbit was shrinking as orbits must if they lose energy, and it was shrinking at exactly the rate you would predict using Einstein’s theory of gravitational radiation. So that Joe Taylor… well, I… it was Taylor and Hulse – his graduate student, Hulse, who discovered this pulsar, but it was Joe Taylor who actually used it to check gravitational theory. Over… over many years observations they found that the approach of the neutron stars was at exactly the right rate to be explained by energy loss into gravitational waves. You couldn’t detect the waves directly as distortions of space in time, but you could detect the energy loss in them, and that fitted Gravitational Wave Theory precisely to within a fraction of a percent. And Joe Taylor was awarded the… the Nobel Prize for that. Now, the Square Kilometre Array, when it exists, is going to follow up all sorts of different kinds of physics. At the moment we know something like… we have discovered about 2000 radio pulsars, radio emitting pulsars, in our galaxy and with the Square Kilometre Array many, many more are going to be discovered.

Pulsars open up a huge range… a huge… they’re really physics labs, as I said earlier, and you can do different kinds of physics… physics with them. Solid state physics, just what goes inside a neutron star, is something which we’re very unclear about at the moment. And particle physics, which you can learn about by having huge accelerators like the Large Hadron Collider in Cern, which is just coming online now, particle physics is not yet developed well enough to know what the interior structure of a neutron star would be… would be like. The matter reaches densities in the centre of a neutron star, which lie beyond the theories that… that we have from laboratory physics, but it’s possible that by looking at how pulsars spin and what happens, for example, when the – when sudden changes occur in the structure of a neutron star, we can detect all these things happening by careful timing measurements. And you can, as it were, have a window into the physics that’s going on right in the interior of a neutron star, what we call the equation of state, and this is an active area of research which is going to develop a lot, I think, when we have the Square Kilometre Array and we have more, more pulsars to look at.
There will be, I’m sure, rapidly spinning pulsars which are… which are of greatest importance for this and already what is close to the limit of being able to explain pulsars by neutron matter as we currently understand it in… in the… the lab. If you found a pulsar spinning more rapidly than about 1000 revolutions per second, you couldn’t explain it by conventional physics. You would have to develop particle theory to have not maybe a neutron star, but what you might call a quark star, something which is even more dense and more compact, otherwise it would fly apart. And one hopes that with the Square Kilometre Array one’s going to extend our knowledge of the pulsar sample to rarer objects which are of… of great physical interest. And one can see various ways in… not only in… in checking Einstein and what form of general relativity is most accurate, but… but getting at the physics inside a neutron star. And then again, there’s the physics of the atmosphere, what happens around a neutron star. We believe they’re surrounded by a magnetosphere, that’s, to say, a large cloud of ionised gas which is flung off from the neutron star as it spins. Well, now already last year, I heard about research where you have a pair of neutron stars and they’re sufficiently close that the radiation from one pulsar – there are actually two pulsars in orbit about each other – the radiation from one pulsar passes through the atmosphere of the other and you can detect effects in the magnetosphere of the pulsar directly from the way the radiation is… is affected as it comes through the atmosphere. And this gives you a way of… of probing the actual atmosphere of a pulsar, a neutron star, the magnetosphere. And this is just one aspect of… of physics, I mean, it’s another aspect of… of highly energetic plasmas which must surround these… these stars, but directly observing it from the way the radiation is modified on its way through the atmosphere, it’s probing the atmosphere.
And… and there are going to be lots more aspects of physics where you can directly observe phenomena which tell you about things which you could never achieve in a… in a physics lab because you simply cannot handle matter of these densities, you can’t generate it. And it’s extending physical knowledge so that neutron stars and pulsars are not just lovely things to have found, but they’re leading on in many different directions to developments of pure science itself. And… and that gives me enormous pleasure and, I mean, I’m looking forward to the first results that come from the Square Kilometre Array because I know that with many more pulsars discovered there are going to be much more interesting things coming out. And this is going to extend physics in different ways, which we’re only just beginning to understand and seeing how that goes is… is going to be most exciting, I think. So that… this group, hopefully, will be involved with that pulsar work because we are part of the team, the international team, which is developing this antenna and astronomy now, radio astronomy, is… is still a very exciting and… and… very exciting and, I think, a very useful aid to fundamental physics. So it’s… it’s right that we should be here doing these things at the Cavendish Lab, which is the home of physics and it isn’t now just another branch of astronomy, it’s still basic physics that… that we’re doing. And I think the future is very bright for astrophysics.
