benoit.mandelbrot

Benoît Mandelbrot (1924-2010) discovered his ability to think about mathematics in images while working with the French Resistance during the Second World War, and is famous for his work on fractal geometry - the maths of the shapes found in nature.

						I was born in Warsaw on November 20th 1924. Before I tell you about my life I would like to tell you a little bit about my family. My mother was born in Lithuania and my father in Warsaw, but from a family that viewed itself as being from Vilnius, Lithuania, as well. In my mother's family a very strong figure was her grandfather who must have been born around 1820. As a young man he walked to Petersburg, and became in due time the manager of the properties of a major Russian nobleman. When he was a very old man, and my mother was a young girl, she was very pleased and surprised to have her grandfather received like the Prime Minister of the Emperor, which this man became. He came back home and established a family. One of the most striking features about him was that he decided early on that all his granddaughters were to become doctors. For this reason my mother became a doctor, and later became a dentist. Her sister was a doctor; in fact, almost everyone in the family, all the women in her family were doctors as well. On my father's side most of the men were scholars, they had, some had in fact no clear occupation, They were wise men who were supported by a group of faithful who worked for advice, leadership etc. My father however was from a different generation and became a businessman. My mother went to medical school before World War I. They had married shortly before, then they had a child, and during World War I had a very adventurous life because of all the different terrible things happening in Eastern Europe. At one time, they were in Krakówow during the Russian civil war with my uncle - my father's younger brother- who was to become a very important person in my life, was there as well as a student of mathematics. It sounds strange, but it was so; the civil war was raging but the mathematics department of the university was going on as if nothing were wrong. Shortly after World War I my parents lost their child in an epidemic, and then had two more sons: myself and a younger brother. This fact is important because my mother, as a doctor and a bereaved mother, had a great fear of epidemics. After a few years of very normal, very happy, problem-free childhood, the question arose: would she let me go to school? She was so afraid of epidemics that she didn't let me go to school. However, there was an uncle who was a very cultured man, but almost permanently unemployed, - life was very, very rough in Poland, who was hired to be my tutor. So for two years of learning reading and writing, counting and the alphabet, I was tutored by this man who was quite unskilled in the art of being a tutor or a teacher. He didn't think it was fun to teach me the alphabet, so I didn't learn it. At least I learnt the beginning and the end, but not the middle. He didn't think it was fun to teach me table multiplication, so I never learned - well, I know most of it but with glaring gaps. He taught me how to read maps, how to play chess, how to argue, how to hold opinions on various subjects which he felt strongly about and, all in all, it was quite a strange, strange, strange beginning to my education.
					
						Then this became impossible and I had to go to school, and I remember very little about school between, say- third grade and age eleven, except how strange and uncomfortable it was. The Republic of Poland had been reconstituted in 1918 after over a century of interruption and was very keen on having compulsory universal primary education, but this was not happening in the schools. It was happening in, how to say, schools, which were actually apartments - in residential buildings transformed into schools. These were extraordinary cramped quarters with an extraordinarily tight arrangement between teacher and students, but I have no recollection of either having been a good or a bad student, or of having had fun or not fun. School was something comparatively insignificant compared to the rest of my life, which was much more active. My parents had endless numbers of relations. It was a very, very large extended family and things were happening all the time.
					
						The major event occurred when I was eleven approximately, when we moved from Poland to France. My father had had this business in Poland, which was destroyed by the Depression. The Depression was bad in the US, bad in Germany, bad in England - in Poland it was simply desperate.  I can remember as a child my parents showing me whole boxes of IOUs from various sources and those people who owed my father money were not to be found. In 1931 he decided that the situation was hopeless and moved to France five years before we did. Why to France? Because his younger brother, the one who had been studying mathematics during the civil war in Krakówow, had in the meantime come to Paris and had become extremely successful. He came to France in 1919 or so, a young man very seasoned by events of various sorts, but not broken by World War I like many people in France and Britain were. France was lacking energetic young people. He was very much in the style of the mathematics that was in fashion in France. He became rapidly very well regarded, and received a professorship and, in due time, later on, when I was already in France, he became professor at the College de France, which is the highest institution of learning in Paris. I'm going a bit too fast. My uncle was an important figure in all of these affairs. But moved to France, and then another very strange interruption occurred in my schooling. First I went to elementary school to finish learning French - we spoke French but not very well - so by the time I was finished with that year of studying I was twelve and half, say thirteen, and the normal age to enter high school was eleven. Therefore I started two years behind. And in the same way as my first two years were very strange and irregular, the schooling at high school was strange and irregular. For example, I went to a Lycee in Paris, I was two years older than most students, I was much taller, I was, I think, rather brash, and the teachers had an uncanny propensity, I felt, to pay as much attention to me as to all the rest of the class. Once again, I remember high school not as a kind of very regulated and difficult and tedious exercise, which many people remember it to be at that time in France. But a time where very bright people were there just to talk sometimes about mathematics, sometimes about Latin, sometimes about French, or sometimes about some other interesting subjects. The professor of French and Latin in my first year at high school was a very scholarly man, who otherwise would have been a university professor I imagine . He had a passion for Paris and every Sunday took the class, or whoever wanted a class, on a tour in Paris. His idea was that Paris was worth a tour per year. Thus when it was finished he started again with a different group, and that provided me with knowledge of the older, nicer parts of Paris in extraordinary detail; much more than any guidebook could provide. Because he would explain the history, the people who lived there, the ups and downs of different neighbourhoods and how the life of the city would move from one place to the other. That came to very good use later on, on many occasions. But again, the main feeling was of being in school but not quite connected to school.
					
						Then the war came. Now why was that expected? My parents, I said, "went to France," like that, cold. But it was actually an extraordinary wrenching operation. Of course my parents wanted to be reunited and my father could not possibly return to Poland, where the Depression was getting worse and worse and conditions were quite intolerable. My mother was then about fifty, she was a doctor, very successful, and by coming to France she was going to become a housewife. She had any number of friends, school friends, family friends, in fact a whole community. By coming to Paris she was going to become quite lonely because she only knew my father and his sister and brother who were in Paris. For her, this move from Warsaw to Paris was an extraordinary sacrifice. Why did they do it? Again, in part to reunite the family, in part because they were afraid that the war was going to bring terrible things. They didn't want my brother and myself to stay in Poland and become, how should I say, more Polish and therefore have more trouble when the war inevitably came. Clearly they didn't expect what happened, but they expected very bad things to happen, nevertheless. So war came. In the meantime, my uncle had become well established and had a country house in the centre of France in a part called Correze, which is way in the hills and a very poor part of the country. We went to Tulle, the capital of Correze to  high school and then I finished high school, jumping classes. But I don't remember high school as being classes. I just moved faster and after two years was back with people my age. The professor I remember most was the professor of French when I was in the first grade, which means between sixteen and seventeen. She was a very scholarly person also who decided early on that I wrote French well enough for my grade and that she was going to give me special difficult exercises in class and correct them in terms of the university rather than high school. But history and French were the most important topics involved. In the last year it was mostly mathematics, taught in a very, very tedious and organised fashion. That was the only year I remember as being well organised in high school.
					
						In '42 two things happened, quite unrelated of course. On the one hand I finished high school and took this baccalaureate, which in France is the high school graduation degree, and of course the Germans occupied the whole of France. Before that, between '40 and '42, the unoccupied zone was genuinely unoccupied, that is the Germans were very much a presence but not on a daily basis, and particular in a place like Tulle one didn't see a single German, and prewar conditions continued. We had many friends through my uncle and therefore we did not feel as isolated or as lost as many people who had moved to the country from Paris might have felt. From '42 on things became very rough, and for about a year and a half I had a hectic and complicated life that I will not describe in detail, except to say that at different times I had different jobs. I was running around to keep my body and soul together. To go to school again was something which was quite inconceivable. I didn't have the money for it, we were afraid of going to the school and to put ourselves in danger, and in general it was very difficult to imagine that I could maintain any kind of regularity in this life. I may add that during the war in occupied France life was not as perturbed as one might have expected. It's a well known fact that these wars tended to leave large parts of a country more or less the same, then a storm went by, some destroying a little or destroying a lot, and then again a kind of peace came to call again. It was not a matter of horror every day and on a routine basis, far from it. I remember life in Tulle at that time, from '40 to '42 as being more or less normal. In fact, surprisingly normal. But the year and a half after that became very, very rough. I had several very close calls with disaster, which I won't describe because they had, I think, no influence - the details had no influence - on my life. But at the end of '43 after a particularly rough episode, the people I was living with, who belonged to the resistance group and were taking care of the welfare of various people and occupying them properly, decided that I needed a few weeks or months of rest. We didn't know how long the war was going to continue. But what did rest mean? Something instead of being in places where I was completely out of place - I was playing roles, which clearly were taken up- I did not look like an apprentice toolmaker on the railroad, which I was for a number of months, because I just spoke differently, I acted differently. I had strange books in my bags, which was very imprudent, but I carried on regardless. I held books that I had collected in this little town, books of mathematics, most of them very old even by then, which I was reading and trying to understand so as not to completely lose touch with what I was going to be studying.
					
						So in early '44 I found myself in Lyon, in what is called commonly in France 'le top', the official name is post-graduate high school, Preparatoire, and the purpose of this group was primarily to just cram for an exam, in fact for several exams the École Polytechnique, the École Normale, etc., etc. The fact was that there was and there is a gap between high school, on the one hand, and the elite universities, which are called Grandes Écoles. This gap was filled by classes given by some high schools for students who were deemed to have a chance of being accepted to these elite schools. Now the reason I was put in that class was not that anybody felt that I could, after all these years of not studying, catch up or do anything like that. In fact it was very difficult - this planning to keep me out of harm's way for a few weeks, or a few months, so I could recover and perhaps participate more actively again in the events of the day. But things turned out very differently. First of all, in the first week I understood nothing, which was not incomprehensible after having missed a year and a half of studying. I was with students who had studied for a year and a half, again under conditions that were disturbed every so often, very roughly, but on the whole were comparatively undisturbed. So I understood nothing. In the second week, I understood nothing. And then towards the third or fourth week of this 'forcible' stay in such an environment I suddenly realised that there was a game being played. That is, the professor would give us exams or problems in algebra of a very abstract kind, but I didn't perceive them as being abstract; I perceived them as being concrete, and not with anything conscious about it. I didn't just sit down and say, "Can I think of a geometric construction, which would be exemplified by these questions of analysis?" I just simply, spontaneously, thought of such shapes. It was a freakish gift which I must have had for a long time but which events did not have an opportunity of bringing out as they did in that winter of early '44. And I would raise my hand and say, "But isn't your question equivalent to asking how these two surfaces relate to each other, and whether intersection has this and that property?" The professor would say, "Well, yes, but after all, the question is not to know what surfaces, but the question is to learn about how to do algebra very rapidly." One was learning algebra, and this was a pretext for learning algebra, and not for doing geometry. It's very strange that in high school I never knew, I never felt that I had this very particular gift, but in that year in that special cramming school it became more and more pronounced, and in fact in many ways saved me. In the fourth week again I understood nothing, but after five or six weeks of this game it became established that I could spontaneously just listen to the problem and do one geometric solution, then a second and a third. Whilst the professor was checking whether they were the same, I would provide other problems having the same structure. It went on. I didn't learn much algebra. I just learned how better to think in pictures because I knew how to do it. I would see them in my mind's eye, intersecting, moving around, or not intersecting, having this and that property, and could describe what I saw in my eye. Having described it, I could write two or three lines of algebra, which is much easier if you know the results than if you don't.
					
						In a few months - because that whole event lasted only a few months - the professor of mathematics saw a few of my classmates and friends and told them about forecasts for the exams. War was raging, France was occupied, but this thing was going on as if nothing was happening. I don't know what would have happened without the landing, but that is how these events proceeded, as I found. The professor told almost every one of his students that he could very reliably say: this one's going to get in, for example, to the École Polytechnique, which was taking 200 students and was the easiest to enter. He felt nobody was going to get into the École Normale, and others would just barely make it, others probably would not make it at all. But one student, for him, was a totally open book: I was that student. He said either I would end up first, or among the first, if I guessed the geometry; or I'd be miserably behind because there was no way that if I didn't get the geometry I could do the algebra in time. Well, I may add more about this. French schooling at the time was clearly quite archaic: that is, these programmes had not been changed for fifty years and more - actually very similar to the tripos at Cambridge, they'd remained for a long time in a very steady state.  If it had been unfolded later, geometry probably would have played a lesser role and this kind of game, which saved my life, would not have been possible. But that's how it was. Many years later, I may add, I had the opportunity of revisiting this professor. I was in Grenoble and had to go near Chamonix to give a lecture and learned that this man had retired and was living near Chamonix. I called him and he remembered me instantly. He asked me to come over for supper, which I did. He brought his successor from that school in Lyon to visit, and his wife was there, whom I'd never met before. He told his wife "This is the man I was telling you about in the winter of 44; the student which forced me". His father lived with them and had also been a professor in the same kind of Preparatoire, and they had spent nights, weekends, trying to find problems of algebra which would baffle me and almost completely failed. They looked at all problems in examinations, found the driest, the most incomprehensible ones and for each of them I instantly found some kind of geometric interpretation. 



Do you recall his name?



Yes, of course. Monsieur Croissal was a major figure. It must be said that his preparation was intense to the point of being - amazing. I think we spent twelve or sixteen hours a week with that professor; that is, for him it was an enormous job. He had nothing else - his full teaching load was one class of preparation. There was also a professor of physics whose name I do not remember; the physics was very stereotyped and quite boring and I could guess nothing. I have no recollection of chemistry. There was a professor of French and philosophy, who was professor of the literary students who were preparing for the literary exam of the École Normale, and his name I do remember: de Bideur. I recall when in particular handing in French or philosophy papers to de Bideur who said, "I think this a practical joke happening, because there's one paper more than I expected, and this paper is so good it doesn't look like any one of you people could have written it. Is there an extra student since last time?", I was the extra student. I said, "It's my paper." Well, he was surprised. It was due to the work of Mademoiselle Trancher, who was my teacher in French at high school a few years before and who had taught me to write, in a certain sense, eighteenth century pastiche if I wanted to, which I did on that occasion, it was just a fun story.
					
						Another thing happened that was very linked to it. I had absolutely no experience in drawing. There was no temptation. My father was very much interested in painting and I remember very well the first day when we arrived in Paris, after the first weekend, when he found had time to walk take us around Paris, he took us to The Louvre and to the conservatory of Arts and Crafts, which is a museum where they keep old planes, old cars and so on, because he wanted us to know about technology. He was very, very keen on that, and he also wanted to share his love of classical painting, in particular of Titian. But I didn't know that I could draw, but in that preparation for the École Normale and the École Polytechnique, at the time drawing was just part of the programme. It sounded ridiculous because there was no need for it, but again it was tradition. Once upon a time engineers had to be able to draw the state of something happening for their bosses, or, if they're coming to inspect a bridge being built, to draw what was happening. Therefore drawing was an important part of the game, and to train that skill in a kind that could be also subjected to exams, we had - well, the Venus de Milo, the Victory of Samothrace, the head of Voltaire, etc., etc., all kinds of classical and French sculptures to imitate. And I found that I could do it very accurately. It was rather soulless but extremely accurate and extremely careful depiction. All that was part of this complex of skills which again, amazingly enough, I did not know about before, namely the ability to draw, to see things in accurate detail, to see differences between my drawing and the model very accurately, and to think in terms of pictures. I might say that this had been my skill throughout, that in all the very complicated ups and downs of my life the ability to think globally- certain configurations has been predominant. The ability, the willingness, to ask myself questions about what shapes things are, because then I could think about them, had been predominant. In my work in pure mathematics most of it - the parts most exciting for mathematicians - has been parts in which I was asking questions which nobody else had asked before, because nobody else had actually looked at certain structures. Therefore, as I will tell, the advent of the computer, not as a computer but as a drawing machine, was for me a major event in my life. That's why I was motivated to participate in the birth of computer graphics, because for me computer graphics was a way of extending my hand, extending it and being able to draw things which my hand by itself, and the hands of nobody else before, would not have been able to represent.
					
						Now that was these few weeks under Monsieur Croissal, in that place, which were so central to my life. Lyons was a centre of many things happening. I was warned to avoid going downtown, ever, because if I were caught terrible things will happen, and now we know who was there. He was caught and judged. Lyons was also the centre of various Resistance and anti-Resistance activities, but for me Lyon was not that. I just stayed effectively in that school, day and night, seven days a week, because I had absolutely no money, and because I was afraid that, if caught, my official identity - which was quite inaccurate - would have been seen through and led to trouble.



So you were effectively in disguise?



Oh yes. From shortly after my high school graduation to the liberation of Paris, I was in disguise. Well, I could tell stories of how it came to be, but they are more the kind of stories you can read about in time of war. I wouldn't like to repeat which was, how to say, events which other people have been subjected to and which may have no relevance to my future life, but only those which had an effect. 



					
						Then liberation came; again the summer was very complicated, I will not go into detail. My nominal activity was to raise horses, which of course I didn't know how to do, but my real activity was something else. I would like to skip that. Perhaps I will tell one story about that because it's somewhat unusual.  I landed for reasons too long to explain in a little chateau, a big farm that was raising horses, what they call half-bred horses or they call them Anglo-Norman half-breeds. They're English racehorses crossed with other horses to provide the kind of animals for the colonels and generals in the cavalry. Very beautiful horses but short of thoroughbred and able to do some work. Well, the first day I arrived the owner of the place invited me for lunch, and said, "Well, in 1913 my horse Phoebus won the derby in Lyon. "Hi dam was.. his sire was.."  and he recited to me the pedigree of the horse to many generations. In the evening Monsieur de Riviere, as his name was, started again ... "In 1913 -" I stopped him. "Your horse Phoebus won the derby in Lyon. His -" and I recited the pedigree absolutely as verbatim. I was able to do that routinely. I didn't try to remember the pedigree of that horse, but I remembered it, and that saved my life because Monsieur de Riviere was so impressed that anybody had listened to him. He was used not to be listened to and being spurned as an old cavalry man whom everybody viewed as being a man of the past and not worth listening to. Some people have saved their life because they could tell one thousand and one tales of Scheherazade. I saved my life, to some extent, by reciting the pedigree of a horse long dead. It was actually rather interesting to raise these horses and to be in this community of people who were then at the end - they were raising horses by force of habit. Nobody wanted their horses as there was no need for the horses, but later on, of course, when France and England became more prosperous, horses came back. At that time they were just animals that those people had been paid in the past to ride and to raise and to breed.

					
						The war went on; liberation in the north, liberation in the south, and in the fall of 1944 there was a lull. We moved back to Paris. Again I prefer to skip the main events in the summer, they are irrelevant, I think, to my story as a scientist. I was accepted by the Lycée Legrand (1944), which is the biggest, most prestigious high school in Paris, and took the exams as such, as a student of Lycée Legrand. But I didn't really attend the classes. The professor told us the exams of '44 had been postponed, again the world was very unstable, and we would take them in December and January. In December and January we took these absolutely hellish exams. You take the written paper for one exam, the written for the other and the oral of yet another. For a very long time I was doing nothing else except going from exam to exam. At one point, I was walking down the Latin Quarter and Monsieur Ponce, who was, I would say, my host and my teacher but really my host in that high school, hailed me in the street and said, "May I speak to you?", I answered  "Yes, sir." "The examiners tell me that one student in my class did the math problem from end to end - in fact only one student in France did it and he's in my class. I don't understand it. I couldn't do it myself. And I know the students in my class, and not one of them could do it remotely. Did you do it?" I said, "Yes, sir, I did it." "How did you do this triple integral in the middle of the problem? It took me hours to get it." I said, "But that triple integral is the volume of a sphere if you don't work in x, y, z co-ordinates, but in u, v, w, which are natural to the problem." "Of course, of course, of course, of course, of course." So again, I'd gone through the moves of this terrifying exam by cheating. I didn't reduce that integral, I didn't think of cute ways of replacing this by that. I had no repertory of tricks of calculation, but I had an innate intimacy with shapes, and that whole problem, instead of doing it as a problem of calculation, I had done it as a problem of describing shapes.
					
						Before I continue I would like to stop to say more about my father and my uncle. Let me begin by my uncle perhaps. He was sixteen years younger than my father and one of the features of his personality which struck me always when I was small, and he was in a way the big figure in the family, was how he divided his mind between being a mathematician on weekdays and a painter on weekends. He was perhaps as good a painter as Churchill, or maybe not as good, but anyhow it was certainly a Sunday vocation. He was very much interested in painting and art. But for him there was an absolutely necessary separation between the two. His weekday mathematics had nothing left of geometry. For him geometry was very good for children to get into mathematics, to confirm their interest in mathematics. But to grow, one had to forget about it, because mathematics to his mind had completely gone beyond anything that was visual, sensorial or in the fingers, and had become extremely abstract. Even though his mathematics was mathematical analysis, which was born from very clear physical problems, he was very much in the spirit of 'mathematics without pictures', with not even diagrams because they were not necessary and were in fact, if anything, illusions.  Quite clearly in my mind the two have been present very strongly and totally linked. Where my uncle made the separation, I did not want to see any, and this antipathy towards mathematics that had been deprived of its visual and sensorial aspect has been a driving factor in my life over many years.  My uncle had led a charming life. He, as I say, came to Paris when he was needed very badly. He fulfilled a very important role. He was an excellent teacher. He helped greater mathematics survive at the time when otherwise it might have been crushed by other investigations. But the influence he tried to exert on me had been quite negative, even though, at one point, he started me on the study of iteration and Julia sets, which later became perhaps the most spectacular part of my own work. Therefore I owe to him this inspiration. My father had had a very hard life. He was nearly the oldest of a very large family. He was a very devoted son and stayed on to help his father and many sisters and brothers when his father, my grandfather, was not quite able to cope with everything. So he started working at a very young age. He was mostly self-taught. He was the kind of man of 1900 who throughout the bad years of the war was going to do self-improvements. Things were terrible but he would take self-improvement books and learn this and that, because he felt that everything he learned would be a good addition to what he knew, and also perhaps it would be additional ammunition if things went very, very bad. For him it was not a matter of mathematics and painting; it was a matter of engineering and painting, and this symbolic fact that he took us to the Louvre and to the other museum was very much emblematic of what he wanted us to understand. I saw the correspondence of my father when he was wooing my mother; he was sending her postcards of paintings he had seen because he was travelling for his business a great deal. My uncle was a very nice man but I would say he was a nice man in environments which were not hostile. My father succeeded in something, which we, that is my mother and my brother and I, felt impossible. He had a small business in Paris manufacturing clothing for children, rather cheap clothing. This was closed in 1939, and in 1945 my mother thought that he perhaps should become an employee somewhere, because he was such a great accountant, he was such a fast person, but he didn't want to start working for just anybody. He was a very independent person, had never worked for any length of time for anybody except when he was very young. He started from scratch and went to travel to these fairs and markets in western France, in the country, to see those people and say, "Well, five years ago I was selling you good stuff at a good price. I am back." Well they worked with him.




					
						Did you discuss with your uncle your ability to visualize mathematical formulas which for him were always kept separate?



Oh, it was a source of endless arguments and fights. He said again and again, "Geometry's for children. You must outgrow it." Much, much later - I am jumping forward now but let me jump because the question is very very relevant- I will tell you how my uncle wanted me to write a Ph.D. thesis to continue the work of Julia, which I didn't want because I saw nothing to do about it. That was in '47. And then, thirty years later, in rough numbers, I did this work that led to the Mandelbrot set, and brought the pictures to him. He was then a very old man. He was not well, and conversation was getting strained. I showed him those pictures regardless and said, "Remember, thirty years ago, you wanted me to take up this problem of Julia sets, of iteration, which you said had been lying completely untouched for thirty years, and to do something with it, and you said that what was lacking was a good new idea?" And he said, "Well, maybe, I vaguely remember, but if I did I had something else in mind than pictures. Where are the theorems?" "Well this conjecture was proven by so and so, and this conjecture is open, and people think it's very difficult and very interesting." "Well," he says, "I prefer theorems to conjectures." That is, his view of mathematics and mine were completely orthogonal. The fact that I was just back from the war, when these very sharp fights occurred, and again had never been caught, never been tortured, never been starved, but had been very roughly bumped around, hardened, and had saved my life on many occasions bothered him. I was able to think very fast on my feet. I had taken sensible decisions, in addition to being very lucky - all these stories are luck, luck, luck, and then some hard thinking on one's feet - I was not going to let my uncle tell me anything different. As a matter of fact, everybody who knew me at twenty or so said I was not an easy person in terms of respecting authority and experts. I've seen authoritarian experts crumble dreadfully during the war in a complete fashion and events occur in ways that were not predicted by them. So my uncle had very little actual effect on me, but those big fights left him exhausted, and me exhausted. They were not, how to say, mild intellectual discussions! First of all he was extraordinarily like my father in terms of physique even though there were sixteen years difference. They got roughly the same genes I suppose, at least significant ones, and so it was a fight between very similar minds, and he was not an easy person either. He was a nice person but he had his clear ideas. Discussions with him were the ones, which sort of trained me far more than any teacher I had in the university and elsewhere. I knew his prejudices. I knew very well how to correct for them after a few years. But there's no question that he and my father were overwhelmingly strong influences on my life then, and I think on my life forever.



					
						Since my parents and my uncle had such a great influence in my life, I would like to add a few words about all three of them. My parents, as I said, had lost a child before I was born. That child was very bright. In a sense, they were hoping with me, ten years later, to correct fate, and they had the most extraordinary faith in what I could do: there was nothing I could not do. This sometimes took actually a rather harsh edge. When I finished high school I received the 'tres bien', which is an A, which was extremely rare at that time. It was reserved for very special cases and was the highest honour. When I told my father coming back home, that everything had gone well, and that I got an A. He said, "Fine. Let's think about the future."  It was - somehow this had been "discounted" if you think in terms of the market. It was understood this would happen and so it didn't deserve much emphasis. I remember being disappointed, that somehow it was just so obvious I should do it. And it went on for a very long time. Sometimes I think of them as still pushing me. It's strange, but it is true. My uncle was very different. When he was a very old man and he always kept coming back to what he felt was the way I had disappointed him in the world. I will tell how he wanted me to go to the École Normale and how I left after two days. Over the years he would say, after conversation lagged, I went to see him,  "How are your wife or children", then he would say, "Well, you know, I know you hate the question. I keep asking you, but please excuse me. I forget your answer because I don't understand it. Can you tell me why thirty-five years ago you didn't stay at the École Normale?" It was a profound wound for him. I had never, ever realised how deeply shaken he would remain all his life. Then one day, I went to see him and he didn't ask the question, and I felt he was getting towards the end of his life, that he was no longer interested in the world, only in his own ill-health. He felt that I had done everything wrong. He was afraid that I would encounter the most extraordinary disasters because I had done something so profoundly ill-suited. My parents never thought I could do anything wrong. That's the big difference.
					
						My father and my uncle were extraordinarily strong influences on my life. And I was taught perhaps by my uncle. When I was thirteen my uncle became professor at the Collège de France.  Therefore I knew that mathematics was an option, that one could lead a life as a mathematician. On the other hand, the war had intervened, times were very rough, and my father had survived World War I and World War II under very complicated and heroic circumstances. My father had a very deep feeling about the uncertainties of life, and during and after the war he was extraordinarily keen not to allow his sons, my brother and myself, to even think about professions which would depend upon state certification, degrees that would be good in one place and of no value elsewhere and professions that would fill a need in one place and not another. When the war ended in, when my exams ended in the winter of 1945- though the war was not quite finished - it was clear that my father wanted me to choose a profession that would be as independent as possible of whether France would be rebuilt, whether Europe would come back, or whether we may have, once again, to pick up roots and move to the United States or South America. He wanted me to become a kind of engineer, which could find a job anywhere. My uncle on the other hand was a very successful person and he was extraordinarily lucky to be at the right place at the right time. He felt that the only thing I could even consider was pure mathematics. My uncle felt that in a way I should, and I was destined to, live his own life with one thing improved: namely, he did not go the École Normale. I, on the other hand, had entered the École Normale. And so in 1945 I had taken the science exams under heroic conditions and I was faced with a very big choice: should I go to the École Normale or to the École Polytechnique? And a kind of family council got together to, in a certain sense, really fight for my soul. My uncle wanted me to drop every consideration and just go into mathematics - I was very good, I was entering number one at École Normale, - and forget about any other consideration, just take a gamble. My father was very much against gambles. He felt that the life of a professor of mathematics in France was too much linked to a state, which was being rebuilt, but was certainly in very bad shape. A third person entered the story, a cousin of mine named Magar, who was a physical chemist. I would like to mention their ages: Magar was about thirty-five, my uncle was forty-six and my father was sixty-two. Magar felt that France was just about to enter a total change, and that schools such as the École Polytechnique and the École Normale were going to be abolished and that, in a certain sense, a completely new system would occur and my so decision amounted to nothing. He thought I should devote myself to science and forget about everything, forget about school. My uncle said not just any science but mathematics at the École Normale. My father said: anything except professions, which will link you to a certain environment. 

This fight was extraordinarily rough. It was one of the hardest parts of my life. In a certain sense, before world events decided for me, and except when my parents strongly intervened, as they did, I had to make up my mind alone. Now truly and deeply I can say that I've never made up my mind. My uncle's and my father's influence always fought in me and one of the reasons why my life has been so complicated, with lurches, if you will, towards very pure mathematics at one time, then lurches away from pure mathematics to very practical things, was very much this fight between these two men when I was approximately twenty.
					
						The first decision I took was to go to the École Normale. Frankly, I don't quite remember why I decided, but I wasn't very sure. So I entered the École Normale. After two days I couldn't stand it and I left, and I would like to explain why. Mathematics at that time was entering a new phase; more precisely it was entering into a hard second-half of its middle-twentieth century life. To make things very rough: the first quarter of the century was very mixed with many influences; the second quarter was a growing tendency towards abstraction; the third quarter, total domination of abstraction; and the fourth quarter of the century - the fourth was very mixed- again returned to what I view myself as a more normal situation. My uncle was very much a man of the first and second quarter, that is, he was not very abstract, but he was himself on the defensive. He was not a mathematician according to what was the ideal. In 1945 one must remember that the world was run by several very deeply felt movements, which knew profoundly in themselves that they represented the future and that it was not something that man could change. 'The March of History' led towards communism, led towards this and that, anti-colonialism; it led towards a structure in science. It was not a mild liberal kind of situation, but a very rough one. My uncle knew very well about it, and again, even though he wasn't defensive, he did not hold a strong position to try to stop it. And for me this kind of mathematics was simply horrendous.  I did not succeed in mathematics because of an ability to do algebra; I succeeded because I could think in pictures. They felt that pictures were sort of- the devil! I had this, because of my father and because of just my reading, which was perhaps also from my father, and because of other reasons, I had a very deep curiosity about how the world was put together.  For them, that didn't count at all. In a certain sense, a very deep sense, they were Platonists who said that the sensations and the world round us have no importance; mathematics was a thing itself; pure notions, pure categories. It was then that I increasingly realised that first of all, I didn't like it. Secondly, I was just not one of them: I would not succeed, I would not be happy there.  I could not change myself. After two days I simply decided to break and to leave. I was very aware of the consequences. I knew, as I was very widely read, of many historical cases where someone had been given a certain very high opportunity and spurned it. That person was treated much more harshly than a person who was not given that opportunity. For a long time it was very, very difficult for the École Normale to recognise that one could do well while spurning it, and the École Normale in a kind of broad sense, French mathematics and world mathematics. And also for me, to realise, that, in a certain sense, I have succeeded in helping to break their stranglehold.
					
						Why did I go to the École Polytechnique? Well, perhaps again it was a mistake of name.  I view that as being the best decision I ever took, that the École Polytechnique was the right place for me precisely because it was rather undefined, very broad, had many, many scientific fields and still had a certain concern with the real world. This was not very well expressed, especially in 1945 when it was barely being rebuilt; one did not know whether to apply the laws that stood before the war, or the new laws. But I could in a very strong way continue to build for myself this combination of everything which otherwise would have been impossible. Now, what happened then?  École Normale being extraordinarily small- I would like to say how small it was. Because it is very difficult in present time to realise these matters. In mathematics and physics the École Normale was allowed by law in 1944 to take 25 students. They felt that the level was below historical records. Not counting the effects of the war, they took 15. In other words, for mathematics, 15 students, an extraordinarily small number, and that out of two hundred candidates. The École Polytechnique got two thousand people applying for the exam; two hundred were taken in. They were very, very small schools. Therefore, after I decided to leave the École Normale, I found myself in a very strange situation because the École Normale, being so small, could arrange for the second half, from February to the summer of 45, to have a truncated year for the 15 students. The École Polytechnique could not. It therefore started in the fall of 1945 and my class at the École Polytechnique was called to some kind of military training. I volunteered. I say that I volunteered, because I was actually a foreign student. That was a complication of my birth in Poland and all the laws; I entered as a foreign student. I was very highly ranked but I was not entitled to all the privileges. So they went into military training and I tried to follow them and was told I couldn't. So I stayed at school and asked, "What should I do?", "Well, it's very simple. You are a foreigner, you can volunteer for the Foreign Legion and then in six months we'll do our best to get you out of it." That looked very unpromising because the Foreign Legion did not have the reputation of, how should I say it, leniency and easy manners! So from February or March of 45 the war was winding down, though not quite finished until September and I was, well, I was doing nothing, I was nowhere. I would like to underline the importance of those periods where in a way I was nowhere, I was not in school, because this was once again a period where I was not strictly in a framework where people knew what the purpose at school was, what the requirements were, how to succeed, and how to fail. During that period I learned; I read a great deal; also, after the war was over, I learned English very well because I became a guide in Paris. I know Paris inside out and so I was a guide for the high level people who don't take commercial guides, telling them details about life in those palaces, in Faubourg Saint-Germain when I had never been inside, but I knew everything about them. And then in the fall, École Polytechnique came to life and I was a student there for the two years from 45 to 47.
					
						It was very strangely organised. The main professors gave very few lectures. Then there were, not main professors, but other professors who gave exams and so on. It made for an extraordinarily tight, very tough schedule with work every week and exams at regular and close intervals. Indeed, the fact that it was a military academy was quite apparent. It was not run as an institution of learning, but as a military academy, which had become more and more a school for science and engineering as opposed to anything else. Now the three professors whom I remember best were professors of mathematics, of analysis actually. There was Paul Levy, Gaston Julia who was the professor of geometry, and the professor of Physics who was called Leprince-Ringuet. I first heard of Paul Levy, I remember it very well, was in the courtyard of the Collège de France in March 45. My uncle, having resumed his course at the Collège de France, had two or three people come over, it was an extraordinarily small group, and one of them was a person named Michel Loave, who was not exactly very young, but who was a probablist trying to establish himself at that time, and had learned about my situation from my uncle, who had actually told him, "Please help me save this lost soul. He just went to the École Normale, and left after two days. A terrifying situation."  Loeve told me that I would have the privilege of meeting Paul Levy in the École Polytechnique, who was, he said, one of the two great probablists of the day, the other being Kolmogorov. Now, Loev did not tell me much about Paul Levy, but I soon found out.  Paul Levy was a very strange person, for reasons that had nothing to do with events, because his life had been rather peaceful, he had taken a path which was also not of his time, and later on he wrote a kind of autobiography, in which he said he always had the impression of being an anachronistic person, that he was a person of the mid-nineteenth century lost in the mid-twentieth century. First of all, he too perhaps thought in pictures, but he didn't express it, he didn't confess it, but it was often very clear that his arguments were very intuitive and not the kind of hard mathematical proof type. Besides, he was making amazing mistakes of a childish nature. He would go through a paper and put the wrong formula for the surfaces here, then find a discrepancy of two somewhere else, and then he was surprised by it. Later somebody pointed out that it was simply in a little algebra mistake. Paul Levy was so brilliant in his youth that everything was forgiven him. Again I must say now I remember a stroke of fate that was not of his choosing, but of the world, which made him change his way. The dean at the École Polytechnique asked him to give a few lectures about gunnery. So he looked at gunnery, about how far guns can shoot and errors in gunnery, and became interested in probability; but instead of just stopping after the duty was performed he went on. Now in that sense Paul Levy did something I was doing, namely when the chances of life came he did not correct for them, he did not resume a straight and narrow, he let himself be directed by events, which I did again and again. Paul Levy had a very weak voice when it was not amplified. I was assigned to the last row in the auditorium, so I barely heard him, but I read his notes; every week we got these notes that were actually hand-written and then produced by a very old-fashioned system and called 'the sheets', the feuilles. The Paul Levy Feuilles were something very odd. Where other people had ten pages of straight algebra, Paul Levy had two pages of motivation, then two lines of algebra, then a few statements which were more or less proven, and then everything became either totally clear for one person, myself, and totally obscure for everybody else. So I was the interpreter of Paul Levy, where I said, 'Well, he says so and so, but what he means is not that. That's the proof, but there is proof behind it.' But in any event he made you understand what was happening. I was very friendly towards Paul Levy, but at the École Polytechnique I barely spoke to him.
					
						Julia was a very different person. He was much younger than Paul Levy and very much a southerner. He spoke with a loud voice and big gestures. He had been wounded during World War I very badly and his nose and half his cheek were missing so he wore a leather mask. The first day it was very, very odd. One only looked at his mask. After a few meetings, one forgot. Julia wanted to establish some contact with students but didn't know how, and besides he came in the period of his life where he did not have any interest for the course. Paul Levy was rewriting his a little bit every year to make it more perfect and, perhaps, more obscure. Julia was taking chunks of one course, chunks of another course and stacking them together. It was a much less inspiring course than Paul Levy's. Also my uncle had a combination of extreme admiration for Julia's works of the 1910s and 1920s, but a very bad personal relation with the man, which is another story I may come to later. But I never thought I would have anything to do with Julia. I was convinced that Julia was representative of a very long forgotten past, dying kind of mathematics and that whatever I would do I would not be concerned with that.



Did you learn about Julia sets at this time?



No, I only knew Julia as a professor. It was several years later, after my return from Caltech when I was looking for a Ph.D. topic, that my uncle told me that I should read Julia's great masterpiece of 1917 and that I became aware of it. I knew of Julia as being a great mathematician in a kind of old-fashioned fashion, as early at the École Polytechnique.
					
						Now the third was Leprince-Ringuet who was, in fact a very important person, not perhaps as a teacher, in the sense that it was just after the war, he had himself not become yet a member of the international community, and his course was, in parts, very old-fashioned, and partly new, it was in transition. But Ringuet was one person who understood that a laboratory had to be established, that experimental physics was something important. There was an extraordinary level of enthusiasm there. For example, I did go to his laboratory; in fact I worked with two people who later became very well known physicists, Muller and Lagarrigue who had the kind of  'Treiman' as they called it, and while Lagarigue stayed in very strongly, Muller also did, I think, even though I saw him less. I left because it was too much and too slow for me, in a certain sense. Actually it was not too difficult because, I must emphasise, I am very good with my hands; I have a steady hand, and so I could actually prepare the instruments by myself. But I felt that I wanted to start science not by just making little instruments for cosmic rays, but- not go so fast into experimental physics. 
					
						École Polytechnique was notable for the variety of its courses.  The course in mechanics was in a certain sense a masterpiece, in other senses rather peculiar. But the fact was that so many different fields, which in fact made no sense to give to students, were being presented - I say, "made no sense" because most students were mostly worried about the ranking. The ranking changed life. If you are number five you went into one civil service; if you're number six you go to a different one; if you're number twenty-one, your life was different from that of number twenty-two. So most students had no choice but to become extraordinarily focused. And there again the good thing at the École Polytechnique for me was due to a certain Catch-22. To be a regular student had to be a civil servant, and a French citizen for five years, which I was not, well, A had to follow B and B had to follow A. Now, I was very naive on these matters, and the École Polytechnique was very ill informed, so it told me that that was life and I could not do any differently. In fact, had I been well-informed I would have asked someone in the Council of State to review the conditions of my admission and so on, and they would have decided almost certainly to have me become a regular student. That would have been a tremendous change in my life, perhaps a catastrophe, because that would have put me in a position of having to model myself around a certain profession, a very well defined one. But I didn't have to do so and therefore in the École Polytechnique I was at the same time viewed by everybody as being on top of the class, but in fact free from the constraints of having to prove myself on every exam. I could - well, chemistry was pretty awful, I just did not study chemistry; but other fields were very exciting. I studied them in great detail. I even read all the appendices, of which there were just hundreds of pages accumulated over the years. So all in all, the École Polytechnique was a very good - I wouldn't say training for me, but the kind of circumstances in which I could- well- seek my role in life, and hope it will come soon.
					
						At the end of the École Polytechnique I became fairly close to a Professor of Applied Mathematics who was a very high official in the French Navy. He was a Navy Engineers Admiral. His name was Braue. I was looking for some activity, which would be highly mathematical, since I was good at it and at the same time very much hands-on. And everybody was telling me that I was absolutely naive, that I had to grow up, and in fact my uncle was scornful. When I told him that, he said, "What do you want in life?" I said, "Well, look, I would like to find a field, however unimportant, but one in which somehow no scientific mathematically demanding thinking can be applied, and do it myself." Well, he kept saying that I was dreaming of being a Galileo or a Kepler and that had been done before, long before, and now these roles didn't exist and I should decide upon a field. But I couldn't decide. Now, Braue recommended that I go to Caltech and work with Von Karman. Now, why Caltech? Why Von Karman and who was Von Karman? Von Karman, by then a rather old man, was a Hungarian who had received his Ph.D. around 1892 and in the '20s and the '30s he became a pioneer of fluid mechanics and aeronautics. During the war he had an extraordinarily involved role in rocket building and in the aeronautics side of the war in general. The most extraordinary quality that Braue thought Karman possessed was his ability to either know the mathematics or to find the man who knew the mathematics necessary for a topic, and of being close to the real problems. He didn't have to be told what had to be done: he knew that by experience, by intuition, by the generals he spoke to. My father was delighted and as a matter of fact, a year before, my brother who had received a place at the École Polytechnique did not go there, and instead went straight to the School of Aeronautics, because again my cousin, Magar, was telling us that the École Polytechnique was going to die and was not worthy to enter.  Why did my father favour aeronautics so much, both for my brother and myself? I think the reason is very simple. I learned later by reading the life stories of Von Neumann and Wigner that they were twenty-five years older. After World War I, their parents wanted them to study chemistry, chemical engineering. Chemical engineering was felt to have won World War I with munitions, gases and aeronautics together with nuclear power was perceived as having won World War II. My father also felt that aeronautics was a field that everybody needed because everybody needed airplanes and it was a very advanced and still, again, international profession. So I went to Caltech, on Braue's recommendation to Karman, and the next stage of my life began.
					
						I was there from '47 to '49. The arrival at Caltech was a crushing disappointment. Not that the place was not nice, it was just lovely, but it was a crushing disappointment first of all because Karman had gone, in fact he had gone to live in Paris. It's a nice story in itself why Karman came to live in Paris, but the main problem was that this union of mathematics and "hands-on" was no longer there. I had a course from one person who described how to build big rockets and how to fly faster, and he was sure, if he paid somebody millions, he's going to fly a rocket airplane and maybe die, but enough people are prepared to do it. So the sound barrier did not exist obviously. On the other hand there were mathematicians who were totally terrified of the sound barrier: something terrible will happen, some singularities will occur which are very, very difficult. As speed becomes faster, the equations change from being elliptic to being parabolic to being hyperbolic, and these equations behave very, very differently, and the core of my teaching of partial differential equations was to emphasise that the transition of one to the other didn't occur mildly. I had learned that from Paul Levy in analysis, and it was what people were teaching at Caltech. Therefore, in a way, I'd gone to a place, into a field where I didn't belong either, because again, I couldn't find this combination...



Although at Caltech there is a single department for mathematics, physics and astronomy.



Well, I was not in one of those departments. In fact, I was in the school of aeronautics, because at that time applied mathematics didn't exist and was part of aeronautics. But Caltech was well-known and recommended to me knowingly by Braue in many ways, and what you said is very important. Millikan, who single-handedly founded Caltech as a great school in the '20s, had been very burnt in Chicago by his colleagues in mathematics who never talked to him, never listened to him, were in a different world. So he decided in this new school that he was creating this would no longer happen, and so he specifically had the single division of mathematics, physics and astronomy, which was always run by a physicist, and mathematicians were in a certain sense a first class service department. They were not there to do what they liked, but to do things that the physicists liked. In that respect Caltech was certainly closer to what I felt was a proper relation between these fields, even though I prefer them to be more equal, than say Chicago, or Harvard or Princeton would have been in that period. 
					
						Now, I haven't said why I didn't go into physics, and that's rather a complicated story. First of all, my uncle was a brave man with enormous experience, but extraordinarily narrow-minded, and very conscious of reputations. He judged his field by personal knowledge; outside fields by reputations. He believed the experts. And he told me immediately that if I went to the École Normale I must not touch physics, because he said physics at the École Normale is not only not good, it is bad, it's old-fashioned, it is done by people who don't know anything, etc., etc. He was very, very scornful. Probably he was right, because physics then was in a very poor state. It was very difficult to imagine where to study physics in Paris in 1945, in a kind of great fashion. Physics came back to France only several years later - theoretical physics, I mean. Experimental physics again was beginning with Leprince-Ringuet. Actually, at the time, I didn't like the associations of physics with the atom bomb. I don't know why I didn't mind airplanes but I did mind the atom bomb. Actually it's a very common attitude of making a sharp distinction, at one level, of arms.
					
						So I found myself in Caltech. It was a very interesting time. It was also a time for beginnings and in many ways I didn't like Caltech; in many ways Caltech wasn't good for me, but in many ways it was a dream place. Because the war was finished, the students were simply extraordinary; I mean my classmates. In aeronautics several students had been war heroes; they were colonels in the Air force and wanted to become generals so they would come to get degrees at Caltech to help themselves. There were very few people without experience; people had been touched by the war, in one form or another, very deeply. Then many works that had been done over the years during the war, and not published or not publicised, were becoming known. And it was like spring. It was something where, wherever you look, some flowers are coming from the fields. It was in '48 that Wiener's Cybernetics appeared and it had an extraordinary influence in my life. Wiener was a friend of my uncle, so I knew Wiener, at least I had at least met Wiener. It was also then - and that was more important perhaps - that Max Delbruck came to Caltech and started molecular biology. And so I spent two years there. The first year I was a fairly regular student; the second year I had decided it was a mistake and I was not going to stay, therefore I did the course of study, but opened up my horizons in many ways. 
					
						One thing I learned then, which was very important for later, was about turbulence. Kolmogorov's work- well it's a co-op between Kolmogorov, Nabukov, Heisenberg, Weizsäcker and Onsager- had done this work during the war, was now becoming known. It was totally disbelieved. Nobody thought it was right, but the quality of those men and the simplicity of the result and the strange nature of the arguments were very, very attractive, and so we had a number of lectures about turbulence which later on were essential to my life, because I both saw what had been done and I saw how difficult it was to verify, to believe it, and how beautiful it was. And let me say a few words about that. In the most extreme form of this argument, which I think is due to Onsager and not to Kolmogorov, the spectrum of turbulence, which is a great monument of human understanding, came out of pure thought; not out of the equation of flow motion, no relation whatsoever; not out of experience with flow motion, no relation whatsoever; just, if the spectrum were K-5/3 so many things would be nice and simple and convenient. It was a totally ridiculous kind of science, but at the same time extremely mystifying and also very attractive. How come that the human mind can, starting with principles so devoid of content, make predictions so full of content which one could try to verify and at that time one could not verify? So, I emphasise, it was very much a limbo, a world in which interesting things were being said but very little belief was attracted to it.
					
						I would say the more important event was quite outside of my life's work, the arrival of Max Delbruck. Now Max Delbruck was, I think, one of the great personalities of those times. He was a physicist by training, a man belonging to one of the very highest families in Prussia, in many ways a great liberal, in many ways a great authoritarian. Max Delbruck had been told in the '30s, according to rumour, that he was just not good enough to be doing physics as well as he hoped; that while Bethe would spend a few hours and write seventeen pages of flawless mathematics, and Weisskopf wrote only fifteen, but equally flawless - and Pauli always preferred Bethe to Weisskopf because of this difference - well, Delbruck only wrote five and there were bugs to fix. He was not up to this competition, which he was finding himself in. But he had branched into biology, the first physicist (to do so). Schrödinger had written about him in his book What Is Life? Delbruck had suddenly become a challenge. And the challenge was met by an equally remarkable man named Beadle who was a farmer from Nebraska who had gone to university to learn more about corn to improve the yield of his farm and moved on, and by that time had become the chairman of the Biology division at Caltech. Beadle was a very bold person. He hired Delbruck, who knew no biology, and told him, "You go and learn biology by teaching Biology One to freshmen, and then go on and do your thing," - which was to introduce quantum mechanics ideas into biology. Now, I never knew what they were doing. They were very - I wouldn't say secretive, they were just a little elusive. They never said what they were doing. Well it was clear they were doing something extraordinarily exciting which for me was again this very strong hope of bringing hard mathematical or physical thinking to a field, which had been very soft before.
					
						Well it was one of those purely social accidents. In '48, a person who later became Deputy Director of the Pasteur Institute, came as a post-doctorate researcher to Caltech. He was French, I was French, so a mutual friend introduced us. And then those people very much disliked the apartment that Caltech had found for them, and I knew that there was an apartment vacant next door to where I lived, and my landlady asked me, "Do you know somebody nice to go there?" So I introduced those Frenchmen to my landlady, and therefore became neighbours. Therefore we saw each other very often. That was kind of superficial, but I went, I was invited to a few of Delbruck's parties and it was quite clear that this thing which I was dreaming of was happening; that this man who had this extraordinarily strong knowledge of quantum theory - he was later, well not a greatly significant contributor to quantum theory- had a pure command of anything he wanted, he could learn the mathematics he needed any time, had decided to go all the way to a very soft subject, but to tried to take it by the path which could be the hardest, namely molecular biology, which he in a way introduced, invented, discovered, whatever you want to call it. Now his post-doc's were an extraordinary crowd. I mean a large proportion of my friends, life friends, are from that period. Some of them include the most brilliant man I ever met, who is Carlton Gajdusek; I may speak about him a bit later. They're simply of a very high calibre, and of course I wondered should I go into biology? That was too far, it was too removed, I was probably too engaged and somehow also I would have been too late. I had this feeling that the moment of greatest tension was already past, and Delbruck and his first post-doc's had done it. I was wrong, of course, because it lasted for several more years.


					
						Why had I becoming disenchanted with aeronautics? Again, because some people were doing very practical applied work, which was not doing very well, I felt. For example, I became interested in turbulence and I met several people of great brilliance, very good friends. They were studying turbulence but somehow I did not feel that it was beginning. It was still very hard. The K-5/3, which was everybody's dream, was totally beyond what they could do. It was complicated, in a way, it was a mess that had already been visited unsuccessfully, rather than a fresh mess to order.  Furthermore, the mathematics was moving very far away from it. One of the professors I had during my second year was very blunt about it. It took - again, one of the turning points of my life - only a few minutes. He was giving an oral exam in his course. Caltech was on a quarter system so after ten weeks there was an exam, and so we chatted there were questions - I answered them. Then he leaned back and said, "Well, I have some good news for you and some news which may be bad. The good news is you have an A." "Thank you." "Well, you deserve it. The bad news is that I don't think you should write a Ph.D. with me because you do not admire me enough."  That was perfectly true, and I was very worried about that. I did not think that this man's work was going in the right direction. He was going too far, too fast, in a rather dry mathematical manner, attacking a problem, which he did not understand in a physical sense to my satisfaction. I was very relieved because somehow the idea of returning, of doing that work, was very repellent to me. But having seen what someone could do - Delbruck  having seen what someone could do in turbulence and being turned off by both, I reached a very profound crisis at that point in '47. I thought perhaps I'd made a mistake by not going to the École Normale. Now, if that hadn't happened at all, it would have been a total miracle, because again I was lost. I had been several years in very, very good schools. I was very well regarded personally and given nice fellowships and everything, but I was not even beginning to know what I was going to do. And so in the spring of '49 I applied to many of the maths departments, the new maths departments, which at that time in my mind were Chicago, Princeton and Harvard, also, requesting a fellowship because I couldn't come without it. Chicago accepted me and I was very close to returning, to going back to mathematics and just, well, starting four years later where I could have started before. It was a very tempting solution but I finally didn't take it. And perhaps my luck was that the person I would have been closest to would have been Niederberaist, well-known for his very abstract view of mathematics, and I just felt it was too much. I could go part of the way to mathematics, pure mathematics; I could work hard and get back in this field, but not that far, and this man's algebra was precisely what I was repelled most by.
					
						I came back to France - into the waiting arms of the French Air Force. It was a very complicated story. They suddenly realised that my military status was totally obscure. Some papers said I was active army because I was at the École Polytechnique; some papers said I didn't show up when I was called, so I was the lowest level of deserter. Well, I was drafted. It's a long interesting story as adventures go, but had no, or very little relevance to my life as a scientist, except perhaps for the following reason. Again I would like to emphasise, I spent a year in a certain way doing nothing. In another way, this was one of those extraordinarily important years when decisions were taken, where things fell somewhat into place. It was at the end of that year that I applied to the ONERA, the aeronautical research laboratory, which was a natural thing to do given my degree, with a year of finishing my Ph.D. with somebody who'd be closer to actual fluid mechanics and continuing. Well, that decision was natural but this year of thinking had made me dubious about whether I should do it, because, again, I had left Caltech because I couldn't find a nice Ph.D. topic, and because it was too much to hope that I would find a better one in Paris, where there were fewer people and many of the people were quite young and inexperienced.
					
						My father again took matters in his hand, and I emphasise the influence of these two men, my father and uncle, who at different times took my affairs in their hands. My father had become worried, about this, not his business, by my not deciding what to do, about my being overly demanding. At that time Philips of Eindhoven were establishing a laboratory in Paris; they were advertising for a person to help them, and I volunteered, I mean I responded to the ad. They hired me, essentially, on the spot. In fact they were quite right to hire me because it was a very interesting time in many ways. I had had substantial experience with spectral analysis, not as mathematical theory, even though my uncle had given me lessons about mathematics, but as a tool to study turbulence. Not a very good tool, but never mind. I know what spectral analysis was. It was not formulas, it was 'stuff '; you divide a signal into its components and looked at the components. It was a very concrete way of looking at it. And what Philips was bothered by then was the coming of colour television. Now, there was this process, which was in a certain sense the best, and the worst of all things the National Television Standards Committee, NTSC standard, which was being proposed by RCA and General Electric. There was a different system proposed by CBS which was just having a filter in front - a gigantic machine, it would have been a disaster to do it - but very simply, the people at Philips did not understand what RCA and GE were on about, and I understood it because I had a feeling about spectral analysis. In fact, my feeling improved, and I would like to say a few words because in some sense it's an amazing piece of engineering. They observed that if you divide the signal into three, green, blue and red, the eye perceives the green signal with great precision, and the red and blue with very low precision. So if you make the three signals equally sharp it's wasteful because the eye does not know that the red and the blue signals are so sharp. So the green signal had to be very sharp, and the others can be less so. Also they looked at the spectrum, at the actual osculation of spectrum by the signal of television; they observed that the green signal had big holes, that is, patches where the level is very low; and that if you took everything out, made it zero, it didn't make much difference to the signal. So this brave mind put the red and blue signal in the holes of the green signal. Now, that was very acrobatic! I was the expert on spectral analysis for a while. When, later on, colour television came to be, I was an absolute skeptic. I said, "I've seen this thing, how it works. It will never work!" We had such pain to make this machine work in the lab, I was absolutely amazed when they started being sold by the million, and then a little bit of tweaking of this NTSC made the TV we had which is - well, not the best but still a miracle of technology. So this was the reason why Philips was interested in me, and I think I performed this particular duty, and for the rest Philips did not know what to do with me. So I decided to look for another Ph.D. subject.
					
						Again one of these random events, which I was welcoming, because I simply wanted to find something, a mess I could be the first to simplify, These random events came up, and again linked with my uncle. My uncle lived near the observatory in Paris; I lived with my parents very far away, and often went to my uncle to chat. He was trying to improve me, to change me, maybe make me come back on the straight and narrow, and he was trying and trying and trying. And one day when I was leaving I asked him for something to read in the subway, and he leant down to his waste basket and got out a review of a book, which was sent to him by one of his colleagues at Harvard, who was sending him automatically all the reprints, including the review of this book. He had kept the reprints but the review had been thrown away, and he said more or less, "Here is a kind of nonsense which you would be amused by." And that review was amazing. The man's name was Walsh, who was a friend of a man named Zipf, and Zipf had written a book: so it was Walsh reviewing his friend's book. And he was a very good reviewer for a friend. He just covered everything which was terrible in Zipf and emphasised the mystery. And Zipf had come up with a finding, which he expressed at enormous length in his book and which Walsh summarised, which was as follows. He said there is a difference in quality between, on the one hand, randomness in physics, and on the other hand, randomness in social sciences. In physics randomness is ruled by the Gaussian distribution, so-called normal; but in social sciences randomness is ruled by power-law distribution, which was true of Pareto distribution of income, of distribution that became associated with Zipf of word frequencies; firm sizes, city sizes, etc., etc. Zipf put out a big challenge: explain these circumstances and explain the difference. Now, I'm going to go faster perhaps than I should to say how important this finding was for my life. For many years I went on developing power-law distributions and enriching them with quite an apparatus of a theoretical nature on my own, thinking as Zipf thought, as all my friends thought, that this was something specific for those exotic phenomena. And then this merged with turbulence, so the breaking point moved. On the one hand there was obviously the weather and the stock market, very irregular phenomena, which had the power-law distribution; on the other hand there was physics, which didn't have them.



"Gaussian distribution was known at that time, but it was considered just"



Esoterica. Paul Levy had said a few words in his course about stable distributions, which were due to Goshi, to Polya and to Paul Levy, but very little. He called them exceptional. It was just an exercise. It was something to write exams about, of no significance. It was well-established that these things didn't count, and during that period while preparing my Ph.D. I did take Paul Levy's lectures on other topics which taught me a great deal about probability theory a la Paul Levy, but that was still a bit before this. But in due time, in fact I remember the date almost precisely, I could find it precisely if I wanted, in '71 or '72, I was to give a lecture at a meeting of the American Physical Society near where I worked then at IBM. I was the evening speaker; somebody who was very wise or just simply lucky, for everybody, had thought that what I had to say would be interesting to physicists. At the end of my lecture I went to sit with one of my friends there, Herb Talan, and he was smiling to his ears. He couldn't believe it. "What you say is exactly what's happening in physics. There's a new field of physics opening up. The great names are Karenov, Fisher and Wilson; there are two pre-prints, by Fisher and Wilson which are going to be ground-breaking, and what they do is exactly what you do, but in a different field, and different style." And so I'm going forward fast because I would like to emphasise that in terms of my thinking I was totally alone. I was looking at the most esoteric phenomena in nature and using the most esoteric tools, developing the ideas of what others called scaling, normalisation, fixed points, convergence to fixed points. These ideas were developed in two totally separate environments and styles, by the physicists on their side, - and by me in the story I'm starting to tell you- over a long period of time. I started before them, but that doesn't matter. It was just a matter of a few years.
					
						But of course in 1950, which is the period I'm talking about, it was a very long time before my finding out in '72 that I might not have been alone. As a matter of fact, a little bit later, when I was no longer at Philips, I wrote a little paper on scaling which I'd forgotten about until I stumbled across it a few months ago, in which I made a statement that those techniques make you think inevitably of critical phenomena. I was thinking of critical opalescence, which was something I'd read about, I was fascinated, but I said, "In physics nothing can diverge, whereas I need divergences." Of course, the physicists had to accept divergences also, but I didn't know it.
					
						While I was a consultant at Philips, I was also writing my Ph.D. And it was based upon Zipf's distribution for word frequencies which I view as totally devoid of interest, but perfectly fitting my personal search of some esoterica about nature, which I could explain the basis of as esoterica of physics. The latter took the following form: the partition function was not analytic, it had similarity, and the similarity partition - function, by an argument, which was rather straightforward but I could not state it in words gave rise to a result, which was very different from distributions encountered in the theory of gases. Which is why word frequencies follow a law so unusual by the standards of physics. I was very much aware of this thermo dynamical analogy and for many years I was writing articles with titles like Statistical?Macroscopic?Linguistic?' or something, because my, how should I say, beacon was thermodynamics. And I would like perhaps to go back a step for that. Why did I become so enamoured of thermodynamics and why did I acquire the facility to manipulate it? Not because of Leprince-Ringuet at the École Polytechnique, that was a course of rather a dry fashion. But at Caltech, since I was not working on a very specific subject I was taking courses of various kinds, and Richard Tolman, who was then a very old man, was giving actually his swan song, the last course he gave. He met us, rather a large group because he was a famous man. In fact he was one of the very few old professors at Caltech. At Caltech, when I was there, everybody was either very old or very young because of the break of the war. He met us and said, "Gentlemen, this course is not to learn thermodynamics. I'm not going to teach you the formalism. If you don't know it, you don't need to stay. I'm going to explain to you why it works." And then, I had my notes, I maybe even have them - I took notes for two lessons. I stopped. He was saying nothing that could be taken down, but he was, how to say, dismantling the clock and putting together to see how it worked. And also I read Gibbs. His thermodynamics was expressed in a very general abstract fashion. As a matter of fact Boltzmann had criticised Gibbs by saying that he did not need all that stuff. He was interested in gases, and not in an assembly of screwdrivers and sewing machines - or something of this sort, because Gibbs was so general that he could accommodate this assembly. I was overjoyed, because what I had was an assembly of trees, of coding trees which of course have very different properties from gas molecules, and that Gibbs' kind of thinking worked, whereas the Bozeman's kind of thinking would have been totally helpless. From this viewpoint, the fact that in my random studying I had had the experience of having these few remarkable people as models was very important, very, very useful. So, again, I wrote this thesis, of which actually one half was on thermodynamics, in 1952, and the big question was, what was the thesis in? At that time it hardly mattered from a bureaucratic viewpoint because it was a thesis in the sciences. It didn't say mathematical sciences or physical sciences, but still one has to say which category. I was very much in the dark about that, but then I met in the street a very close of friend of my uncle whose name was Alfred Kastler, who later became a very famous physicist, a man of great charm and great wisdom, and I asked him to help me decide whether I could call it mathematics or physics, because everybody who had read it was complaining that one half was a topic that no longer existed, namely thermodynamics, and the other half was a topic that didn't yet exist, namely the statistical study of these crazy esoteric phenomena. Where to put it? And he said, without hesitation, "Mathematics, because in physics you'll come in competition with a huge crop of new people, of Ph.D.s, good or bad, but you'll have plenty of competition. In mathematics you are so far from French mathematics, so despised and detested by them, that it will be perfectly clear you could only do applied mathematics, but there are no applied mathematicians. Therefore when jobs become open, as there will have to be because life moves and that thing cannot go on," - he was very much in a conflicting position with mathematicians - "you'll be the first to get a job." So you see how certain major decisions are taken for reasons that are not very theoretical! But all my life, and I don't like to hide it, events which I knew how to interpret or manipulate sometimes had a very good influence. I never felt I was following the flow of history, the inevitable development of some idea; I felt that I was being hit back and forth by various ideas and accepting or refusing their contribution.



Refusing dull subjects?



Refusing subjects, which looked dull.



So this is the line, still?



Yes, yes. Refusing subjects which were, in a certain sense, terminal.
					
						My big fight with my uncle was a matter of dates. I was telling him, I was very free with comment towards him, and conversely he was insulting me all the time, I was insulting him all the time - we were the best of friends!! I was telling him that I was horrified that his greatest pleasure was to add another layer to a question asked by Watson, who was answering a question asked by Hardy, who was reacting to this, and so on, and it went back to Euler -" Ah! - Euler," he said, "That's the great joy. If I could add something to an idea started by Euler!" That for him was the supreme pleasure. He forgot immediately the sources of the problems. For example, later on he was to criticise me for using spectral analysis in a manner he found a bit free, and I reminded him it's called spectral analysis because of a spectrum of light, or harmonic analysis because of harmonic properties of sound; it didn't come out of a Platonic idea: it came from light and sound, and it is a property of these hard things, or soft things, and that's what makes them understood, perhaps. But for me I found I could not stand the idea of working in this fashion. Of course I was punished for my belief because several of my papers later on did answer very old questions, but not questions which had been constantly being studied in which I'd be the last person.
					
						But let me again come back again to this Ph.D. thesis. Kastler was reassuring because he told me I will get a job, but I was nowhere. I was completely nowhere. And the great concern I had at that time in terms of a career, in terms of where I could be staying, was, in a way, to establish contact with two people I admired above all, because I thought they had succeeded in that search. They were Norbert Wiener and John Von Neumann. So as a post-doc, after I left Phillips I went first to MIT for about half a year and then to Princeton for a year, with Wiener and Von Neumann respectively. Now what attracted me to both is that they both, especially Von Neumann, had this very strong feeling for practical things. He was building his computer. He was not just a person who told other guys to build a computer. He was always about details, "How are you going to do this? Which kind of gadget are you going to use for memory?" He was extraordinarily precise in these matters. At the same time he had written a book on the foundation of quantum mechanics, which I read with terror but great interest. He had written this book about games theory, which looked then extremely promising but of course was just the beginning. He had done this work about logic. I mean, in a way Von Neumann was the person who had performed the miracle. He was for me the model above all models. But before that I went to Princeton, I went to MIT, to work with Wiener. Wiener was a sort of a flop. Wiener was by then too old, too removed; one couldn't communicate with him usefully, and everybody at MIT was pushing him around. I felt Wiener was a terrifying counter example - that even a man who achieved such great work as making a theory of Brownian motion, not as a mathematical idea but as something dirty and incomprehensible from which one must extract the mathematical essentials, that this man was not respected by anybody, neither by mathematicians nor any longer by the engineers, but Von Neumann was. Perhaps I should start by jumping ahead because it is an important fact. Much later, I was to find that my view of Von Neumann as a great man was completely confirmed. My view of Von Neumann as a successful person in a sense of being, how to say, accepted by the community for what he was, was totally wrong. Von Neumann, when I was there at Princeton, was under extreme pressure from mathematicians who were despising him for no longer being a mathematician; by the physicists who were despising him for never having been a real physicist; and by everybody for having brought to Princeton this collection of low-class individuals called programmers, who were just not the kind of people that Princeton liked to have on staff; and of having all those engineers, all those people in uniform coming to look at that- Von Neumann was simply being shunned. And he was not a man to take it. So even before I left Princeton, he had resigned from Princeton and accepted a position, which I can testify was well accepted, as a staff member in the Institute of Earth and Planetary Physics at UCLA, together with a very high-sounding Professorship at Large at the University of California. But he was not interested in the Professorship at Large at the University of California; what he wanted was a place where people really needed a computer, were prepared to do everything to make a computer, and were interested in real things, for example, space and planetary studies, because that was the frontier for him. Economics, planetary stuff, flight, and nothing else, so he didn't need the Princeton Institute on his calling cards at all and he accepted it. But I didn't know it.
					
So this year at Princeton was again one of great fruitfulness, and perhaps I could tell a story which in fact involves Von Neumann and Oppenheimer in some fashion, which was very characteristic of the way in which I was being perceived, and also of the difficulties I was having in finding a place for myself in the world, and that difficulty didn't cease for many years. I met Oppenheimer now and then, and then saw him in a train from Princeton to New York. We chatted. He asked me what I was doing, and I explained to him what I was doing. He became extraordinarily excited. He said, "It's fantastic. It's extraordinary, that you could have found a way of applying, genuinely thinking of applying thermodynamics to something so different, and that you find everything will be decided upon analytic properties like partition function," and of course he understood instantly. And he asked me to give a lecture, and he said, "Make it a lecture in the evening, for the historians and the ladies." Those were his words. "Make it easy." So one evening, which was fixed with his secretary, I came up and I was expecting to find "historians and ladies." To my surprise, Oppenheimer was there. I tried to block his way, and he went, "No, I'm very much interested.' And then Von Neumann came. I said, "You know my story completely. I didn't prepare a lecture for you." "Well," he says, "perhaps not, but I'm the chairman and the discussion may be interesting."  Now, the lecture was, again, to explain to this group that the kind of thinking represented by thermodynamics, as Tolman had made me understand it, could be applied outside and that in a way the abyss between, how to say, humanities and sciences was something you could bridge. That was Oppenheimer's idea, or something like it. Well, I saw all these great men and their spouses arriving, and my heart sank to my heels. I became totally incoherent. I had prepared a very simplified lecture, which I could not do at that age - I could do it now, perhaps, but not then. I tried to change it into a lecture for them. They started falling asleep and snoring. It was a horrible sight. I stopped after forty-five minutes saying, "Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention," etc., etc. Mild applause. Von Neumann stands up and says, "Any questions?" Dead silence. Then a friend asked a question. "Any other question?" Dead silence. Another friend asked a question. And when Von Neumann was about to close the lecture, somebody named Otto E Neugebauer stands up in the last row and says, "I have, not a question, but a statement. This is the worst lecture I have attended in my life. I have not understood one word the speaker said. I don't see any relation with the title," and he went on like that, until Oppenheimer stopped him. "Otto, Otto. Please, let me respond, if Dr Mandelbrot would be so kind as to allow me to respond instead for him. The title is very unfortunate. I gave it to my secretary. Dr Mandelbrot should have changed it to be more appropriate. As to the content, well, it may well be that he didn't make justice to his own work, but I believe I understand his every word, and he has a point." Now he went on into the celebrated Oppenheimer lecture. In fact he was the fear of any lecturer in physics - after he had struggled for an hour explaining things, Oppenheimer would stand up and say, "Well, if I understand correctly, this is what you said." In ten minutes he would speak flawlessly - finished sentences and everything! At that time everybody woke up. They said, "That miserable lecturer, he was trying to say these things!" Well, then when he sat down, Von Neumann stood up and said, "Well, I too have some comments to make about Dr Mandelbrot's lecture. We've had a number of interesting discussions and it may well be that he didn't do much justice to his work."  Well, it was an abominable lecture, and he went on in his style which was very different, explaining what he saw in my work and why it was interesting, why this and that. Well, needless to say, I was taken in time by my friends to the only place in Princeton that served beer at that time. Next day I went to see to Neumenbour, when I entered he said, "Oh, I'm very sorry. I made a fool of myself yesterday. Please excuse me," etc., etc. (I replied) "No, I am coming to thank you. It was you, in a way, that started the real lecture." Well, so you see what was happening was that Von Neumann - and Oppenheimer, I think- understood what I was trying to do, and Von Neumann wanted to encourage me very strongly.

						Maybe I will also make a little detour to the future, a long distant future. Many, many years later I was in a position where my manager at IBM and I were, well, not friends, in fact, quite hostile to each other. He was disapproving of everything I did, and though they never fired anybody they could ask me to do things that I would certainly not want to do and make it clear they didn't like me, and I saw the writing on the wall. Two small children. I was very afraid of having to look for another job in a hurry. So I went to New York to visit a person whom I'd known before and ask him - he was the President or Vice President of a major foundation " whether, in case of real trouble, he would give me a fellowship to give me time to find a good job. He said, "I was expecting your visit. Von Neumann before he died, chatting about the future, said, 'Keep an eye on Mandelbrot. He is doing something that might become very important, but is very risky. He may really sink.  If he's in trouble, please help him.' I promised him; I would deliver. However, please make up with your boss, because I have very little money. If I give money to you I won't be able to give money to somebody else." As it turned out, things settled very well. A new manager came in who was a very close friend and I didn't have to get this fellowship. But I was very moved; I mean, it's very moving that this man - who was not precisely a warm person, he looked like an international banker; his family was in banking; he was a very rich man; he had been extraordinarily successful - that he was sufficiently interested both in my work and in my plight to think about it. But all told I would say I was adding layers and layers of work and solving problems that nobody had been thinking were interesting. I was creating a philosophy of research which later proved very effective; in fact writing papers with long appendices of no particular relevance but which happened to be extremely useful thirty years later. But these things were not necessarily adding up in terms of a career, I would say.


					
						Well, after the end of that year in Princeton I came back to Paris and that year was very busy. Aillette and I decided to marry, so I was very occupied outside of science. While this was going on I met a very strange individual, at least strange to me. I was standing in the library of the Institute of Statistics in Paris, when an old-looking man came in and asked me, "Do you know where Mandelbrot is?" I said, "I am Mandelbrot." and he said, "I am Jean Piaget." Now Piaget was a very famous psychologist. I knew of him, a man who had studied children's intelligence, and was surprised that he would bother to come to me. What he wanted was to have me participate in an effort he was starting of putting psychology on a sound scientific basis. He had always had the impression that what he lacked was knowledge of mathematics and physics, and had been asking around: who were the people who might perhaps talk to him and help him, and he was just asking me whether I would do so. Well, very frankly, my reason for accepting his offer - the offer was an assistant professorship at Geneva for one or two years - we felt, Aillette and I, that it was better not to be in Paris after we were married. Geneva was far, but not too far. Besides, the offer seemed to be strange but tempting, and above all I had not yet decided whether I was going to continue in those social sciences where I was successful and well known, or in physics. And so for the next two years I was an assistant professor of mathematics in Geneva and a strong participant in a seminar that Piaget ran. Now Piaget, first of all, turned out to be much younger than he looked. He was man who was always outside, so had a weathered face. Also, judging from his works, I would assume that he was thirty or thirty-five when he wrote his famous books. In fact he was very much younger, early twenties; had married extremely young, had children very young, therefore he had in a way become famous at an unusually young age. He was famous in a very strange sense, because he was very much a local celebrity in Geneva, in Neuchatel, and also in France. He did not speak English, did not travel, and was barely known outside. What he wanted was to try to push this idea, it was of a well-defined logic in children, which was not a symbolic logic; to organise it, to see to what extent it could be made coherent, and in general he wanted to pursue this dream of making psychology mathematical. Now, since again I was so much hesitating between two directions, which became one half of my activities over the next two years. For the other half, I may say immediately, I was pushing the foundations of thermo- dynamics, and in fact that became very interesting. So the division of my thesis, which was so awkward, was actually continuing with very substantial success in both sciences, both sides, but without the any coherence between them at that point. 



Piaget knew about your thesis about Zipf's law?



Piaget knew of my thesis on Zipf's Law, and he said that he believed that of all the mathematicians and physicists, all the people who were reputed for being fast on their feet and willing to take risks, I was the best to bring to Geneva. It was very interesting. Piaget in many ways was a very impressive figure. I would say - if I were to sort of mock, that he had a clear genius but no talent, in the sense that there was a lack of technique, of research and of science organisation in his case. He was certainly very old-fashioned, a naturalist - originally, I think, his thesis was on snails or something - he was a very old-fashioned observational naturalist who had moved that kind of science into psychology, eighteenth century natural history, and he was good at describing, but he just did not have any idea what the theoretical system is.


					
						These two years I think were very interesting and very disappointing, because I became very aware of the difficulty of the enterprise. It was not something as simple as Piaget thought somebody with tools was going to put them into a nice box, but where to put that? Most of the ideas were not in themselves well-defined, and therefore how can you have laws about things that are ill-defined? Now, as a matter of fact, that was the occasion of a paper of mine in 1956, which I forgot for a long time, but now have found again and that brought back a stream of thinking. I became interested in the following bizarre question: given that all those concepts in psychology, in economics, and so on, were extremely ill-defined, if defined at all, given that how could there could be any law? So the question was not about how to explain observed laws in these fields, but how could there be any law. I wrote this paper, which had the following theme: it said, before explaining one must understand against which possible alternative one is explaining. If the power-law distribution were found to be incorrect, could it take any other form? Would I have to explain it's power-law and not Gaussian or something? And so my argument went as follows - it was much developed several years later, but it was very well written down in '56. Imagine you have quantities that are ill-defined in which somehow different people report them in different ways. Take genera and species in taxonomy: some naturalists would put a big genus with many species; others would make several genera with few species. Very difficult to say one is right, one was wrong. Today of course we can, but we are dealing with old-fashioned taxonomies. So there were cases where some were simply making them bulky, and others small; cases where one simply put a genus just because - somehow for symmetry and for beauty, a bit at random. Now given all that how is it that this man Willis in 1922 found some very specific distribution of numbers of species within genera, a very well defined power-law distribution, which was a very great mystery - now that power-law distribution had been explained by Yule as being the effect of evolution. But to me it was not enough, because given that evolution is very poorly represented by the idea of species and genus, could there have been any other distribution, any other law applicable? I argued not; that the only distribution which is in a certain sense invariant under what I called filters, which are consistently adding, splitting, in averaging, in moving, in taking the largest - all kinds of, how should I say, observational filters, the only distribution that could ever have been obtained were power-law distributions. Now this is entered very concisely in this paper, and that indeed is to a very great extent the idea which was underlying what physicists shortly afterwards started doing in physics; that somehow you must have small ensembles, bigger ensembles, and the same rules should apply to all these various groupings. And the rules not invariant under this renormalization would not be observed because they would not be robust in a certain sense. Then I started that in a totally different environment, let me give you an idea about how this applies. When statisticians deal with the distribution of firms sizes, - rather, when economists deal with that, they respect their colleagues in statistics who tell them that you must take the average size of a firm, and you have reports in this industry, that industry, that the average size firm is so and so. This average very often is totally meaningless. The most extreme case is that of the gun dealers in the US. At one time to become a gun dealer in the US, you had to pay twenty dollars. Therefore anybody who wanted to buy a single gun and could do it a bit ahead would become a gun dealer and then buy from the wholesaler or the maker. Then the US, to control guns, put a rather high, say two thousand, three thousand dollars fee to just become a gun dealer. Almost all the gun dealers did not renew their licenses. Therefore the number of guns sold by big dealers moved a little bit. So, say, one quarter were sold by one chain before " and after that, a bit more. But the average gun size was a numerator, which was more or less the same; the denominator had changed in the nature of one to ten, or to three or to four, I don't know. But the idea of an average size was meaningless. The average size of a city - are you going to take the definition of a commune in France, or a township, or of a school district in America? It's a very elusive notion. So there is underlying all those, how to say, harder sciences, softer because they are just harder - I don't call them soft, I call them hard sciences. The idea that somehow we don't have those solid numbers to deal with. Take income. The initial data at which Pareto was looking were collected before income tax existed. Nobody had any reason for hiding income. Now my income is something extraordinarily ill-defined. There's some money that I am spending that is not income, and other money, which we declare as income even though I don't think it should be. Though I am a good citizen and I pay income tax according to the law I don't think that the number at the end, which I sign every year has any meaning whatsoever. How does it come about that any distribution could apply to it? It's something that is fundamental. It's not a matter of explaining ill-known quantities, but very specific ones. Now, this idea again came first in the context of taxonomy and later on I generalised very broadly. 
					
						Let me again go briefly through the second part of my work during this period. I also worked on the foundations of thermodynamics, and there too, what could a person bring to a topic, which has been so often gone over by so many brilliant people? The topic that actually interested me was the definition of temperature, because in non-statistical thermodynamics there's well defined temperature. If you go to statistical thermodynamics, then temperature is well defined for canonical systems. It is the parameter of distribution of energy. No problem with that, it's straight probability theory. Now everybody wants to define the temperature of a micro-canonical system, an isolated system. There is no parameter, just a number. The energy is given; what's the temperature? That has been a field of extraordinary fights between great minds. At one point Landau and Lifschitz had a definition of temperature for closed systems, and Kittel wrote them an angry letter, and in the later edition they didn't have a definition of it. Then Kittel had an angry letter against somebody else, in Physics Today, much later, and I responded to him by saying that indeed, the idea as defined by Landau and Lifshitz was ill-defined, but one could give a meaning, by defining the temperature of a closed system as being the estimate of the temperature of a canonical system of which that would be a sample. In other words, adding to statistical thermodynamics, proper statistics and estimation of parameters, which is something, which was totally unknown in physics, in fact in mathematics, a very esoteric notion in one community that did not communicate enough. Well, it turned out that part of my work on thermodynamics had been scooped by many years previously by Szilard, but only part, and that in a way I had revived an approach by Szilard, which nobody knew about, I thought, and added to it this fundamental idea of thermometry, which Szilard did not tackle. I would like just to add a few words here. The reason why I became aware of Szilard is because of a mysterious note, a footnote, in Von Neumann's Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. The footnote says, "When I think of thermodynamics of course I think in terms as described by Szilard." The 'of course' looked to me ridiculous because nobody I knew had read that paper, but having read it after having redone it, I understood it. Another great man, Gilbert Lewis, in thermodynamics had also discovered that part of Szilard, but none had gone all the way to this other aspect. But again, I'm not saying this was a practical breakthrough; it was hair-splitting in a perfect system.
					
						Return to France and disillusionment with mathematics in France
					
						I was invited to IBM by someone who was there as a young scientist, who had previously been a programmer in Von Neumann's computer division, and IBM was trying to hire people in gigantic numbers and they made me an offer like everybody else. I mean there was no great distinction of getting an offer from IBM then. And I agreed to come for the summer. So when I came I had on one hand a very strong reputation of having done acrobatic work in several esoterica; on the other hand, hardly anybody followed my work because the work was not sufficiently important in itself, or perhaps because I left when things were getting too difficult. And then I think my period of, how to say, wanderings, in terms of places, ends, and I started the middle part of my life in which I accomplished many things in a more coherent fashion.
					
						IBM research was founded - I think the name IBM Research Division was created in 1956 or 1957, but there was a research activity before but a very, very small one or two people. But when they created this activity it was very shortly before Sputnik went up, and suddenly everybody in the US or anywhere in the world who had a good degree from a good school and looked good had more offers than they could even want to hear. Bell Laboratories was growing by the day, MIT, everybody was growing. At that point IBM came on the scene under what were actually extraordinarily unfavourable circumstances. IBM was for all practical purposes founded by Thomas J Watson Senior who was the present chairman until approximately 1950; then his son, Thomas J Watson Junior replaced him in various ways as president and as chairman. The passage from one to the other was quite an interesting phenomenon, which is well documented in Thomas Watson Jnr's autobiography, but it is not part of my story. He then found himself having an army of very successful salesman, a way of handling business, but the technology was changing totally. Before the technology consisted in mechanical machines that usually just lasted forever.  IBM's was more like sewing machines by Singer or Lakers, or Mercedes cars of the classic period: they went on and on and on, but they were not sophisticated in any real sense, they were just very well built, and everybody knew that their time was up and IBM had to become an electronics company. So an effort was made, to replace them and it was growing also, - to fill this very successful structure with people totally different from the previous people. Whereas before they were having college degree meant to be from local colleges or maybe from the Rencil (?) Technical Institute, which is a very good engineering school in Upper New York State, but they never even thought of having MIT or Caltech or Stanford or whatever graduates. They're too sophisticated. Suddenly, they became necessary, and a very brilliant man was put in charge of that. Again in Thomas Watson Jnr's autobiography, he describes how lucky he was to get this man to do it, because he had first followed, well, "Central Casting". The dean of some engineering school, who was very personable and so on, was chosen as Director of Research at IBM, and then someone told him that this dean was going to fail because he had not been at any of the crucial places during the war: he was not at Los Alamos, he was not at the Rad Lab, he wasn't at Washington; and that in order for this extraordinary change that IBM was being subjected to - to succeed - one needed somebody who knew everybody. And Emanuel Piore was chosen. Now I knew Piore reasonably well and every so often he would say modestly, "When I created NSF?" "When I created the Office of Naval Research?" This man during the war had been one of the leaders of research, and he made the Office of Naval Research become an agency for research. He was the one who founded the philosophy and the powerful National Science Foundation. The third of his great achievements was the IBM Research Centre. Now it became very clear very shortly after I was there that it was a place of total disorder - I wouldn't say chaos; chaos can have order in it - well, maybe it was chaos! The main idea was very difficult to gather, but then Piore called meetings of staff and said, "Look, I'm told that you people wonder why we got you in here. There's no secret. I'm going to tell you. There's no secret." And so he went on saying that "we need endless numbers of engineers, bright people, we need endless number of people to staff all these structures that are just empty, and, well, we are going to offer all of you very good conditions for applied research. Many of you think that you would like to spend your life finishing their thesis and competing with your Ph.D. adviser, but in fact there can be an easier life with better rewards." Then he proceeded by saying that IBM also needed a research centre proper and because we're isolated we had to do many things which otherwise would have been sort of borrowed from neighbouring institutions, those that IBM could afford to have, well, either he said a few, or several, or some great scientists, at IBM had a way of having deadwood not interfere with the functioning of the institution.  The man was Mr. Shrewdness in person, he was a very brilliant fellow. At that point I realised that I could escape, by staying at IBM, this difficulty- am I a mathematician because my degree says so? Am I an engineer because I'm interested in things? Am I a social scientist because I don't think there's a difference between the turbulence in stock markets in terms of unpredictability? At IBM I wouldn't have to worry about that. The names of departments were totally strange and totally meaningless, so it looked like a promising situation for a short time. As it turned out I was going to spend thirty-five years and twelve days at IBM, almost from the beginning to the day when IBM decided that successful research was no longer going to be carried on in that division. I think that this was a great fortune, because the kind of uncertainty, the kind of lack of 'fitting', the kind of personal exclusion from all kinds of negatism about what I was doing did not have to apply there.
					
						Before, for one reason or another, one country or another had rules which allowed certain people to function outside of the system. For example, Britain for a long time had a reflection of its class structure which meant that people like, well, J. B. S. Haldane who was the nephew of Lord Haldane, or Bertrand Russell who became Lord Russell, could do what they pleased, and it's interesting to think that Bertrand Russell never had a job, he never had to compete for a job. Haldane had four or five different jobs in his life, totally different. He probably could have - if he had been bothered - have just abandoned his job and went on to live otherwise. Lord Rayleigh of course was the third baron Rayleigh. It's surprising how many of the great scientists of England in the late nineteenth century, early twentieth, were in fact very high aristocrats. Of course that's no longer either possible or do-able or done. In France there was the case of de Broglie, very much in the same style. In America. even though it is much less known, America had a kind of indigenous mathematics, not from the American Indian of course, but from before the refugees from Stalin and from Hitler, and that mathematics was carried on by several bone fide aristocrats. One of my professors, was by chance different, he was Hassler Whitney, who was a Whitney-Whitney, I mean, descended from Eli Whitney, and in that way, a very great family. Another one was a son of the first Chief Justice of United States, Stone. But this no longer exists, IBM no longer exists. I don't see a place now where somebody like myself who combined, let's say, unusual gifts and unusual tastes and, who everybody said has promise, was certainly a misfit of the worst kind could find a position at this point and I think that a tragedy.
					
						One must understand how early in computers this was. When I went to IBM I didn't think I would stay there for 35 years. I thought it was for the summer. At the end of the summer I resigned from France and stayed there. I was told by somebody here that something very brilliant called Fortran was being developed and would I please bring some Fortran manuals because one couldn't get hold of them. Well, after a year at IBM Research I realised that a few people knew Fortran, but by no means everybody, and when I started to do my first work I asked to have a programmer assigned to my project - that was about the distribution of income, I'll come to it momentarily. That man did not know Fortran. He wrote everything in assembly language with a computer that was soon obsolete. It was an extraordinarily tedious job. Clearly this was not being done anywhere else. Motivation was very difficult to discern. Much later - I'm just trying to establish these links - I came back home to pictures, to geometry, and I asked another of my programmers - by then I had a programmer myself - to do something to represent a certain structure. Well the best program available had a capacity of 64. Not 64 mega or mille or kilos " 64, after 64, let's say, symbols - it stopped. You had to push return and go on. Therefore I was given this chance of being present, not at the creation, but at the birth of these processes. Since I had a violent need of these calculations and drawings, I contributed to their development to some extent.
					
						But the first thing I wanted to do when I came to IBM was to pursue more seriously this idea of power-law distributions and their meaning in the world. And how did I know of them? I knew of them because of distribution of income, which I mentioned before, which follows a power-law, the probability exceeding u is u to the power -alpha where alpha is some number, and that was discovered by Pareto, and there have been many attempts to find something more normal than that. Enormous scorn was piled on this law by everybody; in particular the scorn was based in the fact that if alpha is less than 2 - which was the case, at least once upon a time - the variant second moment is infinite, and everybody said an infinite second moment is something totally unacceptable. Now, I never understood that. I was never a very obedient follower of fashion, and it seemed to me that an infinite second moment can be unacceptable when it is for example, energy in physics, when physics is finite; but in the case of income it is just a number which has no reality, no interpretation, nothing, just a way of describing scatter. Therefore infinite expectation?



Well it's somewhat - you can think of it as a somewhat dangerous idea because if it has no second moment it's something which is unattainable or, I mean, it's too rough? too difficult to keep in mind.



Yes. Precisely. That's exactly the word.  I didn't use the word 'rough' in that case, I used the world 'wild', which is the same idea. And since you press me, and thank you for pressing me, I would like, before I describe the beginning, to describe the end. After many, many years, in my recent book on fractals and finance I was led to put down in a very schematic fashion the distinction I saw between two kinds of randomness, in fact more than two. I even called them not kinds, but states.  And so I argue as follows, formally in 1997 and more or less informally in late '50s. I argued that the laws of probability theory are unique, in the same way as the laws of mechanics are unique, but everybody knows, not just the physicists, that depending upon conditions of temperature and pressure, the same body can be a solid, a liquid or a gas, and that one cannot say, once can't work with those without specialising as to what they are. It is simply ridiculous to try to reduce oneself to laws of mechanics every time so there are special laws for gases, for liquids and for crystals, for solids. Now I became convinced from early on and increasingly so - and I stated that only recently - that randomness is the same situation; as when people spoke of randomness before and referred themselves to axiomatics and so on, they were in a certain sense obfuscating. They did not need all these axiomatics because actually the only randomness studied was very moderate. For example, when Laplace, who in addition to being a great mind was a great writer, descried randomness, it's clear that what he had in mind were fluctuations around an equilibrium. Something that was defined but had irregularities, which make it go up and down, around it, but clearly there is an equilibrium. The average is something very, very significant, and the variance is in a certain sense a description of a kind of serpent, a kind of strip in which variations stay all the time. That kind of randomness was understood almost thoroughly. It had tools beyond belief, books beyond counting, and also pretensions beyond reason because it did not, how to should I put it, use its expertise - which did not give it an idea of its own limitations, and which invite the self, imposing itself upon phenomena to which it didn't fit. And so, when I had to face this question of infinite variance for prices, I had to think very hard and say we must accept being freed from both the constraints and the help that probability, as applying to mild fluctuations, imposes and just go on our own way and start from the beginning. Now needless to say, for me, this was not a scary thought, it was an exhilarating thought. I'd been hoping that fate would bring me something novel to study, and hopefully not only one phenomenon like word frequencies, which was after all self-terminating more or less, but something more important, more in the centre of some discipline, in which a step beyond that tool box would be indispensable and in which I could hope to be the person who'd continued this step myself. 


					
						I proclaimed the importance of this second variance, infinite variance, very loudly and in general a view of inequality, irregularity, which was very, very unpopular. It's very easy to explain actually and it's very important. Imagine that you take two molecules of a gas, and you find that the total energy is u; then you know perfectly well that each of them has a energy which is u over half, plus or minus a small fluctuation, which actually is Gaussian, more or less. In other words, in classical physics, there is a very profound situation, which is equality plus or minus a small fluctuation. But now imagine on the contrary that you walked down Wall Street and you're allowed to stop two persons more or less blindly and find that the total income for the year 1997 was two million dollars. Now are you going to say that you have found two millionaires? Of course not. Everybody has the absolutely strong conviction, perfectly justified, that most likely one of them is an ordinary wage earner -again distribution - maybe twenty, fifty, maybe a hundred thousand dollars, and the other has all the rest. Therefore the inequality was not something that was in a certain sense quantitative, but qualitative. In one case one half plus or minus, in the other case its two independents, one point which is independent of a sum, and then the other which is the rest. Now, at that point I was very much in a mood already to attribute more importance to qualitative than to quantitative distinctions, because the qualitative one is so sharp it would separate two very different behaviours. If it were just qualitative matter- up to a point it is a liquid and after it's a gas - it wouldn't be right - the critical points would be terrible, they're too complicated.
					
						Before going on, it's perhaps necessary just to say that when you have no what you call " variance", there is no law of large numbers; it is the law of probability as everybody is familiar with. So there is no average wealth of a man walking down Wall Street, for instance. I'm just quoting so that everybody understands the importance of having this "no variance" phenomena.



Yes. And even Pareto understood that. Pareto wrote this expression, and then apparently he got some flak, so he said if you prefer, he would go to power-law with an exponential term, which makes the variance finite; or if you wish you could have a maximum income, that makes the variance finite. But that was just, you know, a face-lift, it was nothing, it didn't change reality. But in a real sense what I was facing, I felt, in this field, was that people were being too nice about existing tools and nobody wanted to say that this was a different kind of randomness. It was not simply a matter of changing a little bit, of adding corrective terms, of this and that; it was a matter of facing the possibility of something very different. And you mentioned the law of large numbers in the central limit theorem. There is a possibility of central limit theorem with infinite variance. Again it was at that time total esoterica. More precisely, there are fixed points. The Gaussian is a fixed point. Two Gaussians added is then the Pareto Gaussian. But Goshi, Polya and Paul Levy had found that there are other distributions that had the same property of a fixed point under addition - Levy called them 'stable', for better or worse, they were possibilities. But Levy viewed them as being exceptional, of no relevance and so on. I was fortunate in having been Levy's student and having liked this man; on a few occasions having been cornered at lectures at which I was the only student therefore who could not go, and therefore heard things I didn't think I wanted to hear, I learned a collection of esoterica which might have been totally irrelevant but which for me became fundamental. So after it became clear that of course incomes aren't Gaussian, I said why not try the next simple fixed point. And this was a very constant activity in my mind - this emphasis upon fixed points. Given that for one reason or another - and I will give other examples - phenomena outside of mainstream physics have no well-defined scale or scales of various kinds; you deal with mixtures, with sums, with these things; which distributions are fixed points and if they're those fixed points, let us see whether by any chance the data actually completely fixed points. So my model of income distribution - which is not something of central significance, not as important by far as my work in prices - was based upon this idea of fixed points as the preferred model for everything. Again, let me remind you that a little bit later, maybe five or ten years later that was the tack that physics took in condensed matter physics, in the theory of critical phenomena in emphasising fixed points and convergence to them. But for that I needed to have distributions of these variables, which nobody thought were important. In fact, after computing them I tried to publish them and I was laughed out of court: people said, "These things are total esoterica. Who cares how they look like? They are not important." For me they were tremendously important, in fact exactly how they looked like. And the income distribution study had many virtues; I would not want to knock it down, it was a necessary preparation for my next stage in prices. But if I think of it retrospectively, I did not become, how should I say, respected and known in that profession by this work.




					
						In 1961, '62, I was shown by a friend of mine, J. Berger, some data about errors of transmission. And these were very, very strange data because first of all, again: what is the average number of errors of transmission per day, per minute, whatever? Every number was being discussed. Peoples' opinions varied by several orders of magnitude. Then everybody was worried about distribution between blocks and error. Blocks and error meant either one error because you were transmitting at, for example, one microsecond signals, was either well or incorrect, correctly or incorrectly transmitted, but sometimes it was a second or a minute or an hour in which at least one error occurred, they didn't want to record all the errors. The folklaw, it was simply folklore said that if you see the statistics of blocks and error of any size, you couldn't tell which size it is. Now that was taken by everybody as a catastrophic finding, and all kinds of pyramids of simple explanations were created to account for it. So a very special, in fact charming, fellow at Bell Labs, our sister laboratory, was speaking of channels being error-prone or not error-prone. In the error-prone they are very error-prone or not very error-prone. If they are very error-prone, they are extremely error-prone - and a pyramid of explanations, which if you put in enough parameters, was giving anything you wanted. But he never faced the main fact which was it didn't matter whether the block was a short one or a long one. So, I was struck by that, and then by my memory of esoterica and my visual feeling for them became important because I'd been looking at the Cantor sets quite carefully, even though "they were just esoteric constructions of no possible significance," so my teachers were saying. So how do you take an interval: you take off the middle third, again the middle third of each part, the middle third, middle third. What are left is, in a certain sense, if you look carefully, little events which are put in bursts, bigger burst, bigger burst and bigger bursts. You put in the burst structure and the hierarchy, by hand. And then Paul Levy had introduced a set that was not very important in his work but later on I called Levy Dust to honour his memory, in which the same thing was true, but randomly. And the main thing was that I knew by  this experience, with those mathematical and probabilistic esoterica that you can get bunching at all levels without having to put in by hand each time deliberately. So I told Berger, "Let's try this." We tried. Well, the success was absolutely fantastic, with one number we got a great deal of the reality, but more so we didn't have enough long intervals between errors, and that's a question of what probability of error occurs. So Berger said, "Well, you know very well there are all kinds of errors, there's also some white noise exponent which is independent, and so you shouldn't expect this thing to hold over a long length." I said, "Look, you shouldn't expect it, but what does it cost us to check?" That was one of the most important things I did. He wrote to the man who provided us with data saying we don't find enough very long-term intervals. The man responded instantly saying, "I'm sorry. I didn't send you any of the tapes which had less than nine errors because I thought it was statistically insignificant." Well that added two orders of magnitude to our data. As a matter of fact this fit was beyond belief, nine orders of magnitude, but it was very unsatisfactory because it still didn't tackle this matter of why is it so, for the errors and for the other things, and then there were other discrepancies. Berger went his way, and I went on worrying about this phenomenon. Well, what did I do? I did a block renormalization. which distribution of  inter-block intervals, under some conditions that I felt were sensible, would be obtained independent in respect to the block size. The distribution was slightly more complicated than the one that Berger and I had found, and the complications did account for the discrepancies. Again the dates are early '60s. I mention them because the technique became routine in the late '60s and early '70s. Again, I didn't push this technique very far but I certainly had a gut feeling that by following the folklore of experienced and hard-boiled engineers I was doing better than by listening to simple statistical rules.
					
						There was an event there that was also a high point of my life. I was invited by Bell Labs to give a talk. I found upon arrival that very few people were there, but Pierce who was director of communications and several other people were there, together with their man who was had these models, and they asked me to present my work, which I did. This man at Bell who had had this hierarchy of levels of noisiness spoke up saying that you don't need all this fancy stuff, infinite means, infinite variances. "It's all very bad. I can do it with just hierarchy." And Pierce turned to him, and said with total scorn, "Yes, I know very well that you can represent the motion of the sun and planets around the earth by cycles, epicycles and so on. He represents it by ellipses. He may be right," or "He is probably right," or "It is worth listening to," I forgot the exact words. But Pierce understood my point.  Need I say that this made a revolution in communications? Yes and no. Yes, to the extent that the reason why these errors were obtained is that because of not knowing what to do, everybody was transmitting at a very high signal to noise ratio for very few errors. The errors are very few; therefore any error collecting system was on only say one thousandth of the time. If it was on it was overwhelmed, therefore error correction was impossible, therefore it became clear to Bell, to IBM and to everybody that this was very bad engineering, not on the basis of details but of a very bad tree to climb on. You should transmit at a very much lower signal to noise ratio, have many errors, and pay lots to correct them. So, this actually put the wolf away from my door for a long time, because everybody was aware of the fact that by having an understandable, clean, few parameters, short model, I allowed people to abandon a very bad technology in favour of a better one, which I did not develop, of course.
					
						The next amazing thing that happened wasn't that- at that point what happened was that Harvard invited me to do a course on the prices that I will discuss later perhaps, and then after this was over, asked me to discuss what came to be this work on telephone errors came to be, and while I was there a speaker, Robert Stewart, who became a very good friend, was speaking about turbulence. Well, Stewart had been the person who had actually found the K-5/3, which is why I went to see his lecture, because he found it in Puget Sound, off the coast of British Columbia, in a very old decommissioned electric submarine. By having a very long snout in front they made measurements of turbulence well under the sea and they found a very substantial range, a scaling range, K-5/3, which in 1948 Caltech was a total pipe dream and everybody said it is impossible, Kolmogorov is wrong. Suddenly Kolmogorov becomes real. But at the same time what they found was that the whole idea of what is turbulent was becoming, shall we say, - was disappearing, because previously with very bad instruments one had a notion that fluid can be either turbulent or laminar. It is laminar and then something happened, it was turbulent, and then something happened, it was laminar. Or you make a cut through a fluid and you find this portion was laminar and this was turbulent. But Stewart and his cohorts who were superb experimentalists, looked carefully at the so-called turbulent region, and they found that most of the turbulent region was in fact laminar. They looked further again and it was laminar. Now, that's what Stewart presented in his lecture, by saying, "This is something impossible. We say it is a property of intervals up or down, up or down - turbulent or laminar. It is not. The turbulent thing is full of holes, laminar." Well, in general it was said that all that was totally beyond any analysis, and I was sitting there in the front row smiling to hear this, because after it was over I told them, "I can tell you how this thing has happened. Turbulence is not a property of intervals; turbulence is a property of Cantor sets and the like," which in terms of understanding this terrifying phenomena I think was a very significant breakthrough. That is, this turbulence had been boxed into this two state dichotomy which was going back to Reynolds or much before, maybe to medieval engineers, and I had given a much more realistic picture of what may be. That explained immediately why turbulence would be very, very difficult, because turbulence was not a mild randomness; it was a very, very wild one. I didn't use the words then, but I became extremely interested in turbulence at that moment.
					
						In '64 I must say I returned to IBM and my feelings and my status and everything had changed radically. I was no longer, how should I say, dabbling in esoterica of various kinds, giving lectures which are amusing but nobody followed, but I had now done this work on prices which were at the very core of economics and this work on turbulence at the very core of fluid mechanics. Moreover very skilled, demanding and 'show me' individuals had become convinced that I had a path through the truth and I was able to go on. Each had to be enormously developed, because it was not a matter of picking up a book off the shelf that had a theory applicable to it, but in fact of doing it more or less from scratch. In particular, having listened to Paul Levy about the stable distribution and stable processes, I was aware of the Hausdorff dimension and realised that the Hausdorff dimension was something which was ready to move from esoterica to reality. I may add that I knew more about the Hausdorff dimension than just from Paul Levy. While I was a post-doc of Von Neumann I met a student at Princeton named H. J. McKean who later became a very famous mathematician, Henry had written a Ph.D. on the Hausdorff Besikovitch dimension of certain sets in probability theory. I was very surprised that a man as bright, as brilliant as Henry was worrying about this little esoteric exercise but this was my friend, I read his thesis, therefore I found out about this technique, which of course at that time I spurned very greatly. But again, for myself in '64, in the context of prices, the measurement of relativity was a Hausdorff dimension, or some other dimension like Hausdorff's. In the context of turbulence the measurement of roughness was again the Hausdorff dimension. Hausdorff dimension was coming into the centre of things.
					
So this brings us to the birth of fractals.    Yes. Now, how did it happen? Why did it happen? Why? Well, aside from the great interest, in fact enthusiasm, by many people I greatly admired, there was a feeling from many people that I was talking nonsense, that I was obfuscating, that I was introducing a dimension in a context where it didn't belong, that I was trying to, to pull a fast one. It was very difficult to tell them that this esoterica was actually saying something very real.
Then one day, once again, chance favoured me and I noticed a picture in an article in a book that was being thrown away by the library, which was the length of coastlines as measured at different levels of precision by Lewis Fry Richardson. Richardson had been a major figure in turbulence, so I knew his name, but he had moved away from it and this paper was found in his papers after his death, published by faithful followers in a very inappropriate magazine and was just as throwaway esoterica of some kind; poor old man, measuring coast lines at different scales and nothing comes out of it. No serious periodical published it, but I think The Journal of Conflict Resolution or something, a very esoteric magazine, published it because of this man's stature in certain circles. So, I became convinced that what Richardson was measuring was a dimension and I found, in a certain sense, a key or a bridge, something to hold everything together. Because as long as I was trying to explain to people in turbulence that a dimension was something radical, they were fleeing away from it. In economics they couldn't stand it, and I didn't mention it in my story of the river Nile and such rivers. The hydrologists were terrified; the thought of a dimension that was not an integer, and of variables that were not independent, that had long-term dependence, all these things were terrifying. I just wanted to have a rhetorical device to help them stop criticising and start listening, and perhaps it was a tactical manoeuvre of a classical kind. If you can't hit them by frontal attack, you just get them on the side. I mean, I don't like the exaggeration of images of science as being the conquest of the unknown, but to a large extent there is a hint of truth about it, and for me I always have a strategy of research, and a tactic, and the two are very separate. I don't chose tactics on strategic grounds or strategy on tactical grounds. They are separate ideas.

						So, Richardson was for me a very important point, because first of all it came back to simple shapes: coastlines. Everybody knows coastlines. There was not one geographer of my acquaintance; therefore I had no vested interest in geography. Besides Richardson had provided all his examples, to which I added, of coastlines or geographical lines measured by different people giving entirely different results, like the border between Spain and Portugal which Portugal has claimed is thirty percent longer than what Spain claims. So, the indeterminacy of these quantities, the fact I'd been drumming in the context of economics that the quantities underlying their most important theories were in fact ill-defined, that indeterminancy had moved all over. It had not been eliminated by physical cleanliness, but it had moved into the domain of physics. In the domain of geophysics or geology, which is physical sciences if not physics proper, one had quantities which were totally ill-defined and for which one could not give a number like length; one had to deal with them differently. And so I published this paper first in Science, called How long is the coast of Britain? which became well known. It was published in 1967. It took very long time publishing, and so could I say that there was much actual graphics in it? No. The graphics were very primitive, I just drew by the hand some classical constructions by Koch and others, and variants, and argued that any sensible person would consider a coastline as being made of capes and bays and then smaller capes and bays and so on, and unless something drastic is true, for which there's no evidence, the length is going to increase more and more as you go into details. I thought that this was a great insight; of course I was totally wrong; it was absolutely well-known to everybody, but it was, how to say, suppressed. I'm told by scholars of Greek history that Greek sailors sailing from Athens towards the western Mediterranean were reporting a very different length for Sardinia's coast, saying if you go on our ship it's so much, but if you go on, say, the little lifeboat, then it's much longer, and if you walk along it, it's much longer. They knew it. "So which length do you want?" they asked the Admiralty. The Admiralty did not know. The idea of area, of length and so on, became separate at that time, but certainly by the '60s, the power of school books, the power of school teachers, the power of people who barely understood the bare rudiments of mathematics was such that length was something which was very entrenched, and also very fragile. Infinite variance was not as real as infinite length. Infinite dependence, as I was supposing for these errors, was absolutely not real. Nobody can think simultaneously of these things. One can see the coastline. And so this paper and several papers that followed began fractals, by introducing specifically the eye into scientific research. I would say that '67, '68 were the critical years for that.
					
						Let me perhaps mention about the River Nile. I heard about the River Nile about the same time as I heard about turbulence, in '64, and immediately had a little model for it, which- well, was very strange in some ways. The River Nile had many features, the flows of the Nile over the years have many features that the physicists would later have called anomalies. You evaluate the variance, and the variance doesn't draw like time span as you take bigger and bigger integration intervals; it goes like time to a certain power different from one. And then a man named H. E. Hurst introduced a technique, which I later sort of formalised as R/S; he was getting results that were incomprehensible. This was very much noticed and the literature grew about it. Many people of considerable talent said that this required just a little bit more fiddling with microprocessors or a bit more memory, or it will require some rethinking, but it was viewed as a major puzzle, this thing which didn't work out. Well one day, William Fellow, who was up and coming at IBM as a consultant, was in my office and, and so I asked him, "You wrote this paper on Hurst's findings; you say that one could do this and that - but I think that wouldn't work. As a matter of fact, I know how to make it work." He says, "Impossible. There's no sensible way of doing it."  I said, "Well, there's a sensible way here.... " "Of course, of course, of course." Once this barrier of infinite dependence was overthrown, which was a colossal barrier, the answer was obvious, but you had to accept the notion that there is infinite dependence between what's happening now and what's happening way in the past and way in the future. Now, it's a very difficult idea to accept. The consequences of this fundamental idea are hard to accept and it's -



When you say infinite dependence, this means a power-law dependence?



A power-law dependence, yes.



I mean it's not infinity, the size; it is still the case, but bears the effect on the long periods.



That's right. And many people in many contexts have been arguing strongly against it, and since it's a very important feature let me say a few words about it. When it became quite clear that to analyse something like the River Nile over a thousand years, or some other data over many thousands of years, or IBM stock over thirty-five years - which still represents a very large number of thousands of data, if infinite dependence is necessary it does not mean that IBM's details of ten years ago influence IBM today, because there's no mechanism within IBM for this dependence. However, IBM is not alone. The River Nile is alone. They're just one-dimensional corners of immensely big systems. 
					
						The behaviour of IBM stock ten years ago does not influence its stock today through IBM, but IBM the enormous corporation has changed the environment very strongly. The way its price varied, went up or went up and fluctuated, had discontinuities, had effects upon all kinds of other quantities, and they in turn affect us. And so my argument was always been that each of these causal chains is totally incomprehensible in detail, probably exponentially decaying. There are so many of them that a very strong dependence may be perfectly compatible. Now I would like to mention that this is precisely the reason why infinite dependence exists, for example, in physics. In a magnet- because two parts far away have very minor dependence along any path of actual dependence. There are so many different paths that they all combine to create a global structure. In other words, there is no global structure in one dimension, but there's one in two and three dimensions etc. for magnets -the basis of Onsager's work and the whole theory. And in economics there is nothing comparable to these calculations, but the intuition of what they represent is the same. And that was always my motivation for transforming infinite dependence from being a ridiculous - not only an exotic but a ridiculous idea, into being an idea which is totally inevitable. One must envision this possibility. And so let me observe the following. The difference between mild and wild randomness goes beyond, how do you say, limited technical details. Mild randomness, in a certain sense, is local; it's happening in a certain period, it doesn't go very far. If you take a large number of particles, what's happening at one end doesn't affect anything else. Wild randomness is global and that is why it is not a matter of the degree of difficulty, it's a matter of the kind of difficulty, which is why I think that this notion of states of randomness, more precisely states of variability, applies also to non-random variability and is essential because it embodies a profound dichotomy. That is why I think that the reason why the phenomena which I have been studying most of my life are so much more difficult than the phenomena, the ordinary phenomena, of physics, because ordinary physics doesn't have the global character. That's why many of the attacks on these questions of economics and of physics have been unsuccessful; it is because they were always simplified, approximated to be local, whereas globality is their principle characteristic.
					
						This has evolved now into what's named self-organised criticality?



Well, it is substantially different because criticality goes beyond what I had in mind. In fact, I think perhaps it goes beyond what is necessary. I have not made up my mind on self-organised criticality, because the characteristic of the question of magnets is that there is a parameter like temperature. At a certain critical temperature very special things happen. The characteristic of phenomena like prices or like turbulence, there's no parameter. Therefore to embed a prime without a parameter in one which has a parameter, and then argue that this parameter somehow arranges to take its own value is presupposing something that is beyond reality. I mean there are no non-critical situations. So I have not made up my mind about the power of this metaphor. The idea that dependence can be global, that variance can be infinite, and in fact that everything that has been taken as finite without any question in physics or in statistics can, in fact be divergent or zero which is sometimes equally bad or equally rich in consequences. This idea is something that did not depend upon any broader conjecture about the causes of these phenomena. It comes out of efforts to describe them and has been made unavoidable by those efforts. 


					
						Well, this work on coastlines following Richardson's empirical observation and using this illustration of the notion of the Hausdorff dimension became extremely important. The first application of course is to give a very clear meaning to what dimension is intuitively. Those coastlines that had a high dimension were viewed as rough by the eye, and those coastlines with a very low dimension - very close to one - as smooth. And I became aware increasingly of a very peculiar and marvellous circumstance - that fate had brought me into a position to tackle one of..  in a sense there all along and, which science had not previously tackled. That is, the eye gives us the impression of brightness and colour; the ear of loudness and pitch; the hand of weight, the hand of hotness and coldness, and for all these sensations, pace Plato, physics had created a field which mastered them with proper measurements, with proper simulations, constructions, which maintained the main aspects of it, to a very high degree of precision. What about the idea of roughness? There was nothing about it. It is later when I became very serious about measuring roughness, it was confirmed to me, that there was no agreed-upon measurement of roughness. There was no such thing.



Or too many.



Or too many which is the same thing. People had used various quantities borrowed from statistics that were not designed on purpose for this goal but were designed for other goals. Now, with fractal dimension therefore I was measuring was roughness in a certain idealised context, and that was marvellous because a number could be given which was, say.. 



But have you coined the word 'fractal'?



Not yet.



You just said 



Did I say 'fractal dimension'?



Yes.



I went too fast. I was thinking of dimension without the word fractal, because at this point I had not coined the words. Let me say, I had been doing fractal geometry a very long time before the word became necessary, for approximately ten years. I am telling you about the period which came to my book of  '75 where the word 'fractal' appeared for the first time. I was using dimensions, sometimes the Hausdorff Besikovitch dimension, though sometimes other words, but the idea was indeed to measure roughness.

					
						These Hausdorff-Besikovitch dimensions are really mathematical concepts, in the limits of very special objects, and one of the major advances was to see this playing a role in real objects that do not fit mathematical constraints.



Very true. Which means that to make a major advance one still had to take a step back. In mathematics, Hausdorff defined his dimension in a very particular fashion, which includes a limit. Limits actually are not so bad in physics but also an inf, which is an impossible alteration - he wanted to obtain a measure, an outer character measure. It's a mathematical requirement of no significance outside of his field. Besides, Hausdorff being a mathematician, a very pure one, wanted to have the finish applicable to all shapes, at least all shapes in metric space. Therefore the search for generality, the search for a proper measure with which everything could be done with, was paramount in his mind. These two searches are totally irrelevant to physics and to my concern. In my discussions with Henry McKean about the Hausdorff Besikovitch dimension, I always kept telling him, "But why do you do something so complicated, so unnecessarily complicated?" And he would say, "We need it for mathematical purposes." And I always kept in mind that this may not be necessary, and the very important feature of my work from the very beginning was that different, how should I say, pre-asymptotic concepts, which are very much in the spirit of the Hausdorff dimension but very different and finite, are much more important than the limit itself. When I started talking about using the Hausdorff dimension in physics my friends, my mathematical friends, were making fun of me. They were saying, "You? That can't be used. It is, first of all, esoterica; secondly it is only a limit and it does not distinguish between shapes having otherwise very big differences.  I said, " Yes, yes, yes. Except, that I'm not interested in arbitrary shapes, I'm interested in self-similar shapes. For self-similar shapes all these considerations appear. There's no local, there's no middle, there's no global. Everything is at the same scale." So in a way by walking back, by destroying some generality that the concept had from the very beginning, I was able to make it useable. And this is a lesson which got lost; very often since then, my work has consisted mathematically speaking in not going to a limit, of looking at what happens before the limit, and by doing so all kinds of very beautiful notions become meaningful which otherwise become meaningless. I would just mention in passing the idea of negative dimension as a measure of a degree of emptiness, which sounds almost like a ridiculous notion in itself, but a dimension can be negative, it measures it very effectively, and numerically, measurably, usefully. 






					
						But to come back to '67, '68, in addition to this work on coastlines, I became very much engaged in the River Nile and such phenomena, and decided very deliberately and tactically to do it right. I had felt that in all these contexts, when one needs to deal with a very advanced technique, applicable to a very practical problem, one must break it down so that everybody agrees, everybody understands, everybody sees what's happening. And so with a collaborator who was a hydrologist named Wallis, we wrote half a dozen papers in this light. Now I may add that Wallis was also the programmer of this work, and that I would like to mention because from there on I became increasingly active in using computers and graphics, but almost totally inactive in terms of programming. I'm a very bad programmer for reasons that are quite understandable. I'm not detail conscious; I am more conscious of the big framework, and in programming, every small detail is make or break. Therefore, to me, debugging was an impossible task. Besides, I would say that the programming of this work became so time-consuming and one or sometimes several programmers were engaged in it; if I'd been doing programming myself I would just have competed with them on unequal terms. It was not worthwhile. But I became very skilled because it was so gradual, in explaining to my collaborators or my assistants what kind of program they would write, what things one should beware of, etc., etc. And it goes on very effectively to this day. Now, with Wallis we wrote these papers, and then the question of publication was raised, and Wallace said, "Well, let's publish that in a statistics journal." I said, "Never! Never. I'm not competing in statistics. I would like these ideas to become standard knowledge in hydrology." But he said, "But they won't accept these papers. They're too complicated." So the following scheme was hatched. There was going to be a meeting of the American Geophysical Union, I think in Baltimore, or maybe Washington, and we prepared on the same machine, which was a Calcomp tracer, we prepared charts of a large number of records of rivers, the Nile, Colorado, Amazon, St. Lawrence, etc., etc. and of all the existing models, and of my model, which was based upon what I called fractional Gaussian noise and all the captions were at the back; everything was done in the same style. We went to see the editor of the main journal in hydrology, a man named Langbine, a very brilliant old-fashioned engineer, but an extraordinarily honest straightforward person, and told him the following story. "We have a crazy way of representing river behaviour. If we present you with this thing you will not understand because it's just mathematical esoterica at this point, and certainly you wouldn't see how it applies to your problem. But perhaps you should accept to play a game with us. Please tell us which of these graphics are real rivers and which are theories?" Well, the man started shuffling (the papers) and said, "Oh, this one's ridiculous." Well, that was his theory! Well, as a witness of his honesty and competence he said, "I knew it was bad; it didn't think it was that bad, but it was very short term dependence." He put it aside. And then put aside others and yet others; then he said, "Well, I don't know. I don't know. They all look like the things which I deal with every day." Then he turns to the Amazon, Nile, St Lawrence models - model one, model two, model three of my model. He said, "I can't believe it. So you have found some part of a secret of the world." And he accepted the papers, how to say, cumulatively; he was saying, "Somebody's going to read them and to help you, you understand, but you will not get any flak because it's incomprehensible" And he delivered. That was to me an amazing situation because, again, given the extraordinary badness of the tools - the Calcomp plotters were high-tech - we couldn't hope to have much better than these tracings, but even those simple tracings, in the eyes of this man, very skilled, very old-fashioned, who was looking at these things all the time and commenting about them, were sufficient to make a difference between inacceptable esoterica, and something that for some reason he had to learn. 
					
						Well, that lesson was not lost on me, and I am talking now of the late '60s. Shortly afterwards I started working on something different, which gave rise later on to the fractal model of distribution of galaxies. We still had only Calcomp plotters, but to show people some patterns of dots and ask them: do you think that is theory or that's sort of real, became a very important test. And also something else entirely which became very apparent with graphics, that very simple rules that didn't seem to have anything particularly important in them were in fact capable of producing very complicated phenomena. So this distribution of galaxies, the first model - it's not a model even, it's called the scenario, which was a Levy Dust in space. Very easy to construct. Very easy to imitate, to simulate; half a line of formula, fifteen lines of code, we got all this clustering of galaxies, super-clustering, automatically out of it. That is, automatically this model was in a way simplifying, reducing this overwhelming complication of reality to a possible collection of consequences of one very simple principle, which of course is a principle at the core of science. Science tries to duplicate this complication of reality by very simple rules. Now, to come back again to those rivers, the parameter they have is again dimension; more precisely the Holder exponent, again a very esoteric notion of mathematics used in harmonic analysis with which we used to make measurement of roughness. And in each case it became clear that one could gather roughness in at least two different environments: the coastlines which are self-similar, and those other shapes which are self-affining, which means that each is part of the whole but reduced. In one case reduction is isotropic, the same in all directions; in the other reduction it is one in one direction, one in the other direction. Therefore at that point this split occurred between two kinds of fractals, two principal kinds of fractals: self-affining, and self-similar, which have become increasingly important from there on. 
					
						The geometry started by this inauspicious side issue of coastlines. Again, initially, I picked it because nobody in my environment was concerned, nobody had advanced ideas, which would interfere with their acceptance, and also I must say because my father was a map nut. As a child I learned how to read maps before I could read and write. That also must have had an influence. But after this success with the general idea of coastlines, after the success with the general idea of the traces of river discharges, I became bolder, and we thought of creating, constructing random coastlines from a simple formula and then random landscapes from a simple formula. That was a very laborious project because computer graphics didn't exist. We no longer used the Calcomp; we had to use other procedures. I could speak at great length about them, but first of all let me answer your question rather rapidly. After we had these maps I was going around and asking people, "What do you think that is?", and some people said, "Well, that's New Zealand. In fact, the two islands- more or less like New Zealand." Then you had different scenes, "That's like Australia." That is, people had an immediate contact with these totally abstract doodlings. After we went on to landscapes, that was very laborious because, again, computer graphics didn't exist. There was a program that somebody had written, which was very important and in which a surface we had computed could be put on a laboratory cathode ray tube and then photographed of course. So I photographed that. Now, I went round asking; "What does it look like to you?" First of all most people didn't know anything about it and I didn't have much feeling for it. So it occurred to me that I was barking up the wrong tree because I was having landscapes without a reference. So we put everything to zero sort of half way through, as an ocean  and island landscape. Everybody instantly remembered that and said, "That reminds me of my trip; there was this island, there was this cape and little islands in the sea," etc., etc. These very crude pictures, which were totally heroic in terms of their production took enormous effort and were at the very end of technology that anybody could then do. They had an immediate response from so many people who did not know that they were sensing the pictures more than numbers. And to me this was totally overwhelming. So I became - I felt suddenly, in I would say around '71, '72, I felt back home. I was in shapes, not in numbers. I could speak of a chart of prices as a picture, not as a graph of function. The emphasis was on the picture and not on the function. Then the question occurred: can we extrapolate from what we have been studying to other phenomena? And much of the extrapolation was done almost spontaneously, because again I was carrying these pictures around people would just guess something different from these pictures. They started again to have their visual powers where it could help them and realise that ultimately, even though some were paying lip service to purely algebraic expressions, ultimately they were thinking in terms of pictures also. Not all of them, but many. And this became very very strong.




					
						In 1975 I came to publish a book, which was based on a lecture I made at the Collège de France in very early 1973.  IBM gave me a kind of sabbatical; I came to Paris and I think on 16th of January 1973, it was a Saturday, I was asked to give a lecture at the Collège of France in some kind of interdisciplinary seminar. Now my friends advertised the lecture quite widely among different fields and the crowd was gigantic, which means that that very small room at the Collège of France was full. I gave my lecture for one hour, again with pictures showing how by very simple construction you can get fake galaxy maps, fake mountains, fake this and fake that. I also emphasised the simplicity of the tools, the distinction between all these structures and those of ordinary geometry; the fact that one had to go beyond Euclid, because Euclid plus amendments plus replications was becoming totally unwieldy and helpless and one had to just go well beyond. After my lecture a discussion which lasted for a whole hour ensued, and people from a large number of different fields asked me very sharp pointed questions: "What about this?" "What about that?" "What about that?" Apparently I responded concisely and convincingly. This lecture ended up in triumph. It was very different from the lecture at Princeton in '54! In fact, Pierre Masse, who was a very influential man at that time in France, wrote a column about it in Le Figaro, which was not customary for a lecture by an unknown in a interdisciplinary seminar. And that is the time when I realised that my various activities of economics and of physics and of everything had come together and that the unity of my work was being created. In a way, some people think of a piece of science as starting from a seed and expanding in a very gradual fashion, and that's true for many fields of science. I felt that for a long time I was having, in a certain sense - well, like for example, the kingdom of France: a little county here, a little duchy here, obtained by one means or another, by marrying the heiress or by beheading the owner and pursuing this. Then finally linking two of them together, linking three of them together, but they are still isolated pieces in a landscape; and that all my life before had been in a way spent justifying why a person who did that was, not in a certain sense, acknowledging their defeat and failure, but proclaiming a success and victory, which I was. Because what I was doing did not seem at all like being the basis of any well thought up enterprise. At one point these various duchies and counties became connected - with plenty of holes in the middle, of course, and plenty of very, ill-defended outside explorations, and the whole thing deserved to write a book about it.  As a matter of fact the book that I wrote about it - well, I started writing a book, and stopped half way through because half way through I had enough material for a book, and I wanted it to be very, very short. It was referring to its own topic very elusively and very badly, and a friend of mine whom I should have mentioned and shall mention perhaps now much more, Marcel Berger read that text and gave me very strong criticism in many ways and very strong praise in many others. He told me that I was entitled to give a name to this material, that I had won the right to name it whatever I pleased, and I had better do it. And the publisher also wanted to have a snappy title for the book.
					
						Well, I went to one of our sons' study. He had the Latin dictionary because oddly enough Latin was studied in that High School in America, and I looked up under fraction, under fractial, in French, in English to Latin. They all refer to the Latin word fractus. I looked it up in a bigger Latin dictionary from fractus and it said that it describes what a stone becomes after you hit it, it becomes broken into many pieces and the pieces are rough. Therefore the ideas of brokenness and of roughness were very present in that word fractus. I started playing with fractus, fractus, trying to get a word good in French and English at least, and hit upon fractal. Then my book of 1975 was being prepared, it was already on word-processing, it was edited - and the word 'fractal' was put all over where it belonged. The title was changed to Les Objets Fractal "Fractal Objects". Well, the book represented only a selection of my work, did not include the work on prices, because by then the work on prices had become less central to economics and I felt its limitations very strongly. And it was published. I may say how it was published. I have no shame at all in saying that for all practical purposes this was what's called "vanity publishing". The topic was totally esoteric. The readership was completely undefined. It had the virtue of being well written because my French teacher in high school had done her job very well. I knew how to write reasonably elegant French. 



It was published by your well-known publisher...



Yes, who were quite, quite unrelated to this type of book- it was published by them because of relations, by and large. The book represented for them almost no risk because it was already presented in camera-ready copy. In fact it was the first book that Flammarion published in camera-ready form. When I brought it there they called the production manager, looked at it, and they said, "Well, so now we're going to send it to typography to print it." I said, "No, no, no, no, no, no. You don't." He said, "What do I do?" "You just take it and you photograph it. You make an offset." But he said, "But offset is for magazines, not for books." "Well," I said, "from now on offset is for books also." Of course now it's the routine situation, but in '75 the fact that IBM already had a word-processing system was just because IBM was manufacturing these kind of things. The book would not have been given a second look by anybody had it required external refereeing and seeing whether it would sell enough for its purposes. Well, I don't want to rush ahead but it now has had four editions and I think that it must sold fifty thousand copies in French, or something of this sort. The English book that came shortly afterwards sold well over a hundred thousand. The topic was timely; this effort to, how should I say, avoid resistance by side manoeuvre, by introducing pictures, was successful. And then in due time the scope of the whole work extended by iteration and of course became a very favourite object of play to many people thanks to the small computers. But that is going very fast ahead. 
					
						The main question again was at the time of this lecture in the Collège de France in '72 and the beginning operation of the book of '75, I became utterly convinced that this was not just a collection of miscellaneous titbits which were linked by my personality, by my desire to love this kind of esoterica married to other esoterica, but by a commonality of structure. The commonality of structure again is scale, scalessness, scaling, renormalisability, the use of fixed points as privileged models, and many other techniques that were developed at the same time, in an entirely different context, entirely different style, with much greater precision, but with a much narrower scope in physics. At that point, '72, '75, I became aware of this work and studied it and started working in physics very strongly. But that's a later stage of the story.
					
						The word 'fractal', once introduced, had an extraordinary integrating effect upon myself and upon many people around. Initially again it was simply a word to write a book about, but once a word exists one begins to try to define it, even though initially it was simply something very subjective and indicating my field. Now the main property of all fractals, put in very loose terms, is that each part - they're made of parts- each part is like the whole except it is smaller. After having coined this word I sorted my own research over a very long period of time and I realised that I had been doing almost nothing else in my life. When I was speaking of these  errors of transmission, they were different pieces of an error record and each piece, when blown up, was like the whole record. When I was speaking of turbulence I was emphasising the fact that each piece of turbulence, when blown up, was like the whole record. And in general that the idea of replication of the structure of the whole in the parts was the crucial cement that had in a way glued my works together, or, changing the metaphor, the thread that had led me through so many different investigations. Now, is that a concept which is explanatory? Is it descriptive? Is it purely a matter of curve-fitting? Well, that is where a very important distinction resides. Most of statistics consisted in curve-fitting, of presenting phenomena by one of the formulas out of a certain tool box which may be small or big, and curve-fitting them separately. You curve fit each phenomenon separately. Turbulence, for better or worse, is full of such relationships, many of them very important, others less so. The hope of science is to explain everything as much as possible, to reduce as much as possible to a few criteria, to a few rules from which everything else follows as a consequence. For me this goal of explanation has always been essential but not unique. I feel very strongly that many fields of science have been not been helped but slowed by the constant preoccupation with explaining a phenomenon without having got an appropriate description of it. Therefore I have a very strong feeling in my mind of what a proper description is. 
					
						To my mind, if you reduce a variety of phenomena to a few underlying invariances - that is, the small parts are like the whole with certain additional restrictions - you have done far more than curve-fitting, than describing; far less perhaps than fully explaining and reducing. A certain quality in between which is very valuable. In advanced fields of physics - as well as in parts of my work that are close to physics and to which the basic rules can be brought to bear - this intermediate theory does not deserve to be put forward because there is an underlying theory that explains it also. In the fields in which most of my work occurred the intermediate theory is very often the only realistic one. That is - take economics: one can try to explain all the enormous mess of economic phenomena by simple rules, but for all practical purposes if one is demanding that the rules have to be as strong, as convincing, as those of physics are, economics has no rules. There's no law like E = mc2 or like acceleration times mass equals force. Such laws do not exist in economics. In fact, as I said and keep saying, the very concepts, which these formulas represent are very often illndefined. Therefore it is perhaps an illusion to put a reduction in the centre of everything. In turbulence the wish to explain is always as strong as ever and I certainly share the hope that turbulence will be explained in a certain old-fashioned way very soon. However, I observe that every second or third year in my life someone has come with a theory that didn't last for very long because it had some very drastic weaknesses.



You are describing what Thomas Kuhn named a scientific revolution in which the goalposts, and the situation to explain, have changed.



Well, I don't like the word revolution because it's a big word and I tend to avoid them.



It's Thomas Kuhn's word?



Yes, but the fact that much of my work in life has consisted of setting goals which were different from the goals of the community I was visiting is very strong. The fact that I was visiting those communities, that even though for me I was always pursuing a certain very clear goal in different forms. Seen by others I was coming to a field then leaving, then coming again and leaving, and in several cases my hosts kindly, or unkindly, described me as being a sudden apparition and sudden dis-apparition for reasons that they could not understand. Indeed the logic was that of my process and not the logic of their field. The reason why I influenced those fields to varying degrees and sometimes very strongly is simply because I was asking questions they were not asking. And I was asking them in terms which were perhaps more ruthless than the terms they're used to because I did not know about the circumstances of what they were dealing with. But the overall solution is that, as in the whole of fractal geometry, this desire to introduce an intermediary system which is not the ultimate explanation, but which is more than ordinary description, has been the principle procedure. I found that in the fields that are closest to engineering, to practical questions, this intermediary structure was particularly essential and also, surprisingly, particularly difficult to defend. And I would like to comment upon that, for example, in hydrology. In hydrology I brought the notions of infinite dependence and the like. Hydrologists were terrified by them, but they did not primarily ask me to justify their use by experiment and by analysis, but they were very  - at least many of them were very concerned about how to explain it; how does it fit in the grand view of things? And I realised to what extent in a certain sense physics and mathematics had intimidated some rather practical engineers; that instead of saying, "Is it true? Is it useful? Is it coherent? Is it amusing? Is it elegant?" they were asking, "Is it explainable by the criteria of physics?" And the criteria of physics, of course, when ultimately one names them, are those of Newton, Einstein, and the quantum mechanics pioneers. These are criteria that physics very rarely met even at its core, and to impose these criteria in the fields where I was working seemed to me quite pointless.
					
						I would like to say more about what fractals are and what they are not. First of all, I don't think that fractals should be defined in a very strict fashion. Not because of any kind of a priori dislike for definitions - I am quite neutral on that account, - but because since I've been working with them several would-be definitions were proposed by me and others and then found to be wanting. They did not represent the distinction that we wished to create and the lack of their definition never did any harm I think, at all. So let us speak about fractals that are the most clear cut. If you look at the Cantor set being obtained by taking an interval, taking away the middle third, and then for each remaining third taking away the third and so on, the main fact is that the side thirds are identical to the whole set, except that they are reduced in a ratio of one third. Therefore the notion of self-similarity is overwhelming in that context. I'm sure that Cantor when he defined his set had this self-similarity in mind. However, the self-similarity was viewed by him as being inessential, more a matter of convenience, of ease of writing a formula, than as a matter of anything useful. Mathematicians very rapidly went beyond self-similarity to shapes rather like Cantor but more general. The world 'self-similarity' itself in English dates, I think, to a paper I wrote in 1964. Now the word 'fractal' is one with which I have certain pride because it corresponded to bringing together a variety of shapes and circumstances which were not identified as being special at all, and of underlining their co-ordination, their usefulness in the description of nature. But 'self-similar' was a word, which was not used before because nobody thought it was necessary. The idea was in some cases trivial and transient, in other cases simply happenstance, something of no significance. Therefore when I had to distinguish self-similar shapes from others, I had to coin a word that was self explanatory, which was not needed before and which on purpose is very, very simple. Now in the case of the Cantor set again the parts on the side are, like the whole thing, one third. The case of this shape which I called the Sierpinski gasket or Sierpinski triangle; you take a triangle, divide it into four equal parts and you erase the middle one. Again, quite clearly, the final shape is made of three parts, each of them reduced in the ratio of one half. These shapes are self-similar in a linear stick-fashion, and totally non-random in a lengthless fashion. Those shapes are in a certain sense very dull and very useless because there's not much that one discovers by studying them which is not already present in the definition. Therefore self-similarity has this strength, in those cases, of being expressed in the simplest possible terms. But to get shapes that are of great, great richness and unpredictability and which are of greatest usefulness in terms of physics and economics and also dynamics and so on, one needs shapes which are either random or in which the reduction from the whole to the parts are non-linear. The idea of similarity changes from being strictly deduction of directions to being deduction, with a certain amount of random or non-linear deformation.


					
						When you assess the properties of these random objects, some of the properties may be very well approximated by properties of these regular shapes like the Sierpinski triangle; you know this is one?



Absolutely. I certainly recognised that and in my most recent book on finance, which I will discuss elsewhere in this interview I describe them as being cartoons. A cartoon, a political cartoon, must be resemblant. If you make a cartoon of a statesman or of a figure on stage and people don't immediately recognise some common features, the cartoon is very bad. But one must underline that they have certain restrictions. They are not the same as a whole and complete imitation. I think it's very important to have both cartoons and more realistic structures. The cartoons have the power of representing the essential very often, but have this intrinsic weakness of being in a certain sense predictable. Once you look at the Sierpinski triangle for a very long time you see more consequences of the construction, but they are rather short consequences, they don't require a very long sequence of thinking. In a certain sense, the most surprising, the richest sciences are those in which we start from simple rules and then go on to very, very long trains of consequences and very long trains of consequences, which you are still predicting correctly. Therefore for me this possibility of going very far from the initial deliberate construction, and of predicting phenomena, which were not consciously put in is extremely valuable. And that's why I always play in parallel with cartoons and with the models proper. I'm very aware of it, I do it quite schematically. 
					
						The self-similarity is not the only simple relation because, again, it means that in the case of objects in space; the reductions go from the whole to the parts and are the same in all directions. The structure is isotropic. In the case of graphs of functions, for example of pressure as a function of temperature, or volume as a function of temperature, the volume and temperature play very different roles.



This is also true for mountain shapes.



For mountain shapes, the gravity has very strong direction, therefore the up and horizontal are the same. Under these conditions it seems natural to introduce transformation in which the horizontal reduction and the vertical reduction are different as you go from the whole to the parts, and those shapes are called self-affining. The word affinity was introduced by Euler. It's a terrible word, but Euler will not be overruled, so it's called affinity. Self-affinity actually is more general than affinity in some ways, but the main idea is still the same. So how can one construct a self-affining variability? Well, the procedure is very straightforward. The simplest case is you imagine a function with values for zero at time zero to one at time one. First approximation is a line. Second approximation, break the line, replace the line by a zigzag made, for example, of three intervals of arbitrary length. After that you reduce the zigzag in different ratios horizontally and vertically to fit each of the three intervals, and you replace each zigzag, each zig, zag and zig by a whole zigzag reduced. And so on and so on. The procedure is that of repetition, of recurrence; the same algorithm appears again and again. When such procedures were used by mathematicians around 1900 they were certainly not viewed as being in any way significant. It was just a way of writing a simple description. They never thought of computers, of course. But once computers came to be, that's the kind of thing computers adore. You just write your instruction, and say do it again and again. Which is why there is an uncanny profound attraction, if you will, between the computer with its particular usefulness for recursive constructions on the one hand, and the constructions of fractals which were introduced around 1900, of which there're about half a dozen. I call them pre-fractal, because they came well before fractal geometry and they were done for entirely different purposes.
					
						The people who around 1900 introduced the shapes called them mathematical monsters, pathological shapes, because their only intent was to show that certain ideas that had become intuitive were incorrect. Now, intuition was certainly believed at the time to be quite invariant in time, quite inbred in humans, and it didn't occur to them that what they viewed as intuitive had any relation with their time and space. Fifty years later- well for some, seventy-five for others - I thought that these constructions could be models of reality and increasingly proved them to be so, and then built upon an enormous variety of variants which very many people continue to do. Then we went to the next stage which was to construct those random novelties and random shapes obtained by iteration, of which I will speak later - the theory of iteration, the theory of Julia sets and Mandelbrot sets and the like. Those shapes are found by many people to be very attractive visually, in fact artistically. And in due time the readers of my books pointed out to me that the shapes which I was creating around 1900 in the work of like Peano, Sierpinski, like Cantor even; in fact familiar in decoration in many, many cultures. So we find here a circle, a very virtuous circle I must say immediately, which goes from art to mathematics to physics and to art again, with the help of the computer in the passage from the second to third stage.
					
						Much of my life was devoted to the problem of iteration, of Julia sets and what later became known as the Mandelbrot set. It's a very long story. It started way back when I was a student at École Polytechnique. My teacher in geometry, differential geometry, was Gaston Julia, a man whom my uncle knew very well. And my uncle kept telling me about the marvellous works that Julia had done before and after 1920. That was background, otherwise my uncle and Julia were very, very hostile to each other. Then after many misadventures and when I was thinking that perhaps I should go back and do mathematics, I went back to my uncle and again he spoke to me about Julia. He said that this marvellous work that he and Fatou, Julia and Fatou had done in 1917 had lain fallow for thirty years and if I could bring it back to life I would get myself a marvellous Ph.D. and a marvellous mathematical career. Now what was the problem that Julia and Fatou were working on? It's one of the simplest and the oldest, the most elementary and the most complicated questions in mathematics. You take a function, f(z). z is a complex variable, (x+iy). f(z) can be z2, z2+c  and can be a rational function, z2+c divided by (z-1). Rational functions are functions that are ratios of polynomials. The simplest. It can be also a transcendental function, exponential of z, logarithm of z, sine of z. But the rational functions were the most challenging. The question is the following: you take a point z0; you define z1 as being f(z0); z2 as being f(z1); then z3 as being f(z2), and so on. Therefore you get a sequence of points, z0, z1, z2 and z3, on to infinity. Those points create an orbit. Question: what happens to this orbit? Does it get lost in infinity? Does it converge to a point? Does it at the end oscillate between two points? What happens to it?  Again, the question was very old, early nineteenth century. Arthur Caley made very considerable contributions to it under rather strange auspices. He was trying to show what happened if you solved the equation z2 -1 = 1 by Newton's method. Now, any sane person in mathematics knows that 'z2 -1 = 0' has two solutions: one, and minus one. That's fine, but Caley said, "What would happen if I did not know the solutions and applied a method due to Newton and Rafson to find them?" He showed that if you started on the right-half plane as an approximation, you go to z = 1; left half plane you go to z -1. Very simple. Then he asked himself the question what happens if you taken the question of z3 - 1 = 0, and found that that somehow instead of being a little bit more complicated it was gigantically more complicated. First he totally miscalculated the complication; he said, "Well, in my next paper I'm going to examine the case of z3 - 1 = 0," then he came back to it and found that it was very difficult. If you start with a reasonably simple value, close to the limits you want to have, you converge quite quickly. But then there was what he called a 'grey zone' where he couldn't say anything, and he gave up. He couldn't do anything because there was enormous difference between these iterations as they're called if you do them locally, if they are close to your limit; or globally. Local theory was easy; global theory in general was much more complicated. In 1905 a French mathematician named Fatou did much new work about it, and then in 1912 an event occurred, an event of a purely mathematical nature. A person named Paul Montel, who was then a very young and brilliant mathematician, produced a mathematical technique that he called 'the theory of normal families of functions', and that technique was hailed as a great advance in analysis. War came. During the war two mathematicians in France, Fatou again and Julia, became interested in the problem.
					
						These two men were as different as can be. Fatou was no longer very young. He was a very strange man who did not want to have a career as such because he never wanted to leave Paris. He was a solitary person, as I understand it, and he became a calculator at the observatory. He had a position in the daytime doing calculations with slide rules of tables or logarithms, of trajectories of planets, and at night and on weekends was doing mathematics. This double life was very strange. He was very much the black sheep in the French mathematical community. Besides, he was physically very weak; I thought he had a foot much longer than the other. Anyhow, he was not called to war because he was just not good as a soldier. So he was in Paris. Who was Julia? Julia was a very up and coming person, actually from Oran, Algeria, of a Spanish family originally, who was the greatest discovery of French mathematics at the time. He had been sent to the front in 1914 or 1915 and deeply wounded. He came back alive, which is quite extraordinary, but for many, many months he had operations performed on him to remove shrapnel, and on his face they were doing that without anaesthesia because they were afraid of killing him. So he was being tortured, in a certain sense, for his own good. At the same time he started doing mathematics.
					
						Both Fatou and Julia realised that Montel's theory could bring the theory of iteration of functions that I have described before- those sequences of  z0, z1, could bring a very gigantic step forward. The fact that Fatou and Julia had for each other the most negative feelings would have been totally insignificant otherwise.  It's well known that academics do not necessarily love each other, it was well documented in every country of the world, but the level of antipathy or hatred these two people had for each other was quite unusual. It was relevant because they used every trick in the book in that theory. They did effectively the same theory in parallel, in a different spirit and different style. Julia was more geometric; Fatou was in some ways perhaps deeper. Whatever the case, the theory of Fatou and Julia was published in 1917, in '17, '18, '19, in those years, and became a major landmark in the history of analysis. Now why was it a landmark and what happened to it? It had almost no follow up; that is over the thirty years between, say, 1917-47, a few papers appeared that clarified specific questions that Julia had found to be- had answered incorrectly. He was corrected, very important work was done, but by and large it can be said that very little happened in terms of starting the theory again. And that was my uncle's point; that the theory of normal families of functions had given rise to this immense advance and then nothing else happened. Now why was the advance interesting? At that time the reason was not formulated very strongly but it is very easy to formulate it today. Shortly before Julia and Fatou, Poincaré and Hadamard, and many others, but these two primarily - Poincaré was a great man of his time, Hadamard was nearly his equal - had demonstrated that solutions of very simple equations can have extraordinarily bizarre trajectories, that when the equation was simple and natural it did not mean that the solution was also simple. Hadamard in fact discovered this sensitivity to initial conditions, which was later, a hundred years later, to become a very key factor in physics and mathematics. Poincaré made a list of possible horrors, which may happen if one studied equations and emphasised them and the effect they would have. And Julia in his book was very much writing in this spirit. What he wanted to show is that even though the sequence of operations I described for simple functions, f(z), looked perfectly childish, very strange things could happen to such solutions. The orbits could behave in a very complicated fashion. This was something which was very much ahead of its time; that is, hardly anybody thought of these matters until again thirty years or two passed, when the theory of chaos started and went very rapidly to a very highly refined state. Why was it so? Why was not more attention paid? I don't know. Some people say it's just a matter of the state of the world, that the world was believed to be a steady comfortable place in 1900, that World War I was not enough to make people change their minds. There were several articles, not on the Fatou-Julia theory, but on others, on the Hadamard theory, over the years, but by and large, very, very few.
					
						Whatever the case, in '47 my uncle thought of it, not because it was, how to say, intellectually challenging but because it was mathematically difficult, and because Julia and Fatou had stopped at the point and couldn't go any further. He gave me the original reprints of Fatou and Julia to read, and I still own the one of Fatou which was an off-print with renumbered pages, one to whatever, two hundred and seventy-five, a combination of three papers, a little book which is a very valuable item, which Fatou had given to him one time. I don't know what happened to the Julia reprint, so I used the Julia collected works as a reference. For me reading the Fatou-Julia was very easy because in a way I was a trained mathematician - I was so under-trained in terms of going to school, and anyhow the school then was very old-fashioned and Paul Levy was so old-fashioned, and I had been reading Paul Levy, so reading Julia and Fatou was not a pain. For many other people it became very difficult. They wrote beautiful sentences in French, where it was not clear, separate. which were the conditions, which were the conclusions. Sometimes it would say it could not be wrong data - and in fact sometimes the argument would be simple and sometimes very difficult. This was mathematics before the great formalisation of later periods. They also sometimes made mistakes, which were forgiven by their time but not forgiven later in their work. Whatever the case, in 1947 or so I read these papers, I studied them and first of all I did not appreciate the contact with anything physical, which for me was so important, and I did not at all appreciate why these things were particularly interesting. And Julia by that time - Fatou already had been long dead, Julia was still alive, he lived to be very old - was he was very much outside of the great men of the times. He was viewed as being old-fashioned, someone who had done something important in the past but well forgotten. So that's chapter one.
					
						Chapter two occurred much later. I wrote my first book on fractals in '75 in French. Then there was a translation, which appeared in English in '77, and my second book appeared in 1982. The '77 book was not much different from the translation; it was like additions. But one addition that occurred was to state what I was going to do next, in '77. In the meantime I had read an obit. of Poincaré, written by Hadamard. Now this I think is a masterpiece among obits. There may be such obits. by statesmen about another statesman, but here was a man of extraordinary breadth, depth, style and strength, namely Hadamard, describing the whole life and works of Poincaré which he understood from end to end. The most striking part to me about that obit. was how Hadamard was dwelling on Poincaré's work in dynamics, and on Fuchsian functions, on Kleinian groups. These were the discoveries Poincaré had done very early in his career, which consisted also in repeating operations, but the operations were not the ones I mentioned, but simply ratios of linear functions, called Möbius transformations. And Möbius transformations, if you start with a certain number of transformations you create a group which is Kleinian in general, in some special cases they are called Fuchsian. Hadamard was very aware of the fact that in some cases the solutions came very simply; in other cases in a very irregular fashion. And again, for Poincaré and Hadamard these are examples of what later came to be called 'chaos'. And by reading this obituary, and not because of the environment, what was happening in science, I suddenly realised that fractals had been seen by Poincaré in the study of these groups but never explored, and I remembered that Julia had presented his work as being in the spirit of Kleinian groups of Poincaré and again this wasn't explored. Computers were available and I became, as soon as the book of  '77 came out, extraordinarily involved in the exploration of Kleinian groups and of iterations of rational functions.
					
						Now the development of these two topics, from my viewpoint, took entirely different aspects. In the theory of Kleinian groups I did not contribute to any new problem. As a matter of fact, it might have been just playing by me over a few years, if it were not that I solved a problem, which Poincaré and Felix Klein at the same time had seen about a hundred years before and couldn't solve, and this was something in which the eye plays a role which is completely amazing. Poincaré and Klein had to deal with limit sets of these groups; that is, after you repeat these operation many times there are some sets which are defined as limit sets. They can be called attractors in a certain sense, which is a better known word now in the theory of chaos, but they called them limit sets. And they had an algorithm for certain limit sets. This algorithm was converging with excruciating slowness, that is, after many, many operations it gave a very, very crude idea of what the limit is going to be. And there was a very widespread feeling that somehow this was a gap; that there should exist a simple way of constructing those limit sets without going through very slow and unsatisfactory algorithm. Well, what I did first was not to think of the algorithm, but simply to see whether those people in 1870s, 1880s or 1890s had been right in their evaluation of the limit sets. With a computer it was very easy: where they had great trouble we could just take the pictures, measure all the circles they had and then redo it and take orbits and just see the orbit- and the limit set grow in front of our eyes. The limit sets were very different from what the books of the time presented. On one hand, very much more complicated, but on the other hand extraordinarily orderly. In fact, in the limit sets that were obtained by pictures, the self-similar aspect of these constructions was very apparent. A small piece of the limit set looked like the whole limit set but smaller, and deformed - not linearly, but some were deformed - but definitely the same structure in different scale. In the pictures of the 1980s, self-similarity was not visible. I don't even remember whether they were aware of self-similarity, because it is not something which one can think of so easily in these very complicated shapes. And by and by, looking at the variety of these constructions, I had a very nice and very good assistant at the time, the programmer who was working for me all the time, but he was not mathematically sophisticated. But I had for a month a mathematically very sophisticated programmer, a student at Princeton, and so I was having him redo these things with slightly different initial conditions, so we had limits set for this set; well, actually, we were looking at inversions and circles, which is almost like Kleinian groups, not quite, but very, very close. So you select a collection of circles and then you invert. It's a very easy thing to do. And I would say, "Well move these circles, move these circles, move those circles." He'd say, "Why? I mean it's all the same." I 'd say, "No, no. At this point it doesn't talk to me. I don't see anything. I would like to establish a connection with this alien in front of me." And then at one point the solution became obvious. I didn't do any kind of highfaluting mathematical investigations; I just experimented. Experimentally the solution to this problem became totally obvious. That is, there was a way of constructing a limit set, which after two or three stages gave a very, clear idea of what the limit set was. Moreover, this way had nothing, how to say, bizarre about it because a curve which is one of the major monsters of mathematics round 1900, namely the Koch curve, the snowflake curve, can be constructed by having the inside and the outside made of little triangles that become smaller and smaller, and each new iteration gives more detail. You get an overall shape after one stage; a very good approximation after two: an excellent one after three or four - the eye sees how to continue. Well the construction I found for the limit sets of groups based upon inversions, which are almost like Kleinian groups, consisted in replacing the triangles with circles, and those circles I called 'oscillatory', because they kiss the limit set in a certain sense.
					
						Well, the result of it was very strange. On the one hand neither I nor anybody else could view that as being a breakthrough when we saw it. It's as if a gap which was an illusion had vanished, because it was so simple. It is a well-known construction; I don't think that it is attributed to anybody in literature; I'm not even angry about it because I felt it didn't require any initiative, but I think it's worth recording because of the way it was obtained. For a hundred years people far more specialised in this field than myself, and very brilliant people had been looking for this solution, but were just looking at the sky, dreaming, "How can I make it?" I was looking down on pictures. They were looking for an algorithm; I was looking at actual constructions that the computer by then could give very easily, because iteration is very, very easy to implement on the computer. And was I the first to use the computer to look at these solutions? Of course not. As a matter of fact, when I found this solution I was convinced that it must be well known. I went to see a very well known person in the field, a man named Wilhelm Magnus, a professor at New York University and asked him - he had written a book on the subject - whether anybody had told him about the solution. He said, "No." He was amazed: "It's so simple, and I never saw it. But," he said, "after my book came out and computers came out, I received enormous correspondence from many people who've sent me drawings of these limit sets." So he give me a big file. I looked at the file and was totally amazed. No-one had experimented. That is, those people wanted to use the computer to make better pictures for a book by Klein, from 1885 or 1890, but they didn't take the initiative of thinking of the picture as being something that is creative. A picture is something that visualises results obtained, otherwise it is not a tool for invention, a tool for creation, a tool for helping the mind obtain results which pure thought cannot allow us to obtain.



It would not have been possible without the advent of computers?



I think that the computer by itself was necessary, not sufficient. If one did not break from the mould of mathematics in the '70s as I did, one could not imagine using computer for this purpose. I was not the first. People who knew mathematics far better than I did were there, but they could not have obtained this result, I think, at all, because it required a leap of faith.


					
						I would like to add a few words about these iterations of inversions and Kleinian groups. First of all the self-similarity is obvious on these pictures; that is one looks at a small piece of it and it is like the whole except smaller, and deformed - that's very essential, that part. The second point is that it is not imitation of nature. In fractals there are two aspects, which I like to keep very much in balance. For example, all my book jackets, the front and the back jacket, one part is imitation of nature, and one part is the creation of these amazing shapes - which, again, chaos theory embodies - which are created from very, very simple formulas in a fractal. The two are very closely related in my mind, in the motivation, but quite separate in, how to say, the daily handling and style. The iteration, the Kleinian group part did not become wildly popular. It had a very strong influence on some of my friends, and I think it had a strong influence on research on Kleinian groups, which was very much in the doldrums and became again very active. But to my disappointment people did not start drawing such shapes and to correct for it I decided just a few weeks ago to use such a structure as a cover on a forthcoming book. Today's computers are so much better than what I had in the late '70s, that it could really play much further than before; and what you obtain - in particular, one structure that is in my book of 1982, which I called 'the pharaoh's breastplate' was re-rendered not as a kind of shadow of jewellery found in the Pyramid, but as a jewel. It is astounding how rich those shapes can be. That is, you take a collection of six circles, not chosen at random, but chosen according to my experience with what is going to be nice, and do this - apply my algorithm from my book of '82, and lo and behold, you get objects which are certainly not an imitation of nature, but which are, in a certain very strong sense, powerfully decorative. And frankly, I am going to have them made up as jewels as soon as I can manage to corner a high class jeweller to do it!
					
						But again, this effort paled next to the effort of my coming back to the works of Julia and Fatou. Originally what I did was simply to play with them. An extraordinary situation- where Julia spoke of the complication of these shapes without being able to describe their simplicity, their regularity. He was very conscious that they represented something else, something beyond circles and other shapes, but he couldn't see them. The power of the computer to simply construct them became something that I enjoyed enormously, and we went through a long period of just changing a parameter - and first we had a rather complicated expression- of seeing what was happening. Now, being a physicist, or more precisely, a realist at heart, I did not ask myself abstract questions about iteration, but the very concrete questions, which were very close to what Julia had been motivated by originally.  So you have a sequence again of an orbit, zO, z1, z2, etc., to infinity; that orbit under certain conditions converges to a limit; and under other conditions converges to a cycle of two, three, four, a finite cycle; under other conditions it does neither but just goes on wandering for ever. Now, I tried to do it experimentally by taking a nice slightly complicated function, f(z), because I felt that to get something interesting I needed something complicated, and we just played. It turns out that the problem I was asking is simply too ridiculous for words because you needed a very complicated calculation, computation, to get those points, those values of c, a parameter for which there was a limit; and then those which are a limit cycle of two, then a limit cycle of three, of four, and the convergence of these sets to the limit, I mean, was very, very slow. It was irritation of the the cumbersome of the argument that led me to think of something else, and this also led me to replace those very complicated functions that I was trying first with the simplest one, which is z2+c. In a way, to come back to what I was saying about inversion: inversions more or less 1/z, and iteration of squares, quadratic iteration, is z2+c. If you go to functions which are non-linear, these are the simplest, and that has very often been my policy: not to try to be general, not to try to be too over ambitious, to think about the strategy or to think about ultimate goals, but to try to understand simple cases absolutely thoroughly. In the simple case of 1/z again gave rise to these works on iteration and limit sets of Klenian groups. The simple case of z2+c turned out to be of a wealth, a richness, beyond anything I could have imagined, because I thought it was going to at most a tactical exercise and it became very much more than that.
					
						In the case of z2+c one can ask the question, which was asked by Julia and Fatou; under which conditions is it true that the Julia set is connected? Now what is the Julia set? The Julia set is in this case the set you obtain by working back this transformation, not going to z2+c, but working back from one value of zn to one which is the inverse of f. There are two possible values, therefore by working back there's a tree of possibilities that occurs, and one chooses one of these possibilities at random; and one sees how it behaves. I was postulating, I was implying all kinds of theorems I could not prove, some of which were proven by others I didn't know, and others are still open in this process, because I was trying not to do mathematics, but to explore the unknown numerically at that time. And so the second set we could look at was whether the other - for c - for which the inverse backing up on this transformation would lead to a set which is connected or not connected. That question was raised by Fatou and Julia because it was mathematically simple. It had and still has no intuitive meaning to me. I felt it was close to a question that is physically interesting. So after playing for a long time with Julia sets, finding their complications, finding their extraordinary structure, finding their self-similarity, which was so striking, the small piece and the whole thing - but again smaller, not reduced linearly but by squaring but that's alright, it is still a form of self-similarity - I tried to make a map. It was a map of possible behaviours, in a certain sense a dictionary,  in certain sence an index. Since I did not know that there was no theory that says if c is in that region, then that thing happens; if c is at other region, then something else happens. I decided to establish this map, first, again, on the basis of existent limit cycles, and then on the basis from Fatou and Julia's criteria of when the Julia set is connected.
					
						That is how the Mandelbrot set came to be. We drew this set as a - well, we call it a map; on this map we should see in which parts of a plane different behaviours occurred. The first impression of this map, of course, was extraordinary complication. The first impressions we had were of shapes that were dirty. Now, I must emphasise, what kind of instruments I was using. This work was started when I was at IBM, and continued when I was a visiting professor of mathematics at Harvard. Harvard then had very poor computer facilities, extremely poor ones. We had a small DEK computer, and we had a Tektronix screen, a graphic screen, which was very old and very worn out, and a Versatec printer, with a very old-fashioned processor which gave rise to very dirty pictures under ordinary conditions. So the first drawing of what became known as the Mandelbrot set a few years later, was very, very messy, and I thought it was the fault of our terrible equipment. Well, to make sure, we zoomed; that is, we looked in greater detail at a small part of the field. Some pieces were clearly dirt; other pieces we didn't know. I took advantage of a trip back to IBM and went to beg my previous assistant, and remind him that I was a nice person to work for, that I let him do all kinds of things which I didn't care about because that would help his career after he stopped working for me, and finally convinced him to give me a day. So, he had some difficulty reproducing the program done at Harvard, and then he reproduced it: their machines were far better, much faster; the screen was extremely high quality; and I was expecting a nice clean picture. The picture was worse than ever. It was a very peculiar cardioid, then a circle, then this and that, and then at the boundary- mess beyond imagination. Well I couldn't beg Mark Laff to continue, so I went back to Harvard, then started looking at the boundaries in greater detail and greater detail. At some point - we had picture after picture; we repeated the picture - and the dirt was different. Where it was different in different transparencies, probably it was dirt. And we zoomed in, - it was dirt. In other places, a strange thing was happening. We saw the same piece of dirt on top and it was symmetrical at the bottom. That was very unlikely to happen because of just a bad system. We looked at these pieces in greater detail: total shock. Those pieces were exactly like the whole thing but smaller and a little bit deformed. Well, we looked at some other pieces in greater detail and then we started taking values of the parameter c, in z2+c. Actually, I was using a different formalism, but it was equivalent. When c is in those pieces - I called them islands - and when it was there, inside, we got a limit cycle; when it was outside we didn't get a limit cycle. More precisely, the thing was going on moving around and we couldn't see whether it was a very big cycle or it was no cycle: therefore, chaos.
					
						The relation between my original problem, which was the existence of limit cycles, and the problem we were studying, that is the connectedness of the Julia set, became the main issue in front of me. I had been right to follow from this impossible problem to this one that was very easy to program, but right in a sense that visualy it was what I expected, but could I prove it? Well, I spent, I think, twenty minutes on it, a very intense twenty minutes, to convince myself that I shouldn't even try to prove it. It was beyond my capacities. I had stumbled into a field in which very difficult things were happening. I could not do it. I put as a conjecture, and the conjecture is that the first set which I was considering - call it m0 - if you add it to all its limit points, make it the limit points plus the set, you obtain the set m which is obtained by connectedness of the Julia set. This conjecture looked extremely simple. It can be explained to a good high school student, because there was no complicated concept involved. The concept of a limit cycle is straightforward. The concept of connectedness is straightforward and intuitive. The relation between the two was postulated by a very simple identity, that m =m0 plus its limit points. Well, believe it or not, this conjecture is still open and what is so striking about the study of iteration of z2+c is that the first serious difficulty I encountered in its study has remained, after now eighteen, nineteen years of study, totally baffling. First people told me, "I'm going to prove it to you next week," then next month, then next year, then next decade. Now of course they do it next millennium! It's a problem of extraordinary difficulty. Let me comment on this problem. Without computers, it would have been totally unthinkable to even raise it. In 1947 when my uncle spoke to me about that, no-one could have asked seriously the question of the structure of a set for which the limit set is connected, because after a very, very few small pieces that can be done analytically, the rest is just too complicated. With a computer many people have been looking at iteration, outside of my little group. They had computers; they could do iterations, in fact they made a few pictures of Julia sets, but did nothing with them. In fact, they didn't look at them very seriously. In fact, they didn't expect a picture to bring anything new. The idea that a picture could bring anything new in 1970 was simply unthinkable. It was the case in 1830, 1840 perhaps, but not in 1900 and certainly not in 1970. The proof that how should I say, respectful examination of pictures with all the looking again and again, looking closer, looking next to it, experimenting to the hilt, that idea was simply not in anybody's mind. And so my feeling was during that period was of simply walking into a foreign territory which literally nobody had visited, not just wild and there were savages - there was just nobody there. And I was not even working very hard, if you will. I had the courage of looking at it, the courage of taking this very difficult question in my hands, literally in my hands, and in my eyes, and I was leaning by, leaning and collecting diamonds, emeralds and rubies, just lying on the floor. And some of these diamonds, emeralds and rubies gave rise to mathematical conjectures that I could prove myself. Others were proven within a year, others within five years and still more within ten years. And again, the first one, the most obvious, most natural, is still open. It was translated into a variety of other forms. It has now many equivalent expressions, but has become stabilised into an open question that nobody thinks can be solved by a nice simple trick, because almost all the solutions require an enormous amount of effort.
					
I would like to continue with the matter of iteration before returning to other issues. The next thing which surprised us very much, is that both for Julia sets and even more so for the Mandelbrot set, the complication was not, how to say, arbitrary, and almost everybody found the impression that these shapes were hauntingly beautiful. These shapes resulted from the most ridiculous transformation, z2+c, taken seriously, respectfully and visually. And people thought at first that they were totally wild, totally 'extraterrestrial', but then after a very short time, they came back and said, "You know, I think they remind me of something. I think they're natural. I think they are like perhaps nightmares or dreams, but they're natural." And this combination of being so new, because literally when we saw them nobody had seen them before, and being the next day so familiar, is still to me extraordinarily baffling.

						Now I took the short path to tell you the story, but let me recount some more episodes. The Julia sets again are self-similar; each part is like any other part, but one of the observations made about the Mandelbrot set was the following: that a small corner of the Mandelbrot set looks in many ways like the Julia sets corresponding to it; therefore the Mandelbrot set included as parts of it reduced scale images of an immense variety of Julia sets; therefore it is not self-similar in that respect. It is self-similar in the sense that the islands are like the continent but slightly deformed; but not in a sense that the way in which the islands are arranged, the kind of strings that link them together are the same; in fact, they're different in every point. Therefore the complication of a set goes beyond fractals. Julia sets are self-similar, they are fractals by every definition and by intuition, except when they are just straight intervals which happens for some cases, in which case they are too simple to be fractal. The Mandelbrot set is a complication which includes a huge number of different fractals in its structure and is therefore beyond any fractal. It is a paradox of sorts that this has become the icon of fractality, whereas it does not fit the definition of the concept at all.
					
						After the story of z2+c proved to be so fruitful, it was natural for many people to go to study of z3+c or other such transformations. It turned out to be extraordinarily more complicated, not just a little more complicated, and what was so striking in the study of these simple transformations is that you had a stage that was totally elementary; a stage which is, how should I say, was very rich, but you could grasp it; and then - a total unknown. There is an image that I use for that purpose, which I think makes the point. In most sciences there's a core that is very simple, at least very simple to write. Anybody can understand gravitation, F = Gm1m2/r2, it's a formula that is very simple. As you go out and out and out it becomes more and more complicated. As you continue to go out it becomes more complicated again, more technical. But there's a big domain around the formula in which one doesn't encounter impossible difficulties. The study of fractals, of chaos in general - and I will say in a minute how it relates to chaos - is more like the situation of a very branching structure. There is a core that is very simple, which children can understand, which anybody can copy and implement, but in order to continue doing something doable you must follow a finger. If you go in a natural direction looking at natural questions, most likely you'll get into an abyss, which means some things that are extraordinarily difficult. Difficulty does not increase gradually as you go away from the simple core. And that is true of fractals in general. It's illegitimate as you look at the parts of fractal geometry that were written down for children to believe it's an easy subject, because the main constructions are like playing, the main early results are like play, and in general there's almost no effort needed to obtain them, or so it seems. Then people say it's an easy subject; it's far from true. If you follow very peculiar lines you again find easy considerations, but if you follow a natural line, which was a matter, for example, of the structure of the boundary of the Mandelbrot set, you very rapidly find things, which are beyond the most refined techniques we have.
					
						I will perhaps continue, before I speak of the artistic aspects more specifically, on my contribution to mathematics outside of the solution to the old problem that was so old that nobody even cared about it, and the beginning of the revival of the study of iteration. What I said about difficult questions coming out immediately after the easy ones has its best example in the following construction. It is called random walk in the plane, or Brownian motion in the plane. Imagine the plane is covered with a lattice of lines, and you start at the origin and you go forward, back, left or right with equal probability. You start from a point, there's a very high probability that you return to where you started very quickly, but sometimes you take a very long time, and the cases where it takes you a very long time are representative of what happens in the continuous plane representation, in which random walk becomes Brownian motion. The point which sort of wanders around for a long time and eventually by definition, by requirement, returns to its origin, I call that the Brownian bridge, two dimensions. It covers a patch of a plane. I had this patch of a plane drawn by curiosity because Brownian motion is the best understood of the random fractals, but I always had a feeling that it was understood only intellectually and not visually and tactually. We drew this blob and my first impression was it looked like very very irregular islands. Now islands by that time were things I knew very well. That was the example that I used to make the ideas of fractal geometry understandable to the engineers and physicists I was dealing with. And my father had been such a map nut, my house was full with maps. So a very very irregular island, well, in my experience the very irregular islands have a dimension usually less than - maybe - four thirds. So my conjecture was that the dimension of the blob may be four thirds. Then I made calculations one can measure dimension. Dimension is the main measure of roughness for fractals, and we measured it by one fashion. We found four thirds with extraordinary precision, I think five decimals. I tried to prove it ...pardon, I forgot to say what the four thirds is. The four thirds is the boundary of it, which is all the points that are accessible outside. Within that island the Brownian motion goes back and forth and in a very irregular fashion, so there are many, many gaps in Brownian motion. But one looks at the whole cluster as a body and one looks at the boundary. The dimension is four thirds, visually and numerically. It became a conjecture in my book of 1982, The Fractal Geometry of Nature; there's a page on that and an invitation to my friends to prove it. Well, one friend told me, "I will give you the proof tomorrow." He didn't. Another one, "Next week." He didn't. Another, "Next month." He didn't. Another, "Next year." He did not. It has now been through a very large number of papers, a considerable literature, which incidentally solved many interesting questions and raised many interesting side issues that could be handled by mathematics, but the four thirds conjecture is still open, after sixteen years, which is close to infinity given the number of very brilliant people who have been trying. And again, what was my contribution here? Not to solving it, but to look at one new aspect of Brownian motion numerically, to let my eye wander, to look at variants of this cluster, modify it, change it, and see that this four thirds appearance brings together many considerations from physics, where four thirds is a magic number in many important phenomena, and altogether to establish a conjecture about one particular shape. Now that particular shape shows promise of becoming a way of exploring the plane, that is, there one has many aspects of a plane, topological, metric, etc., etc., etc. This maybe yet another aspect of the structure of the plane. But we don't know. It is totally open. It's a beginning, and to me what is so heart-warming is that my technique, which is entirely based always upon the eye and upon physical analogies, upon intuition, has been so successful, sometimes in closing an old-standing problem, and more often in opening entirely new ones which have become enormous explorations in which my contribution has been to show a few of the major facts one should be looking at.
					
						To continue my image of picking up diamonds, emeralds and rubies it's as if the next generation had to bring shovels to dig. At this stage we are in the stage of enormous machines which grind huge amounts of data-rich soil to extract new results, with extreme difficulty and extreme technical complication. It's a field that at the same time keeps its attractiveness for children because I get all the time letters from adolescents who tell me that they've been using the computer to make this conjecture, and say, "Well, I hope it is new."  The first years, sometimes it is new; today it's very rarely new, but for them it is still new. For them it represents the fact that someone with a little computer and pleasure in looking at shapes, a pleasure in playing with them, can make observations which are absolutely not implicit in the construction. This is in sharp contrast to the property of a circle, for example, or ellipse, in which although the proofs are rather difficult sometimes, most theorems in Euclid are rather simple to state, and even if you are good with your hands, rather obvious in a certain sense by inspection, but are difficult to prove. In this other case, nothing is implicit in the definition. From the definition to the observation a child can make, there's an infinitely great jump in difficulty, a very short distance in actual time performed, and again very often one ends up with questions for which there is absolutely no answer at this point. The four thirds hypothesis I use all the time for this purpose, to show that mathematics is alive, that it's not a technique that must built, or a field that must be built entirely upon old work and that is entirely cumulative. There are ways of getting to the frontier of mathematics by, how should I say, short cuts that have not been explored by anyone else, which are not long steps of reasoning. And I think that one of the most characteristic features of fractals, perhaps a unique feature among branches of mathematics, is the presence of such very simple constructions and conjectures that lead to impossibly difficult statements. To me there is no simpler way of proving the existence and the life of mathematics than the fact that many people try to prove it and the difficulty of mathematics. The fact that so many people fail to prove it; and also the ease of mathematics - the fact that many of these conjectures are in fact proven rather quickly by specialists. So every configuration is present in these cases.
					
						I would like to add a few words to these examples about mathematics, the limit set of Kleinian groups, iteration of z2+c and the four thirds. One of the fields which my work opened is that of multifractals. Now, multifractals are measures which mean the following: most fractals are sets, which means that you are either in a set or outside; you have a straight line, you are either on the line or outside; a circle, either on the circle or outside, either in the disc which is inside the circle or outside. Therefore it's a matter of black and white. If you are black and if you are inside, they are white on the outside, if you think of a printed picture of a set infinitely fine. But most of physics is concerned with shades of grey. Things are not black and white, don't have nice weather and stormy weather- more or less stormy. And one of the most important structures, which I introduced over the years is that of multifractals. Now I would like to emphasise again its roots in preceding mathematics that I did before very strongly. Some multifractals were known in the literature, again in this collection of esoterica, pathology etc. Very few - just a hint of some complication was known. I began to study them in the context of 'intermittency' of turbulence. Turbulence is not something that comes as no turbulence, then turbulence; but no turbulence ,then turbulence at a more or less higher levels of intensity. And a concept that is very important, and that I hope to discuss in the part concerned with physics, is that of intermittency. I constructed a model for it and encountered some contradictions, some paradoxes. The formalism was becoming ridiculous if the parameter was above a certain value. Now, if you encounter ridiculous phenomena in mathematics there are many possibilities. One is that you made a mistake and it is very often the case. Sometimes, often in my experience, it means that if you look carefully there is something very interesting hidden in the paradox. And in this case - this was the case. Now how did I approach it? First, not by analysis. Not because I couldn't do it; I could do it and I did it shortly afterwards, at least up to a point. Because I wanted to understand in my fingers what was happening. Therefore it was in the early '70s I would say, around 1970 or perhaps even slightly before that with heroic calculations - because then computers were very slow, and these were very big calculations - I tried to make constructions both below and above this threshold where things were getting funny, and acquired a very concrete feeling of what becoming funny meant. It is not a feeling in mathematics that says, in this case, that the measure of the generator is almost surely zero, in the other case it's a well-defined limit. That is something very important, but it is not the whole thing. I looked at those shapes, I looked at what becoming degenerate meant. And only after having this very strong feeling did I collect my thoughts and show by heuristic, meaning incomplete and not completely rigorous arguments, that indeed where the parameter, when things start becoming funny, a certain result that was quite unexpected and that again informed the degeneracy. I would not like to emphasis the details because it's a delicate issue, though I believe that a few questions were later to give much work to mathematician friends because it became very difficult to prove my loose arguments to be correct.  All those difficulties were not of an artificial kind, not of a hypothetical kind, not of a kind that refers only in infinity and are in the limit where nobody can have any feeling for what's happening. Look, one sees them occurring. In mathematics the idea that refined results, difficult results, are beyond intuition, are beyond the eye and almost the hand that idea I think was simply, simply wrong. The advent of the computer and the use of computer as we did to create computer graphics for our purposes, to expand its uses, have shown it again and again and again.
					
						My book, The Fractal Geometry of Nature, was supposed to be out in the spring of 1982. It was a little delayed, but I came with Xeroxes of proofs of that book to a meeting, which had been organised in Courchevel. It was organised by IBM Europe in a series run by Herb Bud on a variety of topics. At Courchevel, it was the first year that this IBM Europe Institute was being held and nobody knew about it. I had nobody to help me organise it. I invited a number of people, then I asked them to invite other people. It was a very informal operation. Many of the participants, when they arrived, said they didn't believe until the last minute that the thing was for real because the field didn't exist, the place seemed to be never-to-be found, it was like something being created out of nothing in front of our eyes. Smallish but very miscellaneous groups of people were present and everybody who was there remembers it, I think, as I do, as an extraordinary experience. It had never been tried on any large group simultaneously. IBM made a big effort to bring computers up the mountain, into the room. At that time no-one had had computers to play with, to make pictures, and the pictures we are describing could be played with immediately. Therefore what now occurs for children when they first do fractals on a computer, was then the case for adults with this plaything. The organiser came one day at 10p.m. and was amazed to see that everybody was busily repeating the days work at ten p.m. under the help of my assistants and associates. The programme was very difficult to make and half of the speeches were supposed to be given by me, not because I intended to give them but because I had to make a programme. But I was changing it constantly because as soon as someone in the audience was showing up with some interesting thing, I'd say, "I give up, you speak." It was a feeling of discovery, of something getting together, of creating friendships, many of which have lasted forever, and of realising that again the construction of a field out of what had seemed to be miscellanies had been put on a good path.
					
						But there was also an extraordinary experience that I'll never forget: the concert.  It is the custom if one has a well-endowed meeting to have musical entertainment. Now we are not well-endowed at all; however by coincidence, Sir George Solti was then directing the European Youth Orchestra and so before the meeting opened I could say, "As to musical entertainment, Sir George Solti, conductor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, has agreed to invite us to a performance of his orchestra." Well, I had never had an opportunity like that, of having a man of his stature to do it. Then his associate was Claudio Abbado, who also gave us the privilege of showing us his skill as a conductor. It was something quite, quite incredible. The main fact was that at that meeting everything went- that is, mathematicians were so completely amazed that esoterica could be the core of something else that they stayed even at lectures that otherwise they would never have been caught dead attending. Physicists who were totally turned off by esoterica attended lectures that they would have never attended. This meeting remains as a kind of goal, perhaps never to be repeated because at this point mathematicians who come to fractals meetings know more or less what to expect, and so does everybody else. At that time nobody knew what to expect: whether the meeting would be held, whether held together, whether people would stay, whether people would remember it. Well, beginnings are often like that. In this case the beginnings were followed up, and each year the number of fractal meetings. They are much more organised now, they correspond to better-defined fields. When they are miscellaneous the people who come tend to be from less active fields who just now are learning about fractals. I am very pleased that so many meetings are held, that the spirit of total coming together of so many different kinds of people, that spirit cannot be artificially created, it just happens every so often under rare conditions. It happened in Courchevel in 1982. The people received those very poorly made Xerox copies of my master copy of the book. Many of them tell me that they cherish them even though they are very difficult to read and quite faint, because they use the book when they want to read it, but they hold onto this very, messy copy because, again, it represented something that was just being born, and with all the uncertainty, all the hesitation, might not have survived, it might just, well, last for a day or last for a week. Some people are saying, "Well, it's a little fashion." My French chamber girl told me one day, "If anybody tells you it's a fashion, tell them that fashion lasts a week, a month, a year. That if a fashion lasts fifteen years it becomes a style." And that was something that I hope is true.
					
						Before I begin to speak of my work in mathematics, in physics and in economics separately, I would like to say a few words of the notions of chaos and wild randomness, which I will come back to repeatedly, but which deserve to be spoken about separately. Now chaos is a word that has acquired an extraordinary popularity in recent decades, sometimes for bad reasons because it is misunderstood, but also for a very good reason. And to understand it very well I think it is very important to go back several centuries to the eighteenth century. After Newton's work became known in France it became a topic of extraordinary passion on the part of the intellectuals. In a way the intellectuals were very much wedded to a scheme of things that went back to Aristotle, which said that on earth everything's a mess, and in the heavens everything is perfect. That is, the stars proceed, the planets proceed along well-defined trajectories, the sun is flawless, the moon is flawless. On earth everything is messy, nothing's predictable, everything is terrible. Now Galileo showed that in fact there was some regularity on earth, and there was also messiness in the sky. But Newton was the one who made this idea go through very deeply. It was very shocking to intellectuals in the eighteenth-century because they really took it for granted that in the sky you could predict everything in advance. But on earth the story was embodied in this little rhyme about "for the sake of a nail the horse was lost, for the sake of a horse a battle was lost, for lack of a battle a war was lost, for lack of a war a kingdom was lost". Very tiny differences initially can lead to totally different behaviour. Two people have to meet; one is late; the first doesn't wait; a beautiful match is off. It's very familiar, and Newton gave this totally shattering notion, which in fact in substantial parts of the world we understand; total predictability prevails. Laplace followed by proclaiming a kind of overwhelming imperialist view that one could predict everything precisely; one could also reconstitute the past by knowing the present very accurately; and he wrote it in a very eloquent fashion that was very influential on science. So science, the hard sciences, predicted, and everything else did not. That was something, which the scientists believed, but I think the common man never believed. Underlying all kinds of acknowledgement of the power of science, I believe there was always strong resistance: 'that wouldn't work'.
					
						Now in the twentieth century the inverse of what happened in the eighteenth was taken. It became known - and that is the theory of chaos which I will come back to later on for some details - that under certain conditions systems which obey totally well-described, well-understood laws, in which one can predict with certainty the progress of a trajectory once one knows initial conditions, that those systems were so sensitive to initial conditions that in practice they could predict nothing. That is, if you know fifteen decimals of initial conditions you could go on for a certain time and then essentially have no prediction whatsoever. If you knew more decimals for every initial condition you could go on longer but eventually, again, predictability is lost. Therefore, mechanics/dynamics - the same thing - became split into two parts: the nice, well-behaved dynamics which, if you know a few decimals you know pretty well how things behave; and the chaotic dynamics in which you must know an infinite number of decimals to have exact predictions. In theory you could predict everything, but in practice you can predict very, very little.
					
						Now my work made a very parallel but very different distinction in stochastic behaviour, in random behaviour, unpredictable behaviour, which has no dynamics. Sometimes the behaviour is, how should I say, mild, the randomness is mild, and a fair amount of predictability can be obtained. In other cases the predictability is much less so, the control is much more difficult, and these correspond to what are called wild fluctuations.  This parallel division of dynamics between classical and chaotic, and of randomness between mild and wild, with many other states in between on both sides, means that many habits of thought, which go much further than technical procedures, which people were completely trusting, identifying with science, were no longer applicable. These took different forms, my work in mathematics, my work in physics, and my work in economics and finance.
					
						Perhaps before I proceed to other fields in mathematics and physics and elsewhere, I should give the classic example. I have a certain resistance to examples that have become cliches, even when the cliche really embodies very strongly the true situation. In the case of the weather, the great contribution of Edward Lorenz has been to observe that even if one assumes that the weather follows extremely precise laws which are differential equations of fluid motion, and if everything is under perfect control, even so a very tiny change in initial conditions? the classical butterfly effect. A butterfly moving up or moving sideways somewhere in the Caribbean would affect the process of a storm moving towards the US coast; because the butterfly went up, the storm much later moved up the coast. The storm involves a gigantic amount of energy, the butterfly a very tiny one. If one knew exactly the initial conditions, if one knew exactly how the butterfly moved, one could predict in that model where the hurricane would move. Since actual prediction of this butterfly or other butterflies is impossible, despite the existence, presumed in this thinking, of very strict laws, it's impossible to know where the storm will move. That is, a system can be both completely predictable in principle, and completely unpredictable in practice. Needless to say, in actual situations the complete predictability in principle is seldom satisfied, but as a background for understanding many phenomena, the butterfly effect is absolutely essential.
					
						My whole scientific life was spent wandering between disciplines. I have often had the feeling of them as being cities, somewhat fortified, not completely fortified, and of myself coming and asking to be welcomed and trying to contribute to their welfare. But to explain this work I am obliged in a way to disentangle different stories that occurred together and now would like to proceed to story of fractals as tools to represent nature. At the beginning of my book, The Fractal Geometry of Nature, I observe that mountains are not cones, clouds are not spheres, islands are not circles, rivers do not run straight, lightening is not a straight line; and more generally that the shapes that nature offers us for contemplation and understanding are only extraordinarily, exceptionally represented by shapes of the geometry of Euclid. It's a miracle, in a certain sense, a central one but still totally surprising, that shapes like circles which we see in nature only when the moon is full, or when a tree is particularly straight and you cut it - those shapes give an idea of a circle, but there are very few circles in nature. There are no straight lines in nature. Painters, who are very careful of these matters, particularly so Eugene Delacroix who wrote about these topics very eloquently, says that there's no straight line in nature, there is no circle, there is no triangle of course. Yet these shapes have enabled man to obtain an extraordinary degree of understanding, control and explanation about many aspects of nature. However, for everyone, the ordinary man and woman and the scientist, it was always a source of surprise that, in a certain sense, the limitations of science should be so obvious. The poets, who often do not like the scientists, are quite generous with comments in which they say that geometry is hard and dull and dry and that nature has a richness of shape, a richness of expression that goes beyond anything that intellectual minds, the mind of a scientist could imagine. Well, this thought is very, very deeply embodied in our culture, but the fractals prove that it is without foundation. One of the most striking features of fractals is that they enable us to imitate nature and thereby to, I think, gather immediately a great deal of understanding about nature by creating shapes that are completely understood, totally grasped by thought, which are completely described by very simple formulas that can be combined, divided, altered, modified, and which in different forms provide us with very straightforward forgeries of nature. In most cases 'forgery' is a bad word because one wants to repeat, in a certain sense, the thinking of Vermeer or some other painter who painted only a little, and it has become very valuable; in this case 'forgery' is a very positive word. We do not claim to represent nature in all its richness. The claim is not to obtain pictures that are indistinguishable from nature, because had that been our goal we'd be led to enormous levels of complication and the simplicity, the straightforwardness of fractal geometry would be lost or at least diminished. The goal is to find a rather reasonable imitation; I wouldn't say caricature, I wouldn't say cartoon, but a good imitation of what nature is about. The most widely known of these pictures, are, of course, pictures of mountains, of clouds, of trees, which fractal geometry produces so easily. Instead of starting on this topic I would like to go straight to more fundamental issues of physics because my involvement with mountains did not occur because of a particular love for mountains but as a rhetoric, to explain how other things worked.
					
						In the early '60s, I became faced with a phenomenon that I discussed in many places, which is distribution of errors communication in telephone channels. This was something very, very powerful, which had surprising success, but which obviously was an over simplification of reality. At this time I was only considering some phenomenon through a very crude reduction; either an error occurs or an error doesn't occur. Almost immediately the task became to understand the underlying phenomena. And what were those underlying phenomena? Essentially there are two of them, or three perhaps. One of them was so-called 1/f noise. Another one was turbulence, and by the very names they're given one realises that they were faced, in a certain sense, very differently. 1/f noise; the very term expresses that if you do spectral analysis of those phenomena you obtain a spectrum that is inversely proportional to frequency. Very, very strange behaviours that were baffling every one of those who discovered them, in totally disconnected places - as a matter of fact in the early '60s, this was esoterica scattered among different disciplines, acoustics, electronics etc., etc. The second phenomenon, which was linked to it, is the behaviour of rivers over the long run. That was not presented as 1/f noise in any certain form, but in a certain sense like a story of the Bible, the story of Joseph, the son of Jacob, and the seven fat years, seven lean years. The Bible, like the expression of any culture which lives in a dry climate, had to take account of something fundamental about Egypt, which is that some periods are very wet, other periods are very dry; some periods of seven or seventeen or seventy years are either wet or dry. The very successful Egyptian dynasties were ones that were blessed with lots of water in the Nile, and those that had no water in the Nile had no resources to either build the great buildings or wage great wars. Therefore, certain cultures are very much dominated by this behaviour of very great irregularity. If I was to define the very notion of what the average level of the Nile is, it almost goes through the fingers. There is no average level around which it fluctuates. Do you mean this dynasty, or that dynasty? This period, or that period? Therefore the way of thinking, which we have been used to, which Laplace, around 1800, taught us very strongly, of randomness as being fluctuations around a middle value, doesn't apply easily to the Nile. As a matter of fact, the people who were studying the Nile were very emphatic in saying that one needs art, experience, memory to study it because mathematics was too blunt a tool for that. What about turbulence? Turbulence is a phenomenon, which ordinarily enough has been named after a phenomenon of sociology: a crowd, an unruly crowd, that's what turbulent meant. But Osborne Reynolds and others in the late nineteenth century classified the behaviour of fluids as being turbulent or non-turbulent. Turbulence is one of the greatest, the most difficult problems that physics faces us with. The story is told - it may be apocryphal but is a very profound one - of Enrico Fermi close to death. He was dying of radiation exposure and, very conscious to cheer him up, his friends asked him, "When you meet our Maker, what will you ask our Maker?" And he said, "There are two questions that now bother me. One is quantum electrodynamics, the other is turbulence. Quantum electrodynamics, well, if I could live longer it will be solved s there are enough bright people to do it. Turbulence is harder. I'll ask our Maker how turbulence functions." A feeling of mystery has always enclosed it. It is not defined by a formula, 1/f, but by phenomena. Somehow an airplane is in what was smooth air, then being shaken, then again the air becomes smooth. It turns out that techniques that are used for the 1/f noises, for the rivers, and for turbulence form a whole. As a matter of fact, I started with one, a very simplified view of the 1/f noise, which was lucky, because had I seen the whole monster I would have been totally overwhelmed. So chance served me once again. But very soon I realised that the 1/f noise was not a well-defined notion, that in fact you could have a spectrum, 1/f , while being of very many different kinds, and that is a discovery that at the same time is, how should I say, a shallow observation and at the same time also very profound, because 1/f is a formula. The same formula can be used as caption to all kinds of different phenomena. This proves the formula does not have much precision to it. Phenomena are very complicated. Again, these phenomena are very rough, irregular. They are not fluctuations around a straight line, certainly not straight lines. They are very, very difficult, yet 1/f finds some commonality among them but doesn't go any deeper.
					
						So a big part of my work in the '60s consisted in creating mathematical structures that would represent different flavours of 1/f noise in different times - and those flavours are extremely different from each other. It is not as if they are different chapters of the same part in a book; they almost belong to different parts of the book, 'The Great Book Of Science', then their formulas were generalised to tackle turbulence. I mentioned 'The Great Book Of Science' because suddenly I remembered, as I often do, this wonderful quotation of Galileo Galilei that 'The Great Book of Science', or 'The Great Book Of The Universe' is written in mathematical characters which are circles, lines and triangles, and without them one errs for ever in the dark labyrinth. Galileo was right in terms of the language that the book uses, that is, mathematics, but wrong in terms of whose dialect was being used. And as time went on and as I was developing the various formulas and formulations for the various fields, it became increasingly clear once again that Euclid was simply not adequate for it on the one hand, and on the other hand that something else could be constructed. A new geometry of nature, the purpose of which is to represent not everything that the old one had left aside, but a big part of those. And by extraordinary luck, coincidence, or perhaps for reasons very profound that I don't understand, this second batch of geometric phenomena did include as important things as fluctuation of rivers, turbulence, mountains, etc., etc.
					
						Now, I would like to say only a few words about one topic which is turbulence - then go to a different chapter of science, in which I became interested later on. Turbulence, again, is a very, very old phenomenon. Many people broke their teeth on it, and in the early '20s a very strange character named Lewis Fry Richardson made a decisive contribution to it. I would like to say perhaps a few words about Lewis Fry Richardson because in my life, as I mentioned and keep mentioning, I encountered either in person or in their writings a certain number of very forceful personalities. Richardson was one. He was an eccentric Englishman, one of the last ones of the kind. He started by being employed by the weather office. When the weather office became part of the Air Ministry he resigned because he was Quaker and had very deep convictions. He would not want to work for any branch of the military. Well, he resigned and had a rough time for a while. He was fortunate whilst still working for the weather office to become Fellow of the Royal Society, and then an opening became vacant at Paisley College, a small school in Glasgow. When Richardson applied they barely read his application, they were so proud to have a Fellow of the Royal Society as their principal. Well, when he came they were somewhat disappointed, as I learned when I participated in the ceremonies for his centenary - because someone from his time was still available. Richardson was not what they expected to have as the principal of a small college. In due time he resigned because he had a small inheritance and occupied himself as he pleased. He left a number of great works and a large amount of unpublished work, but the most significant part of Richardson was to did something that I so deeply admire because it is exactly the kind of thing I love to do when I can. He took as a guide, pictures of turbulence, not measurements of turbulence, pictures of turbulence, more precisely the fountains of Leonardo da Vinci. Now Leonardo da Vinci has been described as being the last and greatest of medieval engineers; as his primary occupation - he was also a painter of course, and a poet - but as an engineer he was in the habit of drawing natural phenomena extremely accurately. Many of the drawings as a matter of fact start with him but were familiar to medieval architects and engineers. One of the most beautiful is a collection of drawings of fountains in which one sees very well the behaviour of water which falls into a pool and being divided into eddies, big eddies, small eddies, middle-sized eddies, etc., etc. For Richardson this was not just a picture. This was not something that had to be replaced instantly by measurements and by theory: it was something that inspired him to have this picture of turbulence as being made of a cascade. He wrote this wonderful parody of some verses by Swift. Swift had written of his contemporaries, the poets: they're big fleas on which smaller fleas feed, and the smaller and smaller and so on. Richardson said, they're big eddies on which smaller eddies feed and smaller yet and so on, to viscosity. Swift said to infinity; Richardson said to viscosity. Small enough eddies are impossible.
					
						Now this idea embodies in itself the basic thought of similarity, self-similarity, and it was taken up around 1940 by Kolmogorov and others but in a very analytic fashion. They produced this marvellous work, K-5/3 spectrum of turbulence that played such a big role in science and also in my life. But for me, in a certain sense, the K-5/3 was an over simplification. It was already analytic and too crude, because it assumed that turbulence was homogenous, that even though there was eddy structure hidden under it, the turbulence was the same at every point. However as it was pointed out very soon to Kolmogorov and to others, turbulence is anything but homogenous. If you think of a wind, the wind comes in gusts, and you think of a gust, a gust is just gust but it has separate sub-gusts, it splits into pieces. Turbulence has not only a self-similar scaling analytic structure, it has a self-similar scaling physical structure, and the question was how to illustrate how to represent it. Now for this goal I introduced the idea of scaling going well beyond the analytics to the geometry, and this was the foundation of the theory of multifractals that I mentioned, not because of their mathematical interest. The mathematical interest came second. It was very great, but the most important idea was that these hierarchies were meant to represent the structure of turbulence. Many techniques were developed: I hasten to say these techniques were developed completely on the basis of traditional mathematics. I was not aware of any work in physics proceeding in the same fashion. For the rivers, say the River Nile, or any of the other rivers with one exception which is the Rhine, the structure is very different. What I did was to generalise Brownian motion by introducing fractional Brownian motion. I add again, as I often do, that later on I discovered that fractional Brownian motion with that name was present as esoterica in one or two papers before my work. Those papers had attracted no attention because, as a defined formula, it was not a topic of exciting content. As I defined it, it was simply a translation into mathematical terms of the idea that seven lean years, seven fat years, seventeen of each, seventy of each, seven hundred of each, and the development of this approach was very different from multifractals. If I had been only, how should I say, led by analytic similarity, by the fact that the 1/f noise occurs in both cases, I don't know where I would have ended. But because one of the principal lessons I learned from my studies is that generality is - well, generality is for the birds! It is not offered to mathematicians when it is interesting, but in general, if I dare say, generality itself takes us away from what you can see and compare and have on our fingers and study in detail. So I certainly studied 1/f noises as one phenomenon, or several kinds of them, including variation of rivers, and multifractals were a separate thing even though I had gone from one to the other for the purpose of keeping the 1/f character and having something richer. Today I just finished putting together a book which puts together my papers of the '60s on this topic, and their diversity and their unity impress themselves upon me again. They're all the same phenomenon, if you look by this narrow window of Fourier spectrum, harmonic analysis; they are very different phenomena from any other viewpoints. It is a case also of where the mathematical haste of saying this is almost independent is absolutely terminal. One gets nothing because one must proceed very, very carefully.
					
						Well, I don't want to pick these pieces in detail because it would be very, very tedious, but I would like to mention one fact, however, which impressed itself upon me. There is this notion of white noise. White noise is fluctuations a la Laplace in which every fluctuation is independent of the others and they have a zero mean and well-defined variants. When you see a graph of white noise it is just is zigzag zigzag of a very tight nature. Now, 1/f noise manifests itself by a spectrum that is flat or a correlation which is zero, except for zero lag. And in the '50s or '60s, I forget exactly which date, when spectral analysis became in fashion very widely, many people did spectral analysis of prices. They found that they were white, a result that was absolutely in contradiction with intuition because everybody knew there's a great deal of structure in prices, but the spectrum did not reveal this structure. Well, the fault was the tool, not the intuition of the people working with it. They thought the tool meant more than it did. They said, "Under white conditions when the series is Gaussian, whiteness means independence. Well, we know it is not Gaussian, but we probably aren't too far from being Gaussian. Let's assume that it still means independence." That loose thinking is lethal. That's what gets people into binds, and spectral analysis became totally discredited in economics and in finance, for a long time because it was giving such counter-intuitive results. I would say it is an indictment of the profession because if a tool gives a counter-intuitive example, it's not a matter of abandoning the tool. One must understand what the counter-intuitive character of this result tells us about what we're dealing with. But let's not dwell on that. This blind spot of spectral analysis became very apparent in my work on a third class of 1/f noises, which are a completely, extraordinarily, dependent in structure, however are white. Whiteness does not necessarily imply independence. Whiteness is compatible with a very great deal of structure. So my work in the '60s consisted very systematically in exploring several special but well-defined and, how to say, tractable collections of models representing a great deal of variability, variability very far from these kind of mild fluctuations around a straight line, of various sorts. And what I was always led by is the idea that within this, how should I say, extraordinary arbitrariness of modelling you could think of any number of models, any number of formulas. Most formulas have only one virtue: they're easy to write, other formulas have the virtue of being, well, I would say robust - and the overwhelming criterion in my thinking all that time was emphasis upon phenomena which correspond to fixed points of certain natural transformations. I think it's something that must be discussed at some time else, but this emphasis on 1/f, on fixed points is quite essential. Fixed points amazingly enough did provide us with very good pictures of what reality was like.
					
						Well, that leads us to the period where a tool that I was using, the fractal dimension, was increasingly important and increasingly ill-understood. I came to mountains not because of their beauty and because of my attraction, but because I needed a neutral example to show that fractal dimension was something you could look at. But I think it is interesting in terms of the biographical and the sociological aspect of my story - how my life orbit which is so complicated, so involved, reflects upon our educational system. To consider the following- suppose someone would have the idea that certain techniques could apply, mathematical techniques that could be used to represent the structure of mountains. How could a person proceed? Would he write a report to the National Research Council, the CNRS, National Science Foundation, saying, "I would like to receive a hundred thousand dollars, or two or three or four hundred thousand dollars for myself and collaborators to seek formulas to make forgeries of mountains"? Totally ridiculous, and it would be never accepted. There are some tasks that are simply too ridiculous and either represent non-professional attitudes of the applicant, or represent just folly. I was fortunate at IBM that I didn't have to tell anybody what I was going to do. We did that on Sundays, nights, and besides I was being given an enormous amount of leeway in these affairs, and there was a good understanding that when the computer was not used, there was no need, no reason to do bureaucratic things about it. It could be used by anybody for any purpose. Almost all of it went to waste, but if the computer had been under lock and key everything would have gone to waste. So the few things that were very successful were a justification for a liberal availability of tools.

					
						Now we are coming close to a period of the early '70s which is logical in this context, because it is in '71 or '72 that I became aware through Herbert Curran of the fact that at the same time as I, totally separately, totally independently of me, a number of physicists had been studying a phenomenon called critical fluctuations. And they were using tools, which for some extraordinary coincidence were very much the same as those I'd been using. Now, what is critical opalescence? It is rather important and easy to say: it is a tube with liquid and gas above it; as you heat them at one point the boundary between liquid and gas vanishes and the liquid becomes quite opaque, which is why it's called opalescence; we heat even further, it is neither a gas nor liquid, it is something else, and again it is transparent. It is a phenomenon that struck the imagination in the nineteenth century and was very much discussed in books of science for young people or science for amateurs that I was reading as a young man, as a child. Critical opalescence was discovered therefore at that time. Some time later Pierre Curie, a very great scientist, discovered that if you heat a magnet enough above a certain temperature it ceases to be a magnet. That temperature is called the critical temperature or the Curie temperature. And more generally, many phenomena in physics have different phases and under certain critical conditions their character changes. A breakthrough in that context was in 1944. An extraordinary calculation performed by Lars Onsager, nominally a chemist, but in the book of many of my friends, one of the great mathematicians of this century, who succeeded in solving the problem of the Ising model in two dimensions. That is: you imagine that a big magnet is made of a gigantic collection of small magnets which can move up and down; that all the neighbours interact but not beyond neighbours - interaction is very much short range; that these magnets are being hit by an environment which is at some temperature, so the higher the temperature, the stronger the inversions of these magnets forced by the environment; and the question arises, is it possible for these small magnets acting together to create gross visible microscopic magnetism? And Onsager solved this problem in two dimensions. In three dimensions it's gigantically more complicated. Now, Onsager did that in '44. From what I understand for the next twenty years his ideas were very, very slowly digested and around '65 or shortly before, the study of critical phenomena became again extremely active and produced several great scientists who established a very very great chapter of physics around them, based again upon scaling, upon normalisation, upon fixed points, and all these phenomena which I'd been studying. Now, I became acquainted with those people very rapidly and in a short time established a very close working relation with several of them, so my work in physics can be described in two parts. When I was working alone, solo, on these questions that are a part of physics, you could say it was physics but not physics proper; in a sense. It is physics of a kind that was carried out by people who did not call themselves physicists; some were called fluid mechanics experts, others were electronics experts or hydrologists. Each dealt with a physical phenomenon, but physicists didn't have an interest in them, whereas critical phenomena were very much part of physics proper.
					
						I would like to give two examples of my work in physics, perhaps more as I speak. One of them is the understanding of the phenomenon called percolation. I would like to do it first of all as physics or mathematics, and then perhaps as art.  It started as an exercise in mathematics due to two Englishmen, Broadbent and Hammersley, who asked themselves what happens in the percolation of a coffee-making machine. To simplify they assumed, in my words, a very large floor - in the case of dimensional percolation - on which you would lay tiles that were either copper or rubber. If they're copper then they conduct electricity; if they're rubber, they don't. So you just put them at random, some with a proportion so much of copper and so much of rubber. If there is no copper to speak of, one or two percent, they are sort of lost in a sea of rubber and current cannot be conducted. If there is lots of copper and very little rubber, then the rubber is neutralised and the system conducts electricity over an endless distance. Then the discovery of Hammersley which was very important in mathematics and even more important in physics. That was that some particular probability of copper and rubber passed from a state in which electricity is not transmitted to one in which it was transmitted. In some cases for some shapes of tiles that's one half; for other shapes of tiles it is not one half. In a short time it was realised that this model, even though introduced as a mathematical curiosity, but not esoterica, was very much discussed around and was a model for many phenomena in the physics of disorder.  The study of percolation clusters became a topic of very great interest to many individuals. The most striking aspect of percolation clusters is the following. If you take a criticality, which are these very magical probabilites of the two kinds of tiles, you take a copper tile and all the tiles that touch it. Together the (copper tiles) form a cluster, which is a fractal shape. It has the same properties at all scales. It has very, very subtle properties. It is very weakly attached to itself, that is, at some points if you remove one copper tile and replace by rubber, the cluster is disconnected; in other places if you move copper tiles out it doesn't disconnect it. So there are points that are 'privileged ' in a sense, in that they are the fundamental points where it can be disconnected. Those points also are a fractal. As a matter of fact, every property of this object is fractal. That is, if you don't look at the whole thing but only parts of it, they're all fractal. And then another aspect of it is that if one makes a list of all the interesting subsets of it, plus the fractal dimension of each, those properties together determine all the physics. It is a most remarkable situation because one of the models, the dream, the Holy Grail of much of physics is to prove that geometry can govern physics. The great example, of course, is Einstein's General Relativity, in which the geometry of space determines gravitation and everything else. It is a very beautiful situation. The geometry in the case of Einstein is a matter of curvature, it is a matter of classical properties in a very smooth structure; the geometry in the case of percolation clusters is a matter of wiggliness, of irregularity, of connectedness or disconnectedness. But the same words apply: for percolation cluster geometry determines structure. The study of percolation clusters became an extraordinarily important and central topic in physics, and much of it is fractal - not everything, but much of it is fractal. That is, if one understands the fractal structure of it and its parts, one understands the way it reacts in many different ways and those ways present a metaphor, sometimes more than a metaphor, to many natural phenomena. One of them is forest fires. There are many phenomena in physics, and also outside physics, in which these clusters are very important.


					
						Another phenomenon which I spent an immense amount of time on is diffusion limit aggregates, and this one started quite outside of my group of colleagues, but would not, I think, have arisen otherwise. For a long time, a very long time, in fact in the '20s, many scientists dealing with disorderly matters, often people working on oil fields, were finding branching structures. So for example, if you push water into a rock- for example, take an old oil field; oil that is under pressure has been collected, but there's plenty of oil left, so you want to push water in it hoping the water will push the oil and get more oil, - secondary recovery. Now the hope is that the water you pump in will move like a kind of wave. The fear is that more like a finger, it will just find some easy way out and you just put dirty water in and get dirtier water out and no oil. The reality was it moves more like a hand, with fingers spread out. In the '20s they had no idea how to analyse it. As a matter of fact, they said, "Let's cut these fingers off because we want to study them, and let's look at the shape of the blood inside." After fractal geometry arose, two physicists, Whitney and Sandor, studied an example in which such branching structures occur, an example they could control completely, they knew thoroughly, they knew inside out, and they obtained very strange shapes. They did not know about fractals, and walked down the corridor to show their colleagues, "Look what we've got. Do you know what to make out of that?"  And one of their colleagues said "But that's a fractal." "How do you know?" "Well, it looks like one." "So what do you do?" "Well, make this and that and that measurement." They did. Indeed it was a fractal. That is, the way in which this system branches makes it into a fractal. How is the system defined? You can express in childish biology as follows. Imagine that there are little cells floating around, and a cell floats around, and here is a living, multi-cellular organism. As soon as this wandering cell touches that organism it gets stuck to it and the organism becomes bigger by one cell. And if another cell comes again it makes something grow. So it grows by corners and so on, and if you added a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, a million cells, they don't add up to a wave going out as you might have thought, but they add up to a very, very loose and fingering structure, which was called DLA, diffusion limit aggregate. And the fractality was its most striking characteristic.
					
						This branching structure, DLA, the diffusion limit aggregate, proves to be of extraordinary complication. It is perhaps like turbulence, a phenomenon that I think will be with us for a very long time. Now why are we so excited about this structure? Because first of all it represents in one form or another way many of the natural dendrites encountered in many different fields of geology and elsewhere. By a total shock, it seems, it turned out to be a structure that rules the growth of certain bacteria under certain conditions. One is used to thinking of a Petri dish in which one gives lots of food to bacteria. You start with a little spot, it will grow more or less as a circle, but if the bacteria are starved- not starved but very much undernourished - they change tactic completely, instead of growing like a frond, they grow like trees, and the trees happen to follow this very simple mechanism called DLA. The complication of DLA is also extraordinary because it turns out that it attains a steady state very slowly. When many articles were written about DLA's of a few thousand particles, then people could make a few tens of thousands and found different properties. There was a great deal of surprise: why is it that one man's paper contradicts the second man's paper, until a third one comes with even bigger DLA and finds different properties. It is an object that takes a very long time to settle down to a, how should I say, final behaviour. More generally, it is an object in which every level of carelessness is punished very rapidly.


					
						I would not like to make a long list of other fields of physics where fractals are important because it is all too easy to make a list of so many topics, that and that and that, without any connection. Let me just mention one and then, how should I say, wrap it up on several levels. The one that I will mention is the distribution of galaxies. Of course the galaxies that are close to us are not very uniformly distributed, and a very strange historical event occurs here. For many centuries individuals were thinking about matter, stellar matter, being collected in clumps of various sizes well before there was any evidence of this being the case. The main galaxy I suppose starting from the Milky Way, is quite recent - the realisation that we live in a certain clump of matter in the universe is quite recent, but well before it came, some individuals were dreaming about a universe in which matter existed very irregularly. Then galaxies came; then the prevailing wisdom among cosmologists became that the large structure of the universe is uniform, except perhaps very close to us, to our galaxy, where it is clumpy as we see very, very obviously. My analysis of the distribution of galaxies -distributions were well known in literature - made me conclude something quite different, that galaxies had a fractal distribution up to a certain depth in the universe, and then after that I couldn't say anything, but there was a considerable depth in the universe up to which galaxies were not uniformly distributed, but fractally distributed. The cross-over from fractality to uniformity is something which my data could not tackle. A friend and disciple of mine, a very distinguished professor in Rome, has shown that this cross-over occurs much farther out. But the reason I mention this example here in the same breath as DLA and turbulence is the following. In all three cases there's a phenomenon that follows well-defined simple equations. They are called partial differential equations. The basic partial differential equations of physics were discovered around 1800 by people who translated Newton's Law in a more and more refined fashion. The Laplace equation, Poisson equation, Fourier equation, Navier-Stokes' equations - they were all discovered in the early 19th century. They are differential equations, which means that they refer to functions that have at least two derivatives, and the whole of research on them has been devoted to phenomena whose solutions are smooth, with perhaps a few singularities involved in it. Now, very early on my work in physics, on physical phenomena to be more specific, raised the following question: how come in one universe, in one world, there's one part that everybody has been studying so successfully for so long that is ruled by smooth phenomena, two derivatives, Laplace, Poisson, Navier-Stokes and other equations. Then a kind of introduction of fractals which came as a foreign object, like a contradiction to everything else that we were used to. This view of fractality as being an interloper, as being something like an uncalled-for, unwelcome guest, was very, very widespread and several people concluded that fractality was only an approximation; that all these things were smooth and regular but it was convenient to make them fractal, that fractality was not true, what was here was just an illusion or a convenience. Now, very early on I had a very different thought. The thought was that fractality comes from the same sources as the smooth behaviour declared by those equations. For example, if you take a large number of point masses in a box - in practice one must continue the box periodically, but a big box, and a large number of masses. You put them in uniformly early on, you put interaction, which attracts as inverse square of distance, and then you push the whole thing by adding some energy. This experiment was done around IBM in the '60s, redone again and again and now is an experiment that is very easy to make. What happens is that very rapidly this matter, which was originally quite uniform, becomes fractally distributed, clumps and superclumps and so on. We did not put the clumps in on purpose, and the gravitational field outside of the masses is perfectly smooth and regular - two derivatives, Laplace equation. However, each mass is what's called a singularity of a field, and those singularities are not fixed, they can move. That is, the attraction of the other galaxies made the singularities move. Therefore the lack of attention in the past given to singularities was a mistake. One must not only solve the equation by having fixed singularities or slowly moving singularities, but by looking at how singularities are going to be displaced and how they'll be distributed. The evidence, which is so far purely numerical, is that the galaxies become fractally distributed. That is a very important point.

					
						Same thing for fluid flow; the equation of Navier-Stokes' rules the behaviour where it is smooth, and there are places where the behaviour is not smooth at all. Of course it is not completely rough because of viscosity, but let's forget viscosity for the moment. The idea is that the irregularities that represent turbulence are manifestations of the same phenomenon that gave us the smooth flows. Take DLA. The way I describe it by these particles floating around, as a matter of fact performing a Brownian motion, is the way they came in initially. But this can also be rephrased as a problem in Laplace's equation in which the boundary is variable. That is, in solving a problem with a fixed box as I always did as a student, as millions of books were written to do, you imagine that the solution to the problem changes its own boundaries. It is extraordinary broadening. That is, a block, nobody thought of that because there was, in a certain sense, no need for it, but this experiment of Whitney and Sandor which creates DLA shows us that starting with very, very smooth boundaries, for example a little circle or a straight line, one makes them rougher and rougher and rougher, and the roughening is not haphazard, irregular, incomprehensible, lawless; quite the contrary, it follows very, very strict rules of fractality. So, what I would like to say is that the various examples in physics at very different scales, again skipping many examples, tends to point in that single direction: that fractality is not a separate phenomenon from the smooth phenomena, it is part of the same reality. That in a certain sense fractality is at the end of regularity, the boundary of regularity, the frontiers of regularity, and those frontiers of regularity become destroyed and are replaced by fractality.
					
						There's a phrase, "Fractals are everywhere" it is the title of a book. The book was not written by me; the phrase was not coined by me. I think that the phrase is correct, to the extent that if you go around and look at phenomena of every kind, you probably will find somewhere in a corner an aspect which is fractal. I think it is probably correct. In this sense there are fractals everywhere. Now, I don't think that those fractal parts are necessarily important. In many phenomena they're not important, sometimes because those phenomena are simple and very often because they're even more complicated than any fractal. But this fractality is not complication without rules. Fractality is a form of geometric complication with very specific rules, very strong rules; and disorder, chaos, complexity, call it as you wish, and is present in many places in a way which does not have any clear rules. So if there are fractals everywhere, it doesn't mean that fractals are important everywhere. And it is not only my caution that tells me that, but also my experience.
					
						I spoke of iteration without using the word 'chaos', or perhaps only in passing. But iteration has become one of the principle tools of chaos theory, which again was sketched, seen, but not followed up, long ago, and became a very major aspect of science later on. Let me say two words about the relation between chaos theory and fractals. Much of chaos theory is made of mechanical considerations that are totally analytic. They don't concern shapes, they concern something else. That is not fractal. When chaos generates shapes, the shapes it generates are invariably fractal, that is, they have the property of self-similarity or self-affinity because of the way they were generated, because one of the reasons for fractality is indeed chaos - differential equations. I spoke of fractality in the visible space, in turbulence, in stars and so on; there is also fractality in phase space, in invisible representational spaces, and that is generated by chaos in dynamical systems. In both cases one has fractality. Fractals themselves have at least two aspects. One of them is random, as I mentioned; the other is non-linear. There are also, how to say, basic fractals that are neither random nor non-linear; they are very intuitive, very useful, but they're only cartoons of reality because they lack flexibility in a very strong sense. The flexible fractals are either random or non-linear. If you put together all my work on iteration, and I could say on other aspects of chaos but I will not enter into it because it would become too disconnected, then my work on these phenomena in physics, which can be described as the theory of irregularity- the word escapes me- in general the phenomena that I described as being a matter of complexity - in each case the irregularity comes from different sources, known or unknown, but can be studied in a very coordinated fashion. Fractal geometry covers all those phenomena, irrespective of the source, and irrespective of whether they're phenomena in our real, ordinary space or phenomena in some abstract space in which one represents the behaviour of a dynamical system. I may just add in passing that it was quite striking to observe that in the context of chaos theory, which is a theory of order in deterministic systems that look very disorderly, the fractals were accepted with very little, how should I say, surprise or opposition. In a certain sense one's speaking of shapes that were not familiar to us; there was no, how should I say, set tradition of thinking about them; they had not been classified into our world in any particular fashion. Whereas in the real space one was associating well known, familiar, very well-defined complicated phenomena with mathematical esoterica, which was saying that these phenomena are simpler than they seem to be, and more tenable. This is not a matter of anything intrinsic, just simply the sociology of science; that one finds it easier to introduce innovations when there's no existing competitive view of the world present.


					
						In summary, my work in those hard sciences, and I could add other examples but I think it would be rather tedious, consists in either representing well known phenomena in real space, or representing phenomena in some representational space in which a system is represented by a point in phase space or something like that, in which a great deal of irregularity prevails, in which the alphabet of which Galilei spoke of in 1623, of "straight lines, circles and triangles," is totally inadequate, a new alphabet can be added. Now, do I claim that this alphabet allows us to read the whole book of nature? Of course, not. Only a few more chapters, a few more parts, a few more volumes perhaps, because it pushes away the boundaries of the unknown. But in many cases, like for turbulence, perhaps even for DLA and other such phenomena, we're maybe reaching very hard boundaries where we may find progress is very slow. In other cases we are moving quite rapidly.
					
						Perhaps I will say a few words again about dimension. Dimension ordinarily is a number which is like zero for points, one for lines, two for squares, three for cubes, etc., if you can expand in more than three dimensional spaces, which is comparatively immidiate mathematically. What fractal geometry does is to create a continuity dimension. You can have a set, dimension one half, or one and a half or two and a half, whatever. Any number can be a dimension of a set. This dimension, as I said before, represents in a very concrete sense, roughness, and irregularity, both for a coastline and for a curve that represents a function. But there's something more to it. The notion of dimension is very central to physics; that is, physics in one dimension is different from physics in two dimensions or in three dimensions. Now, take magnets. There are no magnets in one dimension; there are magnets in two and three dimensions, because of various very complicated fundamental reasons, and my friends and I have been preoccupied with the question of understanding more precisely in a more demanding fashion, all of dimension in these phenomena. We have written about it. I think that it is a wide-open topic. Perhaps it is mathematics, perhaps it is physics: I'm not sure. Anyway, it deserves to be taken up again and looked at much more closely. But the idea of dimension is something, which has become truly fundamental out of being just a very abstract idea. And there again, dimension is substantial progress, but that is not the end. To represent a shape by numbers one must go beyond dimension. There is a whole enormous chapter that I opened many years ago and that moves very, very slowly because it is so difficult. I call this notion lacunarity, that is, you can have shapes having the same dimension and looking completely different. And that touches a very basic point of interaction between the analytic way of doing science, which is everybody's way and that has to be the way when you go to equations, and the geometric component of it, because a shape, a very complicated shape, cannot be totally specified by a few numbers, and the very complicated shapes we have around us very often have to be approximated by one number then another and then a third. When I said earlier on that dimension is for roughness what temperature is for hotness, it is part of the truth but roughness requires more numbers than just one - not very many but still more than one. And this particularly is so if one wants to examine closely various phenomena that the world faces us with.
					
						The first man in chaos theory was unquestionably Henri Poincaré, and I also think one of the first men for fractals. It is actually a very strange and enigmatic figure from the early 19th century named Bolzano played a part in it, but he didn't publish it and his papers were published only in the 1920s. They had no influence on history. The Cantor set which is a very essential fractal was introduced by Cantor and also by two other people, Derra and Smith, at about the same time - as a pure counter-example of analysis, just as a set which contradicted some simple and natural ways of thinking about the world; it had, how to say, no physical reality whatsoever. But almost at the same time Poincaré was describing some limit sets of some Kleinian groups and observing them made of a kind of dust, which he characterised, and that dust indeed  was something Cantor had said. So if you put the creation of chaos in the hands of Poincaré, which I think is fair, he was also the creator of the notion of fractals, and of the notion that fractals were not simply an invention of mathematicians, but something useful. However, both of these influences were totally not continued, except again for this very important work of Hadamard in 1897 or '98. Then it was interrupted, and I think, if you allow me to say a few words about my view of the development of sciences, I wondered very much why it was interrupted. Here are the two men who were effectively the most influential and the second most influential intellectual in science in France at the time, whose work has no progeny. Some people, for example, the abstract mathematicians with whom I had so many disagreements throughout my life, had the very strong feeling of 'The March of History', the inevitable 'March of History', in which mathematics was destined to become more and more pure, removed from reality and abstract. That idea of mathematics is actually very recent. It started shortly after World War I. Its sources are multiple. One of the sources was in the work of Hilbert who was insisting on axiomatics; one source was in the works of the Polish school of mathematics, which had nothing to do with the inevitable 'March of History', and everything to do with political events in that part of the world where I was born. In 1919 a very forceful person named Sierpinski, whose name I gave to some basic shapes, decided he was going to create a Polish school of mathematics that would not be a distant suburb and colony of Paris, Gottingen or Cambridge. Therefore he decided to concentrate on topics that the others were not interested in, very abstract topics indeed. Then World War I had an extraordinary dreadful effect on France in many ways, because so many young Frenchmen were either killed or, equally bad, after spending four years in trenches, incapable of the terrifyingly sustained effort that science requires. Therefore there was a break. After a few years, young Frenchmen decided to go and seek inspiration, not among their teachers and their contemporaries in France, but in Gottingen or Berlin, among German mathematicians. Germany did not have the policy of sending scientists to the front to be killed which was very much more noble in this case of France, if you want - much more democratic, yet extraordinarily destructive. So Germany had more variety of activities in mathematics than France had.
					
Now those French mathematicians who went to Gottingen were very impressed by one half of the mathematical institute there, the half concerned with fundamental and abstract mathematics. Apparently they didn't pay attention to the fact that Klein, who was the master of this institute, and his successor, Courant, were very careful to also have, in the same institute, professors of numerical methods, also applied mathematics and also theoretical physics. In the mind of Hilbert, Klein and the others, as it was in the mind of Hadamard and Poincaré, all these things together were mathematics. Those mathematicians who came to Germany saw only the abstract part, and picked it. The tradition, the fact that Hadamard and Poincaré were French ordinarily would not matter much. The fact that French mathematics had this break when it was not much followed, when a new tradition was started, I think matters a great deal. One can always regard history with 'ifs'; if Poincaré had lived, if Hadamard had not lost two sons in the war and been a very much less energetic person afterwards, maybe chaos theory would have developed then. But it did not, and as to the idea that fractals enter in this question, the first mention I have of it is an obituary that Hadamard wrote of Poincaré, which again I think is a wonderful piece. I was amazed, and that obituary made me become interested in Kleinian groups for the first time in '77, very deeply. So this strain, this tendency, this sequence of influences disappeared. It did not completely disappear. There were several very notable articles of this sort over the years, and then in the early 60's a new input came, which was Edward Lorenz. Lorenz did not know anything about Poincaré and about Hadamard. He is a brilliant man, a meteorologist, very much hands-on, even though far more mathematical than most meteorologists.  He was one of the first to use computers to very great effect. Now I became acquainted with Lorenz in the early '60s when a friend of mine observed with amazement that I was speaking of turbulence in a crazy fashion, and Lorenz was speaking of turbulence in another crazy fashion, and perhaps we had something to tell each other. Well, we met, we liked each other very much but sparks didn't fly, the length of these two approaches took a very much longer time to get realised. But Lorenz' influence was extraordinary. So you see there was a gap of seventy years in one case, from a theory that had been already substantially started by two great men, to the other one. In the case of fractals, the roots, again I find of them in Poincaré in passing, but I wouldn't have seen them there if Hadamard had not told me. They're not developed. Fractals as described then were simply two or three constructions of monstrous character. When I started applying them, there were people saying, "In other words what you are telling us is that the world is ruled by pathology." Well, perhaps it's ruled by pathology in more than one field, but physics is certainly ruled by shapes, parts of physics are ruled by shapes that were viewed as pathological at one time by the mathematicians. But the link between my work and modern chaos theory was totally independent. We very soon got together and fractal dimension was immediately adopted in the mainstream chaos theory circles, because one used measurements of those shapes and that is a basic one. Many developments in fractal geometry occurred in that context. Multifractals are taken up very much by chaos theory and developed in the context of chaotic systems, as well in the context of real space systems, which I was studying. So at this point the two are very close together. In terms of their impact on the public and on education, perhaps I can speak of that in a few minutes. They cannot be separated. But I think that in those terms one part of chaos which is particularly striking is the geometric part, which is both chaos and fractals.

						One of the greatest concerns of my life as scientist has been with economics, more precisely with the twin notions of inequality in all its forms and of financial variability. I must immediately say that I prefer to speak of them separately, after the mathematics and the physics, but in fact my interest in these topics started well before I became interested in either of the other activities I carried on. In fact in late '50s and early '60s this was my principal centre of interest, and I interrupted it for many years and came back to them only several years ago with very great intensity, I must say. The word 'fractal' did not figure in the first half. As a matter of fact, the tools of fractal thinking were developed very much in the context of economics, finance, inequality in general, and then, enriched, came back to be applied to these fields. Two names come to mind in this context, both of them contemporaries, or nearly contemporaries of the other great men mentioned in earlier segments of this interview. The names are Pareto and Bachelier. Pareto was a famous Italian professor of economics at Lausanne, and had a long career after that. In the late 1900s he wrote down an empirical law for distribution of income that had a very interesting history after that. Bachelier was, quite the contrary was quite a person of no social standing whatsoever, who presented a Ph.D. in 1900, at the University of Paris, and whose work was not at all understood except by very few until the '60s when he became very influential and, I would argue, after a while too influential to be beneficial. The same period as Hadamard and Poincaré, Cantor, Peano, Sierpinski and other names mentioned- was the time of these two men.

						Now what was the finding of Pareto? It was that the distribution of incomes is very long tailed, that the probability of income exceeding value u is roughly of the form u to the power (of) minus some exponent alpha. This in contrast to distributions in physics, which are very often exponential, exponential of minus alpha of u, or even Gaussian, that is exponential of -u2. Therefore, high incomes probability goes down much more slowly than the probability of many of the physical phenomena. What was the fate of Pareto distribution over the long period between its description in, say, 1900, and the time I became involved in the early '60s? I would say that it was a mixture of neglect and scorn. There were a certain number of authors who did test the data, found the distribution to be correct, and followed up a little bit in defending it. But by and large the argument was that it was a rule without any logic behind it, any kind of explanation, and that it did not deserve attention, and that another distribution called lognormal was much preferable. To say that the distribution of income is lognormal is to say the logarithm of income is normal, Gaussian. To say that the distribution of income is power-law, is to say that lognormal is exponentially distributed. Now exponential and the Gaussian are not that terribly different, they're very different but not that terribly different. What is very striking is that once you go back to u from log u enormous differences appear from a viewpoint of this essential feature, which is economic inequality. So perhaps I should follow up first on this matter of economic inequality and contrast three possibilities, which would be a distribution that is power-law; a distribution that is lognormal, distribution that is Gaussian; and perhaps even distribution that is exponential. Imagine, as I like to say as an example, two persons picked in the street, preferably on Wall Street and you have a way of halving their total income, which happens to be two million. Well everybody has a very strong feeling that if the total is two million it is not because each of them had one million plus or minus some factor, but because one had a normal income and the other had all the rest, roughly two million. Therefore, they would have a very strong feeling that economic variables are unequal. If you make a sum of two variables, there is one, which is larger, which predominates, if the sum is large. If you did that for exponential economic variables, you would find no inequality - evenness. For a Gaussian economic variable, each would pick one half and plus or minus a term. The Gaussian being characteristic of physical phenomena, it is very important to observe the physical phenomena, except near the critical points, are not subject to great influence from individual observations. What Pareto law was tackling is the fact that economical phenomena like income are not that uniformly distributed, and was coming close, very close to the core of the problem. Again what would be the case if the distribution of income were lognormal, which many people proclaim to be the case? Well, if two persons together had an income of two million, then indeed one of them would have a normal income and the other a very large income. The lognormal distribution also has the property of being very unequal for small samples like two.
					
						What about big samples, big collections of individuals or of observations? For these it is best to move from income distribution to something that happens to be very similar, which is distribution of city sizes or the distribution of firm sizes. Different individuals observed that the distribution of firms' sizes is very very long tailed, and the number of firms of, say, sales greater than u is also a form proportional to u to some small power like minus one, maybe one point two, or maybe close to one. The same thing for cities. Well two questions occur. First of all how could it be that any law applies to notions as ill-defined as income, firm size or city size? That question I discussed earlier. And the second question is, what are the consequences of this distribution? A third question is how it came to be. The third one I can say nothing about, but the first two - the second question in particular- are very much worth investigating. So imagine that it is true that the distribution of firm sizes is lognormal as some people proclaim. Then if you take the sum of two firms, picked at random, and the sum is very large then one of them is large, therefore there is inequality. You take a sum of ten firms and the largest is going to be a smaller proportion of the sum. A sum of a hundred firms, the largest would be quite a small part of the total. In other words, the lognormal distribution predicts that as you get to larger and larger assemblies, the predominance of the single largest or second largest, third largest of the contributors to the sum becomes smaller and smaller and smaller, rather rapidly. What does the power-law distribution proclaim? It proclaims the sum of many such variables, the contribution of the largest is going to be about the same, independently of how many elements are being added. In one case you have asymptotic concentration; in the other case you have asymptotic lack of concentration. Which is closer to reality? Well, I think, quite clearly, there are many, many industries in which the number of firms is very large, hundreds or even thousands, in which the largest has sales or other measures of size that are very much a non-negligible portion of the whole. That is to say, the idea, the fact of economic concentration is not due to the smallness of the number of participants, but to something more profound. If one dealt with distributions, random variables following the law of exponential distribution or the Gaussian, then the largest would become very rapidly be completely negligible.
					
						Now these ideas were very much in the forefront of my mind in the late '50s and early '60s when I was working on this matter, and recently in my book on Fractals in Finance I made them sharper by making a distinction between what I call three states of randomness. One state of randomness is concentration in the small and the large, that is, concentration in groups made of two, one, two, three, or four add ins and groups made into thousands of add ins. The second group has a lack of concentration, that is the case of the Gaussian and exponential. Finally, a third group has; concentration is small, and lack of concentration is large, which is the case of the distribution called lognormal and of other distributions proposed in this context. Now this takes us very close to an essential feature. Given that the consequences of these different hypotheses are so sharply distinct, can we separate between them a priori on the basis of, how should I say, ordinary statistics? The answer is complicated and in fact disappointing. That is, for all these years different people have been applying different tests that were designed for other purposes and then applied them to this particular issue. Some people say it is lognormal, or close enough except perhaps for a few cases. Other people say it is power-law, unquestionably, except perhaps for some cases that belong to a different domain of understanding. Statistics has not been able to make us distinguish between these two contexts, and I think that when honourable, very skilled practitioners go on for a long time disagreeing on something, then one should not say that one is entirely right and the other is entirely wrong. One should say probably the tools they are using in their disagreement are not applicable to the problem. Therefore my main feeling in my study of inequality has been that the phenomenon of inequality is true for small assemblies and for large ones. The fact that the largest of add-ins to a certain ensemble is quite non-negligible compared to a sum of all the others, that this phenomenon invariably, forcibly, obliges us to consider distributions of a power-law form: probability of U exceeding u is equal to u the power (of) minus alpha (u-?), where alpha is a characteristic exponent that measures degree of inequality. This is a general statement that I would like to apply immediately to the problem of the distribution of price changes, therefore of finance. The contemporary, the near contemporary, of Pareto was Bachelier and he came up with the notion that, in a certain sense, there is nothing special about prices, that prices fluctuate, but price changes if plotted horizontally in time go up and down, up and down, up and down, and they fluctuate around a very well defined value, which is zero. There is an equilibrium; price doesn't change in the long run, and price changes are sometimes positive or negative, they're all independent, they are due to different causes, there is nothing that forces them to be related in any fashion, therefore they are independent and the price as a result becomes the sum of these independent price changes. Therefore it follows what is called random walk, or more precisely a Brownian motion. Now, if price variation were following Brownian motion, what consequences would we have? Look at a chart of price changes. Price changes would be again just up and down, up and down, more or less even over a long period. But look at actual records of price change. First of all, most of them do indeed concentrate in this kind of strip or serpent, if you wish, a snake, and this snake goes on but it is of very variable width. For long periods price variation is rather small, then becomes big, then becomes small again, then again becomes big. Besides, very often, one finds very large price changes. Not large in the sense that the Gaussian distribution can take large values, because for Gaussian distribution there is a measure of dispersion, standard deviation, and the probability of being twice, three times standard deviation is not negligible. But if you represent the middle of this strip by Gaussian distribution you find that the large prices changes are of the order of ten times sigma, twenty times sigma. The probability of a Gaussian distribution exceeding ten times sigma  is 10-23. This should never happen. But it happens all the time. As a matter of fact it happens very, very often discontinuously. Price does not vary continuously, but very often jumps from one value to a very different value. How does the jump occur? Sometimes overnight. In the morning some news has come in that makes price go up and down. Even a very large company like IBM has ten percent, fifteen percent changes, quite often. Sometimes the news comes in the day, something happened, trading is stopped for a few minutes, maybe an hour, when it resumes; it resumes at a very different price. 
					
						So here we have a contrast that is not a contrast of a quantitative nature, but almost qualitative. On the one hand the model of Bachelier assumed continuous price change and a lack of inequality between price changes over different days. The reality forces us to envision a great degree of inequality, when a price changes drastically over a period of a year, one sensible persons begin by suspecting that probably within that year there was a small period - maybe of a day, maybe a month - where this price fluctuated extraordinarily highly. It was more or less at one level, up and down, then changed very much, and again was at one level. It didn't necessarily change in one swoop, maybe in several steps, but over a short period of time a very, very large price change occurred. That is completely contradictory with the idea of Bachelier's model in which price is very uniformly distributed. Well, the issue of inequality was studied on and off by many people between 1900 and the 1960s, I don't think very systematically. The issue of the variation of prices and whether the Bachelier model of Brownian motion and independent Gaussian implements applies, became very much an issue in the late '50s and very early '60s, when Bachelier was remembered, or in fact rediscovered by others and then remembered, and when I came up in this scene for the first time. My contribution to the problem of finance of price variation was in a certain sense to translate in terms of prices the reasoning I had been following in my study of inequality, and to allow the variance of prices to be infinite. I argued that variance is a quantity that for a physical system may be necessarily bounded because it may represent, for example, energy, which is bounded. The variance of price was not a physical, a concrete economic quantity. It was just a number, a number that was expected to characterise the variability, the volatility of prices, however well it did it. And so if one had a model in which prices varied according to Bachelier and to the Bachelier process, then the price change would be very, very equal and the invariability finite. But this need not be the case, and for reasons that I can explain but were largely accidental, a drawing on the blackboard of a colleague drew my attention to some properties of prices and made me suspect that I had something to do about it. I became very deeply immersed in that topic.
					
						My first model came in 1963, more precisely '62, but '63 was the time of the most important paper, and it postulated that price changes are again independent. I postulated that for simplicity's sake, but did not follow the Gaussian distribution, but another distribution with very long tails. And that model was quite adequate to account for many of the price changes that I could then study. Very often the prices of commodities, either securities, like cotton - cotton I studied with very great detail - or wheat, or all the securities because I had long records for them. At that time there were very few records of contemporary securities and I certainly did not have access to them. The model did not explain anything. It represented a universe in which everything was much wilder and much more irregular than in the universe described by Bachelier. A critic of my work at that time, Paul Cutner, whom I quote extensively in my book on fractals and finance, did describe very accurately the novelty, which my work represented. He used words to say that in a way Bachelier's model represented a very quiet - not a very wild, he didn't use the word 'wild' not a very irregular universe; and that my model, on the contrary, was very attractive to the economist because it was bringing up automatically, without my having to put it in by hand, all these properties that everybody was so familiar with, namely the large price changes.
					
						Now, very often in the practice of economics one is overly impressed with statistics and one introduces notions like, for example, value at risk, which is the largest amount of money an entity, for example a bank, can lose within a year with a probability of 95 per cent; that is, the probability of the loss being above that is only 5 per cent. 5 per cent means this event will happen only every twentieth year, and the conclusion is that this event can be viewed as being more or less negligible. More precisely, that there is no way of getting a grasp on it. However, when I speak with people in that profession, invariably after, for example, repeating the definition of value at risk, they immediately add by saying that, "By the way, the 5 per cent of cases are the most important ones." There is a very great inequality of importance between various valuations. Ordinary valuations, which are within a few percent daily of no change, are well under control. What is bothersome, what makes the great fortunes, the great disasters, is that five percent of events. And whether it is five percent, or ten percent or two percent makes a very, very big difference. However, statistical techniques available then and to a large extent statistical techniques available today, do not allow these large values to be taken into account. To the contrary, my work in the '60s put a very great emphasis upon those values.
					
						I could develop it further, but let me immediately say how this work was received, because it is a very interesting phenomenon, which I would like to sketch. First of all, I became extremely widely known, very, very well known in the profession. I was asked to give lectures in every possible place; I was in the place of honour in many meetings; and the fact that something real of the complexity of price variation could be tamed became the subject of very great enthusiasm. Then, after several years, a reaction set in that lasted for quite a number of years. It was based first of all on observation by a very brilliant student at University of Chicago, Mr. Officer- Dr. Officer, who compared, who tested price changes that were not mine, not my cotton prices but other price changes, for this character of stability, which means a fixed point in the physics sense, which means scaling, another word used in physics. You take the price changes over days, months and years; if you properly scale them then the distribution of price changes should overlap completely and be identical. This was the case for the cotton prices; this was not the case for some other prices they examined. They observed that for short periods of time there was a great inequality, with long tails; it took longer periods of time - weeks and longer periods. The tails were rather shorter, as would be the case if after all the prices were tending towards the Gaussian. That is the sharp difference between price distribution for the Gaussian and the daily price changes were becoming less sharp as you took longer time intervals. That observation led people to believe that if you take longer periods then the Gaussian is going to be found again, and therefore the extraordinary complications that my work entailed did not have to be faced. Simultaneously some very brilliant people, Black, Scholes and Merton, showed that if prices had been indeed Gaussian, which nobody said was exact, but which was, they felt, not quite as bad as first believed, then one could make very specific evaluation of options. One could evaluate the price of very complicated combinations of prices, what came to be known as financial derivatives. Therefore, under conditions of a Gaussian universe, under conditions of a Bachelier model, which was again in 1900 the first and basic model of price variation, a great deal of control could be obtained. My work, on the contrary, was emphasising a level of non-controllability, which first of all was in a certain sense, negative, pessimistic, disappointing, because one wants to control as much as possible; and on the second hand, again, perhaps not necessary for some of these prices. Well, my feeling in the mid '60s was that the reaction of the community to my work had gone very much from enthusiasm, with one very brilliant and very effective student who became a very strong interpreter of theory, to a period of great caution, in fact of refusal; that in a way the profession was not ready to accept my verdict that the idea of inequality, which was the staple of everything in economics, like incomes, firm sizes, city sizes, etc., etc., was also a staple of price variation. But price variation was something simpler and I left this field completely for a very long time.

						You speak about market fluctuation, price fluctuation, but don't you think that the booms and the busts, or the big rise or the big slumps of prices are what is very much a characteristic of these fluctuations, which maybe do not appear with the same intensity in other physical phenomena?Well, that is precisely the direction in which my work took shortly at that time when I was leaving finance for physics. I had discovered the existence of long term dependency in 1/f noises in those physical phenomena, and that was the first example of this phenomenon in physics, which was otherwise ruled by very, very short memory phenomena, and it was immediately clear that I should look for occurrences of this behaviour in prices. That leads to a certain technique called R/S, which I developed, starting with work of Hurst which confirmed very strongly that prices in addition to having long tails had a great deal of long dependency. And then, booms and busts can take two forms: they can either be instant, or take the form of cycles, where there are periods of great activity and periods of low activity. The question was: does my model of price variation - my initial model of '63 - present cycles, and the answer was; it does not. It has long tails but no cycles. Most people were not particularly focused at that time on the long tails, and a very, very fundamental change in public relation to my work, as well a change in my own relation to my work, occurred precisely on October 19th, 1987, when the New York Stock Exchange had this very drastic episode of prices falling down instantly by a very, very large amount. Instantly what used to be viewed as being a rare phenomenon that one could live without considering very much became question that one had to face at one time or another. I remember very well the week after October 19th seeing my director at IBM who was visiting our part of the building, and telling him, "You see, Ralph, now it's happening as I said it would happen some day. I must get back to economics." And he very strongly told me, "Well by all means, you should go back to it." Later on Gomery wrote a foreword to my book on prices and on finance for this purpose. I was very much aware when I left economics and finance in the '60s that what I had done there could not be accepted immediately, that the profession had to grow through understanding the consequences of the Bachelier model. I will come back to that some time later. Ideas that I had been developing there found a very good realisation in physics, not in mainstream physics, not in physics proper, but in peripheral or not so peripheral domains of physical sciences. I mentioned a few previously and in all of them questions of infinite variance or of infinite time dependence were very, very much welcomed in one fashion or another and became extremely important.
					
						Now by the time that events were bringing me back into economics and finance, another phenomenon had occurred, so I would like to come back also to underline the 'back and forth' interaction between my work in physics and my work in economics. At the end of my first paper on multifractals, the purpose of which was to represent the intermittency of turbulence, I had a paragraph saying that this model, this scenario, namely multifractals, involves a kind of variation that is very much reminiscent of economics, and that I hope on a better occasion to explore it. That was in 1972. I didn't explore it again for many, many years, but the seed of the idea was present there in a very strong fashion. And what was the seed? That in turbulence, effects come in gusts. There is no very clear intensity of wind, there are big puffs of wind, of dissipation, then low dissipation, then again big puffs, extremely big puffs. The bulk of dissipation actually does not occur in the big puffs; it occurs in middle-size puffs and it is something very, very important but outside of our concern. However the fact that I had learned with multifractals to deal with phenomena that presented together the two features that I previously studied separately was fundamental. And let me define those features in the vocabulary I used in the context of a river's variation. Instantaneous changes remind me of the Bible, the forty days and forty nights. You would say that was not an instantaneous change, but many of these discontinuities of the economy are not individual changes but bunches of changes, which together to make an enormous difference. I called that the Noah effect. Sequences of very high and very low level cycles are present in the weather, they are present, certainly very strongly, in the levels and discharges of the Nile river - these are called the Joseph effect because of the story of Joseph, son of Jacob, seven fat years, seven lean years - and the two effects were easier to study separately. That is, if I neglected the Joseph effect, the dependence, and looked only at changes, I could get a quite reasonable fit for some data, which were mostly governed by the large changes. I'll call them margin dependent. If I neglect the big margins and looked only at dependence, I could also model very well, by the same methods I had been using for modelling the weather and the River Nile. But the great difficulty represented by the reality of finance is that the two effects are present simultaneously. And again the multifractal which I developed in the late '60s and early '70s provided the key, but I didn't use this key until much, much later, that is in the last few years.
					
						But let me stop perhaps to motivate my approach to finance, by comparison with other people's approaches and with other people's, how should I say, wishes. The hope of very many people is to predict when the next big change will occur, because they want to take advantage of it by either selling or buying. Now that, I think, is completely outside of the hope of any mathematical scenario. The exact date of these events is not part of something I hope to do. I don't think that anybody has come close in this fashion, and I'm simply not focused on it because I don't think there'll be much hope of it. Many people believe that good science requires complete explanation; that if a phenomenon can't be explained it cannot be tackled unless it's fully explained on the basis of reduction to some fundamental laws. Physics has many examples of reduction. There are some theories like relativity theory and quantum theory, which certainly reduce very complicated phenomena to principles that are declared to be irreducible. Those principles are by no means obvious, by no means overwhelmingly true. But if I assume they are true, everything else follows, and the idea of reductionism is at the centre of science. In economics, however, there are no laws comparable to those of physics. Nothing comes close. Therefore to hope for reduction and to expect reduction to occur is, I think, asking for too much. And there is an attitude which is very widespread, which is that of theoreticians who say, "Well, the Holy Grail, or bust. Either I succeed regarding this idea of explanation of everything on the base of simple principles, or if not, I give up." I think this idea is very bad, very poor, and very unfortunate tactically. We have an enormous quantity of data for finance. In fact, in my work in finance, in technical terms, I can have easily a spread of time scales from one to a thousand or ten thousand or more, which means three or four orders of magnitude. Three or four orders of magnitude is a very substantial scale by the standards of any field. Sometimes I have more than three orders of magnitude. It is not a case in which one has only very narrow scales, very short records or very bad data: for prices now one can have records every minute for many years if one wishes. Therefore data is very abundant. For the purpose of measuring risks inherent in many financial instruments, explanation is probably irrelevant. The main question is to evaluate those risks. In typical cases the Bachelier model would say that the risk of a certain event occurring is 10 to the -3, -4, -5, sometimes -10, which means extraordinarily small. I said a ten sigma change in a Gaussian price with high probability of 10 to the-23, the inverse of Avagadro's number: it would effectively never happen.
					
						One must understand the extraordinary depth of difference of the predictions that Bachelier, and all my models, make about certain probabilities of risk. When Bachelier models would say that the probability of risk is one millionth, or perhaps one ten millionth, or perhaps one hundred thousandth -the detail doesn't count, it is certainly completely wrong. It suggests that some portfolios are riskless, that a miracle has been accomplished. In the case of the models which I proposed, either the '63 model or the '65 model, which had only dependence, or the more recent model, the probability of risk may be one twentieth or one tenth, one fifth - enormously larger. Therefore it is not a matter of seeing whether the models can be tested separately and their qualities compared statistically. What statistics catch is not the important reality, but some quantities selected for the purpose of statistics. The important differences are the ones that precisely indicate these measurements of risk. If one wants to measure risk one has no time to wait for economic theory to be established; no time to wait for even the mathematics of my models to be fully developed: it is prudent to take estimates of risks much higher than the estimates which are given by Bachelier. Now, what about other uses of these ideas? I think that quantitative economics, quantitative finance has its own needs, but you also must continue to an understanding of the functioning of economic phenomena. I am returning, in a certain sense, to the idea of reduction and to say what I would like to do is to use a description of data that is not a matter of curve fitting and millions of unrelated relations, but a matter of assuming scaling, scaling variants, etc., etc., of using that to understand the nature of economic systems. Now I would like to link the two parts of what I've been talking about in economics: the phenomenon of inequality and the phenomenon of finance. It is clear that they all belong to one economic system, and an economic system in which some parts will be subjected to deep inequality, like incomes, like size of firms, like sizes of cities, etc., etc., etc., when almost any quantity which is of great significance does not have a well defined typical value, but a very, very broad distribution of values; such properties would be quite unthinkable in a system in which they would coexist with Brownian motion that has no inequality whatsoever. Short of having a well constructed system in which each part affects the others, it is very important to characterise the economy, including finance, by a few rules which catch as much as possible of its substance, and then take those rules as building blocks on which an understanding of other phenomena might be based. Now if one sees variation of prices as they occur, there is a naive view of prices, which Bachelier certainly had very strongly and that many people follow, which is that each price change follows from a different cause, or causes. Now if that were the case it would be very difficult to imagine that any system other than the simplest one, namely other than Brownian motion or the Bachelier, would be applicable. Bachelier, in a certain sense, says that causes are very, very small. They are so small that when they add up together each of them becomes invisible. I don't think that is the case. Causes are not very small. On the other hand, I proposed a model of price variation, which is very ambitious. It says that on the basis on some invariances, of some simple rules and some, how to say, almost theological thinking, variation of prices has certain invariances, which means that irrespective of what happens outside or dependent upon it, it has certain fluctuations. Now, I don't think that this is compatible with the idea that each price change corresponds to a well-defined outside, exogenous influence. I think that it conforms better to the idea that prices represent, how should I say, the resonances, the vibrations of a certain system that we have, which is the economic system, exchange system or even without an exchange as such, but an economic system which is extraordinarily well organised and extraordinarily interrelated, which, if provoked constantly by outside impulses, creates not simply a mirror image or an amplification of outside impulses, but produces its own vibrations, it's own way. Now this is purely hypothetical, however, and it is one of the two conjectures one can have concerning variation of prices. But by the very fact of obtaining a model which is often valid, whereas nothing at all suggests that the causes should follow any pattern whatsoever, one very much favours the idea that the rules of price variation are the rules of the market as well as the rules of what makes the market vary.
					
						Now, this is a very, very crude sketch of a long description, but I would like to mention very strongly, to link this work even further to what I said before about fractals: the importance of the eye in this context is extraordinarily high. I found that early on, when my work was at the same time popular and very much criticised, a landmark step occurred when some colleagues of mine at Bell Telephone laboratories decided to test it visually. What they did was to create a collection of charts, very much what I had done before for hydrology. They took charts in which they would plot Brownian motion and my model, the first model, the '63 model, for various values of the exponent alpha. They showed it to a friend of theirs who was a broker, a very sophisticated person, and asked him whether he could, just by looking at these charts, say which ones were real, which were unreal. And the broker immediately identified Brownian motion by saying "this is ridiculous, this supposes a degree of regularity, of continuity in the market which everybody who knows anything knows is not present. " He also immediately put aside the charts corresponding to very small values of alpha where the discontinuity is overwhelming, by saying, "Well, those scientists, when they are told that geometry doesn't apply in the world, all they do is to just dress it up: so it didn't work without discontinuity, so add discontinuities. But nobody can add them properly." And then he zeroed in on the value corresponding to alpha equalling one point seven, which happens to be, I hasten to say, a value often encountered in price series, and said, "That is a real price series." No model could catch this extraordinary mixture of continuity and discontinuity, which the market alone in its great strength and power and wisdom produces, well, this (a=1.7 model) was just as artificial as all the others. Now a closer look, a few tests, would have convinced him that it was not quite so good, but I thought and they thought when they put it to me, that this was a very strong element to be added to all the quantitative tests we had been going through.
					
						Lately I have been presenting my work in parallel, in two forms. One is the sophisticated form, I can mention its structure very briefly because it takes only a few words, which very few people would understand, I'm sure, but which are simple. It is Brownian motion, which does not proceed in clock time but in trading time; that is, a multifractal function of clock time, so Brownian motion in multifractal trading time. This model is not too easy to understand, actually, even though I am going to argue about trading time in a moment. But if one simply tries to explain it, one has to bring up many, many complications, but I felt that cartoons would be useful. And the cartoon consists simply in taking the price variation from time zero to time one, at zero it is zero, at one it is one. First of all take a linear trend; then you break it by a generator; and you break the generator again and again and again; endlessly- you obtain a curve, which wiggles up and down. That curve, if you alternate appropriately at random intervals of the generator, is remarkably alike to all the curves in the stock market we have. We put in almost nothing. We put in only the kind of quintessence of an idea, which again is a matter of folklore. The folklore is that price records are the same at all stages. You plot a price record from minute to minute or day to day and so on and don't put in the scales- they are all alike. Of course, they're not exactly alike. First of all there is enormous sample variation. Secondly, the world is more complicated than that. But this idea was sufficiently powerful to my pleasure and surprise to provide cartoons that look remarkably like regular prices, namely, they have a range of variation of most changes, which is not constant in time like in Brownian motion; not constant volatility but very variable volatility; and then have many exceedences, both plus and minus. Those exceedences are very large and they come in bunches. Now if these various features had to be fed in separately, which one can do, the model would be of the kind in which you put in everything you get out. Well, when you get out things that you put in deliberately, I don't think you gain much. In general you even lose something, you put in more than what you get out. But in this case you put in not a great deal of knowledge that had been consolidated in various ways about variation of prices, but a general structural idea, namely the idea of scaling, the idea of scaling variants. The idea of fixed points enters because under certain assumptions these distributions constitute fixed points, which is too long to explain. And these philosophical ideas have proven very powerful in model making elsewhere. I have been trying all my life to apply the same kind of modelling, whether it is in physics or in economics or elsewhere. The style is different. In some cases I do have the support of real physical theory; in other cases that support is lacking. However, what is very surprising is by including only those features, even in the very simple cartoon fashions, one obtains artificial 'forgeries' of price records, which many people can't distinguish for a long time from real prices. If you look very carefully you may recognise the real prices because I always use very, very important series that are well known. One may recognise some specific wrinkles that aren't right. This is true also for the forgeries of the mountains. A geologist who looked at my mountain forgeries, after a few minutes of, "Wow! Wow!" said, "Well, it's nice, but it fails on this and that point." That is not, in effect, a defeat. If one can by simple invariance argument get a substantial number of characteristics, then one has a base on which to build a more accurate theory and a base on which to apply the ordinary rules of science, which are: construct a theory that is not based on curve-fitting but on some invariances and general rules if possible; then compare it with the facts; and then use the facts to tune the scaling increasingly. That is exactly what I did.
					
						My first theory supposed independent price changes. It gave rise to prices which didn't fit at all, because they have large price changes but not their interrelation, not their bunches, not their clustering. And I refined, I tuned the idea of scaling and obtained a more powerful scaling model with fewer constraints, which gave a better fit. I must say other scientists faced with the same difficulties said that prices were not scaling. I think they were wrong. They are not scaling in a primitive fashion, which I had introduced in 1963, but they may very well be scaling in a better fashion two years later. So, in terms of general principles that I followed in all my work, this interactive procedure has proven surprisingly powerful. As a matter of fact, as a kind of icing on the cake, something astonishing happened with two very good students I had last year. We studied in great detail the Deutschmark/Dollar exchange, which has many virtues as a topic of study. It is known every minute, if you wish, for long periods of time, and known every day for very long periods of time. Therefore the range of small and larger time spans is extremely large, even by the standards of quite demanding physics. It does not have a market, which means that complications which may follow from the fact that New York has specialists and other exchanges do not have specialists, by the fact that there are some rules in different markets which are, how to say, imposed by the authority on the basis of legal requirements or tradition, these rules are absent. It is a market that is completely decentralised in the hands of a large number of people who trade all over the world. It is a market in which the daily cycle is diminished because these exchanges trade in New York, London, in Frankfurt and in Tokyo, in gigantic amounts. In between there are stock exchanges in Delhi or elsewhere which fit in. Therefore there is always a price almost any time for twenty-four hours, except for very, very short periods. So various complications that are present in economics in general, which overwhelm some other investigations very early, are there, but they are not overwhelming. They certainly require tuning and adjustment and may be extremely important from the viewpoint of actual trading procedures, because the difference between taking account of them or not may make the difference between loss and gain. But for the overall behaviour, I think that it would be very imprudent policy, both from a viewpoint of, how to say, scientific method and from a viewpoint of actual effectiveness, to put in too much too early. As a matter of fact when I give talks on this work, which I do very often at this time, almost always someone tells me, "Why didn't you put in the following fact about the stock market?" I say, "Because I don't want to put anything beyond what I know early on because perhaps I may not have to put it in. Perhaps what you want to put in deliberately is already a consequence of what has been put before." That is, to put the conjectures one by one, to study the consequences as much as that can be, and then, when they fail, to add. And to add hopefully not quantitative properties but qualitative properties, of the sort which distinguish great inequality from lack of inequality, which are called evenness, and so on and so on. I expect that this model will be much improved. It may look entirely different in a few years, but in terms of my own intellectual development, in terms of the kind of science I have learned myself to practice, I think it is a very striking example. The fact that it came early on, and inspired multifractals, and in due time multifractals inspired it, is a very strong element of unity in this enterprise.
					
[Q] Is your model able to make some predictions?Well, predictions of various kinds. First of all, if the model is simplest, for example, Brownian motion of multifractal time, it will be a martingale, and therefore would not predict noticeable change because possibly there would be no change on the average. On the other hand, to say there is no change of the average is not enough. It is a very important prediction to say no change on the average, but the scatter will be small or big, and that the model can predict, not because I put it in, but because of the nature of the model. And I would like to emphasise the contrast between that and other models that were introduced, they are called GARCH, in which the variability of volatility is put in by hand, and therefore is found there at the exit, but only on a short run. In this model the variability is there very strongly, because of the assumptions made, and you can predict the variation, therefore, of the average. Secondly, when I say Brownian motion of multifractal time, I took the simplest case because the full model is fractional Brownian motion of multifractal time. After the fact, many of my friends said, 'Why did it take you so long to combine these two ideas? You've written a hundred papers on fractional Brownian motion, a hundred papers on multifractals: why didn't you immediately write a paper on fractional Brownian motion and multifractals?' My answer to them is very simple: 'Why didn't you do so?' It is a very strange thing how it is very difficult to think of which combination of existing tricks would do something, but in our testing of the Dollar/Deutschmark exchange we find that a certain key parameter is close to one half; one half is Brownian motion of multifractal time. But what you get is not quite one half.  If it is not one half, then there is a prediction also on the direction of change. And very simply that can do it; it's a fundamental feature of it. How much more of prediction have we obtained?  Well, I know a few more examples but I don't know everything. One must understand that my old model has been around for many years, has been knocked around, criticised, apparently demolished many times but always by totally non-lethal blows, but has been around and has been discussed. The new model is very, very recent. I feel it closes a loop in my thinking very strongly, and I'm very happy about it, but it has not been greatly discussed. So, discussion will elicit many more things about it one way or another.

						Now I would like to mention this matter of multifractal time as trading time because it is so fundamental. Again, the criticism that I heard of Bachelier's model of constant volatility in time was that it didn't take account of what is observed by just either watching or listening or reading newspapers - that some days the market is asleep, not much is happening, things drift up and down because somebody is getting married or somebody has died and they just have to buy and sell but nothing is happening really, a kind of background noise is ruling the roost. And on other days, an extraordinarily turbulent stock market, headlines on the front page of newspapers: the market went up or down by a huge amount, fortunes are made, fortunes are lost, etc., etc. The intuitive feeling that is in the minds of many people in the stock market is that, in a certain sense, the market moves fast or slowly. Now the implementation of it could have been to have a model of rapid and slow variation that would not be itself fractal, which would have derivatives, rates of variation. Well, that might have been tried. It was not tried, I think, very seriously. Whatever the case is, there is a very tempting way of introducing fractality, which means scaling variances throughout, which is by including in the definition of that time this property of scaling. And that is what I did. A first attempt actually came very early in the '60s, in a paper together with Taylor, in which I showed that if the trading time was moving in a certain fashion, by jumps and jumps and jumps, my early model of '63 would be resumed and reapplied. But immediately it was clear that this fractal time, as it was called, was very primitive and something richer was needed. Multifractal time fills this gap. Now in this model a very strong assumption is made, that the Brownian motion or fraction Brownian motion is independent of trading time. That is a very strong assumption. I'm very surprised that this strong assumption does not immediately hit some kind of difficulty because I don't think they could be independent. But, again, this is a matter of method. You make the simple assumption and you see how far it goes. You don't agonise by saying, "I'm over simplifying. I'm doing it wrong. I should be more careful. I should be more sophisticated. I should listen to more information." You just see how much a simple model contains without you knowing it. Therefore all this modelling is based very fundamentally on a distinction between, how should I say, traditional models and fractal modelling. By that I mean the following distinction that I could have made in other contexts, but which I might as well made here. When I was taught about modelling in science it was clear that if I have a simple model and simple construction; there is simple behaviour. If I want to get complicated behaviour I must have a complicated construction. This was sort of obvious. You look at prices; you hear it is complicated: I must have a complicated construction, a priori, a simple construction just could not do it.  What is true of fractals throughout is the opposite. You start with a very simple construction and you get a behaviour that seems to be extraordinarily complicated, it is not complicated because you put in a great deal of rules, because what looks complicated, in fact, obeys a great deal of underlying deep order. And so, before resorting to further wrinkles, to further tuning of models, it is imperative to see how far a certain model would go, and then take this model as a basis for further building. If you build starting from Brownian motion, you don't restart until a pyramid of variable volatility, of discontinuities of everything, is built, and then you must still add to it. In my model you get variable volatility, discontinuities, everything, at will, from a simple formula. As long as it works it must not be criticised a priori; only criticised on its level of success.
					
						I would like to emphasize that my work in finance and economics is not meant to be simply an exercise in abstract science or in model making for themselves. I hope and expect that the use of the fractal models in finance will expand, and that they will contribute to understanding of many of the basic phenomena of our society to further extend than previous models had allowed to be.

						Actually, the IBM fellowship did not change my life so brutally, but I received the privileges of an IBM fellow before I received the title. However I would like to say a few words about that. It's a very good point. I mentioned how IBM research started in rather inauspicious circumstances in terms of IBM being the last big boy when everybody was busy elsewhere. IBM very soon realised the problems that its very size, gigantic size, had on the way research was being carried on. In particular the innovation was introduced that some people, a few people every year, were chosen to become IBM fellows. The word was deliberately very bland, it has many other meanings, but in that instance it meant that those people who became IBM fellows were given for five years, completely, and then for indefinite time periods as time went on, the privilege of doing basically what they wanted.
					
						Some of the IBM fellows were happy with their title but they did not use the perks, which were freedom, and they continued to be managers of large laboratories, having more respect and well, a kind of award, a prize, more than an actual change of status. But a fair number took it very seriously, and I was one of them. That is, I spent much of my time at IBM in situations that can be described as being a micro-subsidiary of IBM, one which consisted of myself, a secretary and a programmer, for other people it was a technician, some people preferred two secretaries, but actually that was about the size of these small enterprises. We had to write a report every year. The report was not to ask for permission to do something, but to report what had been done before, and implicitly to request continuation, even though continuation was never granted in a kind of brutal fashion. It was understood that if someone were lapsing he would be told that perhaps he could do something useful if he was doing nothing particularly striking. This happened very seldom. It is just odd that the kind of strong wills and strong individuals, who became IBM fellows, when they wanted to go into more daily practical work, gave signs that they wished to do so. Ralph Gomery, who was Director of Research for 17 years and boss for many more years, was very quick to see the signs. He would get someone who was a scientist to start looking into problems with some devices and then he would change their field. I think that the Fellowship was an extraordinarily important innovation because it exemplified in the most extreme fashion this separation from a field, from an activity of a straight nature. And most of the Fellows with whom I dealt most and appreciated most strongly used it very strongly to work very strongly in fields in which there was not much actual competition, in between fields, in fields of a less-defined nature. I am glad to say the Fellowship continues at a lesser scale and perhaps with emphasis more on achievement of a practical nature, but I hope it will continue for ever. As for me, I am now an IBM Fellow Emeritus. 
					
						Now to the awards that I received, they taught me many, many things that I did not know and that some people do not know either. I think that the one that is the highest and which pleased me most was the Wolf Prize for Physics, and the reason precisely was that it was for physics. Strangely enough I have proven again and again that I can function for long periods of time without ego strokes and without awards and recognition. But having recognition that is specifically for one type of work has more value because of that. The Wolf Prize for Physics, first of all, has been given to very eminent people. There was a meeting of the Wolf Prize laureates a few days ago, for the twentieth anniversary, and I was very pleased to be one of them, but for most of them the motivation was completely for some specific discovery, theoretical or practical. In my case the citation was in two parts, one part, which was specific for work done, and the second part, which is for having changed our view of nature, which I found to be, first of all, marvellous. And perhaps it is appropriate that fractals have beyond any technical application changed the view of nature, not only for children and the common man, as I think we may have the occasion of discussing, but also of the scientists. Otherwise, one prize that is perhaps the least well known was perhaps also the most striking. It was one of the first of the Barnard Medals. It was given every five years and I say it was: I am not even sure whether it is given any longer, because being given every five years it does not have, how should I say, sufficient mass to be recognised, acknowledged, followed. They don't announce it very loudly. What was extraordinarily flattering in it is that the previous laureates of the Barnard Medal - which is given by Columbia University and National Academy of Sciences of the USA the previous winners included most of the great men of science in different fields in this century, and they were rewarded well before they became absolutely famous. That is, some committees were good at searching individuals who might in a few years become very influential. The Barnard Medal was of that kind. But what is very striking is that most of these awards have a strange individuality. One was the prize for science and art of a champagne company, Moet and Chandon. This is not normal in science prizes! As a matter of fact, I think it no longer exists. The Franklin Medal was marvellous, but again it is given every year and therefore doesn't have the trouble of the Barnard Medal, but it is somewhat confidential. Each of them had something very strong and touching about them, but again, the Wolf Prize with this citation was particularly nice.
					
						Before I go any further I would like to say a few words about some people I have known and particularly appreciated. I have met many great men in my life. I mentioned Von Neumann with whom I did my post-doc and I could mention many others. But two I would like to mention are not known in the same way, in particular Marcel-Paul Schätzenberger. When I was writing my Ph.D. in 1952, which I defended in 1952, about a year before, I met a man in Paris at the Henri Poincaré Institute. After a seminar he - I was very impressed by his seminar - we went to have a beer together and then went to have dinner together, then we had a chat together, and then about 5 am the next day we left each other, and we saw each other again the next day, then a month later and so on. He died two years ago. For this long period we had, perhaps one could say, a single conversation going on and interrupted sometimes for a day, sometimes for a month, sometimes for many years. Why did Schätzenberger like me? Why did I like him? Well, there are many reasons one cannot understand, but one reason linked us very strongly- that he too could not make up his mind about who he was and what field he was in. He happened to have studied medicine and got a medical degree during the war, but also studied mathematics and got in due time a Ph.D. in mathematics and studied many things. In his idle time he was studying Hungarian because why study an easy language if there are hard ones? But almost always when I had started working on some exotic field that nobody cared for, I was sure that Marco, as we all called him, would find fun and make some ferocious comments about how terrible and marvellous and awful and wonderful it was. He was my worst critic, more precisely my most critical critic, and my best friend. The difference between his work and mine is that his work remained, how should I say, scattered over many fields. He continued to do this field, that other field, without even attempting to draw a link between his various activities. After he died I realised that he had had many passions, which he never shared with me because he thought I would not be interested; that is, I knew only one side, or five sides, of the many other sides of this man. I, to the contrary, always wanted my different interests to come together because I always felt them to be one aspect of the same story.
					
						Another person whom I mentioned briefly, who was a post-doc at Caltech when I was a student is Carleton Gajdusek. He is a medical scientist and explorer and a man of many, many parts. Again, we were both young, we both shared this wild, how should I say, thirst for a variety of intellectual challenge. He went on in very different directions. He was a fearless explorer who could go into a quite unexplored jungle in search of adventure and medical adventures. He became very famous. He received the Nobel Prize in medicine, but always remained a man of very, very many parts, not restricted to one profession, but oscillating between many. I think that the circumstances after World War II were favourable to people like us. That doesn't mean that there were many, but there were a few. At other periods there seem to be none, but the circumstances don't allow this variety to prevail, even under the best circumstances, best conditions. But at IBM during its thirty-five years of high interest in physical and other research showed how many people, potentially, can aim in that direction. Of the many people who came to IBM there were maybe a hundred who had ill-defined goals; most of them of course have dropped out of sight, but after the research division was winding up we all realised with surprise, and for me with great pleasure, that all those who had been most successful in that place were those whose interest spanned strange combinations or fields of investigation, and those who were prepared always to drop an investigation in the middle if something more exciting was coming up and return to the first one later, again and again. This kind of flexibility, it does exist; is manifested by a few individuals at any given time; science does not need many, science probably can't accommodate many, but I very profoundly feel that science at any given time needs at least a few.
					
						I think that the last part of this interview should cover, how should I say, the applications of fractals. The applications - 'applications' actually is a word I do not like because it expresses a kind of superiority of a theory over the uses to which it is put, so let me speak of the uses of fractals. I wouldn't like to resume what was said before but just sketch a few scattered ones to give an idea of the extraordinary variety. To begin with, the notion of roughness that was undefined or measured by too many irrelevant quantities can be measured now by one, two or a few numbers. That is, one of our principle senses has been tamed, to a large extent, whereas it was completely untamed before. In things like, for example, oil exploration. Oil is found in rocks, which are porous under very complicated conditions. The structure of these porous rocks is essential; to define it accurately is fundamental. Fractals have allowed scientists to describe those rocks much better and to go quite far in improving procedures in various fields of that domain. In an entirely different context there is the problem of image compression. I'm jumping from one to one because I don't want to give the impression of any exhaustive presentation. Images must often be compressed to be transmitted, with a little bit of distortion and a great deal of economy. There are two major competing ways of image compression at this point. One is based on fractals and the other on the wavelets. They are very different from each other, hybrids exist, but altogether the combination of fractal thinking and wavelet thinking allows one to replace a picture that takes an enormous number of bytes to transmit by a picture which will be much more economical and which cannot be distinguished very much from the original one. I emphasis techniques using all these applications are very, very different from each other.
					
						But from these very specific applications I would like to move on to two others, which are very different and, in a certain sense, perhaps far more surprising and to me very exciting. One of them is simply the beauty of fractals. The fact that they're beautiful and that they have inspired, for example, musicians to better understand their craft. Music consists in creating very complicated systems of sounds. Great musicians have confided to me that their schools never taught them how to distinguish music from noise. They had many rules, but the rules were not sufficient to characterise music. Upon learning of fractals they realised, as others have realised independently by more mundane techniques, that music of every culture, of every period, is invariably fractal, 1/f noise. Music that is not fractal is not perceived as beautiful. What does fractal mean in this case? That the structures on a large scale, in the middle scale, and the small scale are in balance with each other. It is not the case that there's a very large scale variation with nothing of small scale supported on it, or the converse.  That is, an element of balance that is implied in beauty, which actually has been implied very strongly since the sixth century BC, which beauty consists in the harmony of the parts. This element is present completely in fractals and by people who are not themselves artists. It is perceived as an element of attractiveness in an aesthetic sense. This has led many of my friends to question, again, 'givens' about what is beauty, what is decoration, what is the share of the intent, what is the share of the personality of the artist and what is the share of simple structure rules in this problem? This applies also to architecture, to a large extent, but it would be too long to explain.
					
						And finally, there is the question of the origin of fractals, which has raised a new fashion by this aesthetic aspect. After I began writing about using the 'monsters' of 1900 vintage - all kinds of discoveries made around 1900 for the purposes of either being mathematical pathologies or perhaps exotic observations in economics - when I had described the use of these structures to create shapes that are beautiful, readers of my books started writing that I was completely wrong in believing that these shapes originated in 1900. One form, which I called the Sierpinski triangle, Sierpinski gasket, which is made of several parts identical to itself, turns out to be very common in decoration in Italian churches, either on the pavement or in paintings, on the roof and on the ceiling. Other structures were found in Persian art or in Indian art of different periods, and very surprising to me, very moving for me, a loop seems to be established between structures that first were identified for the purposes of mere decoration; then much later, probably unconsciously, they were introduced by mathematicians for the purposes of, again, pathology. Again, much later, they were used by me for the purpose of science. Then unwittingly, as a free bonus, for the purpose of creating beauty; that a loop is from decoration to decoration, from beauty to beauty via mathematics and physics, which I think, if confirmed would be a very strong element of unity between different human enterprises. 
					
						And last, but by no means least, is the extraordinary usefulness of fractals in education. This first came as a complete surprise. That is, friends reading my books reported having spoken to children, small children, and asking them the various questions which my books ask. How long is the coast of Britain? The children were much less prejudiced about that than the adults. They soon realised that the question was one that didn't have an answer. And other questions were asked of children, and the children actually enjoyed these questions. The movement spread, more and more high school teachers gave fractal problems to advanced students, had great fun, won various prizes, and then the movement continued and moved down to younger and younger children. At this point it seems that actually very young children, before primary school even, or in primary school, are those for which fractals are the most, in a certain sense, interesting. A very interesting question is raised - not that anybody wanted to raise it, but I would say it raised itself. The way in which mathematics was taught to me, it was taught starting by the oldest organised mathematics and moving forward. Since I studied mathematics for a long time- very irregularly for a long time, I went to Newton, well beyond Newton, to even Laplace and then to the middle of the nineteenth century and even further. But it was understood that the sequence in which humans have mastered mathematics was the proper sequence for teaching it. Then there was briefly a period of modern mathematics in which they tried to teach it starting with the latest works. But in each case one tried to begin teaching mathematics starting by simple phenomena. The idea is that somehow simplicity is more attractive than complexity, that simple rules of geometry have been put at the root, at the basis of geometry and that students would learn in the same order in which axiomatics has been provided. This proved to be very widely unsuccessful. To the extent that fractals are used now in various countries, in various schools, sometimes in school systems, sometimes in individual classrooms, they consist in changing the sequence of events- not trying to induce an interest and awareness of mathematics by forcing the students to remember what Euclid and his predecessors found simple but to begin with shapes, which in a certain sense the students found friendly, at the same time mysterious, and in which they saw all kinds of symmetries. The symmetries were not obvious like in a circle or in an interval but hidden behind all kinds of complicated non-symmetric, semi-non-symmetric backgrounds. Children are much more interested in studying the symmetries of shapes in which symmetry does not scream at them like in a circle or as in an interval, than they are the most simple symmetries. After all, one doesn't begin life by looking at simple shapes. One begins life by looking at shapes that are around us, and those shapes, mountains, flowers, trees, are very complicated. For them, many of the simple rules of analysis don't apply. In a certain sense, I say many times, Euclid is very seldom present in the shapes which nature offers us. What is present is a great deal of complication which, however, in some cases, namely for fractals, can be tamed, can be reduced to simple rules of construction, not complete chaos in the sense of a complete mess, but a chaos having very precise rules. And children seem to be interested in it. 
					
						I am very struck by the use of one of my conjectures, the one about dimension four thirds for Brownian clusters, because its such an easy thing to explain to a child - and it is in a certain sense - a child adolescent rather, it is reassuring for that person to be told that this very simple observation is not known to be either wrong or true. People think it is true, but they can't be sure. They could not give a specific complete argument. I think that the advantage of that is very clear for the mathematicians. The fact that mathematics is well and alive, active and moving amazingly is very difficult to communicate to most people. I don't understand at all most of what's happening in mathematics because it can be understood only after an extraordinarily large number of layers of successive instruction. Where it is possible to show that certain regularities are in a certain sense overwhelmingly likely because, as it turns out in this case, of the eye and of measurements, which is a very much short of a proof, one still establishes that mathematics as a field is open. But I think that beyond these parochial needs of, or uses for, the mathematics community, it is very important to realise once again that the way in which the mind proceeds are not necessarily, in fact seldom are, the same as the ways in which the codification of mathematic observations proceed. To codify observation of nature it had been necessary to begin by Euclid and to go very far in Euclid, and fractals came first not as real things but just as a limitation of Euclid. When they became real things they turned out to be, in a certain sense, more real for many individuals than the simplifications of Euclid. Now why is it so? Why is it that the same kind of techniques, very elementary ones of self-similarity, scaling, self-affinity, and more learned terms like renormalisation and fixed points, why do these techniques apply so generally? I don't think that there is any way of saying that this is the law of structure of the world, but it is a very workable procedure, one which once again very often moves from being very simple to being impossibly difficult; which makes it both challenging and beautiful, but which embodies a certain element of unity among very varied kinds of human behaviour. Which personally for me is the greatest charm and the greatest attraction of this whole enterprise, which has been taking up my life for so many years.
					
						What about the future? The question is, will fractal geometry continue as a field? Personally, I don't think it will, at least not for a long time because the mixture of interests, which my strange education, which the ups and downs of my life produced, will not be reproduced: the combination of interests in different fields has no reason to be reconstituted. In a way, there are many, how to say, basic intrinsic fields, like mathematics, like physics, like economics, which are not invented around one idea or around a technique. They are just inevitable. It is not at all interesting to imagine that a new field, yet another one, called fractal geometry will become organised besides them, with all these endless questions of turf that would represent: is that part of straight mathematics? Is it part of fractal geometry? Is it part of straight finance or fractal finance? These ideas seem to be almost impossible to envision. Therefore I believe that as a field fractal geometry is unlikely to continue. The extraordinary surprise that my first pictures provoked is unlikely to be continued. Many people saw them fifteen years ago, ten years ago. Now children see it on their computers when the computers do nothing else. The surprise is not there. The shock of novelty is not there. Therefore the unity that the shock of novelty, surprise, provided to all these activities will not continue. People will know about fractals earlier and earlier, more and more progressively. I think that the best future to expect and perhaps also the best future to hope for, is that fractal ideas will remain either as a peripheral or as a central tool in very many fields. I think the story of iteration will continue for a while, then probably will slow down when things get very tough and resume again when new techniques come in, and then fractal ideas will be part of that study. The same way in physics, some fields will grow- slow down because the problems become too difficult, then resume again when new ideas come or when needs arise. In other words, the unity is unlikely to be preserved. I think that the best we can hope is that in those cases where we failed, where we found that we couldn't go very far, others will soon succeed - or maybe not so soon - but others will do it not as fractalists but as mathematicians or as physicists or as economists. The thought that one unifying idea should continue forever is simply not realistic and therefore not to be hoped for, but I think that for quite a number of years still, perhaps if I am lucky to the end of my life, because I would hate to see that stop in my lifetime, those questions will become very active and still somewhat separate, as different branches of learning become accustomed to them. I cannot imagine that this idea would vanish, not because I am so proud of what I've been doing all my life, but because this is not an artificial thought coming from nowhere in no time and vanishing again rapidly in no time. It has in every one of its manifestations profound roots in the history of the various sciences and the various manners of human enterprise and those roots will not be broken. The continuity of these thoughts will continue, and if any substitute comes, if any other name comes, which is possible, the ideas will remain. Therefore from the viewpoint of the future I am both extremely optimistic and in the substance, quite relaxed about the continuation of the field as a separate endeavour. I think the same remarks apply to chaos theory in general.
					