brian.sewell

Born in England, Brian Sewell (1931-2015) was considered to be one of Britain’s most prominent and outspoken art critics. He was educated at the Courtauld Institute of Art and subsequently became an art critic for the London Evening Standard; he received numerous awards for his work in journalism. Sewell also presented several television documentaries, including an arts travelogue called The Naked Pilgrim in 2003. He talked candidly about the prejudice he endured because of his sexuality.

I think Sargent’s rather a good painter of everything he tackled. I think his portrait drawings are pretty boring, but then they were… don’t do that… they were a cheap solution to… or an inexpensive solution for people who really didn’t want to spend 10,000 guineas or whatever.
But he was much more than the last of the Van Dycks, as it were. And I… it seems to me a pity to take away from him those areas where he was really brilliant. Only he never… if he’d never painted a portrait, he would be much more highly regarded. So you have a paradox there, there’s a man who is famous for portraiture. Everything else is what people really like.

Yes, I think it’s a kind of rather depressing, well, I suppose, post-Second World War reaction to wealth and comfort and display and swagger. He’s quite certainly the last of the real swagger portrait painters. And people’s political views, as well as their religious views, do affect their regard or otherwise for painters.
I mean, really he’s probably held in far higher esteem by Roman Catholics than by any other community. Whereas I say you have to look past all that and see what is there. You can’t ignore it. I think there are painters whose faith and conviction in that faith are so dominant that they actually contribute to what he paints. I was struck, when looking last December at the Isenheim Altar, the great Grünewald, and then here was a painter who could not have painted that if he did not profoundly believe in everything that is in it. It was… it is there. It is that that fires it. And he’s a man whom I think sat down one day and said, you know, who was Christ? Was he some beautiful young man with fair hair, or...? And decided, no, Christ was a Jew. What does a Jew look like? And so the crucified Christ in that great altarpiece is a heavy man with a hook nose and a dark skin. No one had ever done that before.
And that is not done out of disrespect, that is done out of profound understanding of the events, and to some extent, the theology behind what he’s been commissioned to paint. It’s like painting a little monster in the corner cupboard with syphilitic sores. Oh no, the painting was for the Antonites, who were a healing community. They were the doctors of the day. And where would a syphilitic go, but to the Antonite monastery? And so here’s an absolutely brand spanking new disease with these wonderful decays, so paint them. Put them in, you know. A thinking painter, a seeing painter, a feeling painter. And then... there are so many paintings that are improved – funny sort of word to use – but they are improved, they are made more intense by the understanding the painter has for the event.
And when Rembrandt was rambling around in Amsterdam, mixing with old Jews, his understanding of Old Testament subjects became much less dramatic and much more profound. And that’s what… that’s the difference between a great painter and a good painter: puts more in the picture than can be seen.

Gassed is one of the great monuments of the 20th century, I think. It not only is a record of something that happened in the war, inevitably his role as a war artist coming into play, but I think the way the figures stay in a plane, just within the picture space, right across, is a classical relief. It has, for me, the resonances of all those Roman triumphs in which prisoners are... bowed heads, drawn across the picture plane from left to right.
Painting it the way he does, in little groups within the group, and then allowing you to see other things through these various interstices, like the football match and the aeroplane skirmish up there. And the football match is just a symbol of perhaps the indifference of man to man. Because the football had been played by people with all their limbs and their eyes and able to breathe, and the people in the frieze are those who have been gassed and are possibly never going to see anything again. Or it’s a contrast between what could be, for them, what has been for them, and what is now impossible. There are all sorts of ways of interpreting that little paradox. I think it’s a great painting. Two great works of art came out of the Great War in Britain. I don’t think any came out anywhere else. And Gassed is one. And the other is the Charles Sargeant Jagger Artillery Memorial at Hyde Park Corner, which I think is one of the greatest works of art of the century, not just of that particular episode.
The extraordinary architecture of that cenotaph... because like the cenotaph in Whitehall, it is an empty tomb, it is a cenotaph. And the figures around it, and the symbolism and so on. It’s wonderful. Nobody ever looks at it. You can’t really see it unless you’re on a top of a bus, but you never see anybody standing and looking at it. If I were a millionaire, I would propose offering money to move it to somewhere where there is some repose, then people could circulate round it. Because it’s… it’s very three-dimensional, and you need to keep walking around it. You need to see each side, because each side... each end, tells a different story. And it’s all part of the same story. You need to see it all at once. And you simply cannot see the road side at the same time as you see the others.

I think this is just the irony that the commentator has to pick out. I think it’s exceedingly unlikely that they were in any way prescient of the war that broke out in 1914, when painting things like that. No, this was just wonderful, rich, Edwardian, trouble-free, sun always shining, stuff. And then the war made a difference.
And it made a difference to somebody who, in the normal run of things, you wouldn’t think would be impacted by it. He’s American, not involved, has no family in it. No connections with it at all. He then goes off to really, right at the end of the war, and does… and that picture is constructed from innumerable drawings. Very, very good, sensitive drawings. And the drawings speak of pain. The wounded soldiers are… you know, they speak of pain.

I think whoever said that was just being clever. It is clever. It is amusing. But as it affects almost everybody in the human race, whether civilised or not, I think it’s a joke. It’s not to be taken seriously. I think one can be sick with love. One can be diverted and even destroyed by it. You can have people making the most extraordinary decisions as a consequence of either being in love or having been in love. You know, people change wills, dynasties divert left or right as a consequence of something going wrong with a love affair. But that it's an illness, no.
And I think when you talk of illness, this is something that you want to get rid of, but I think a man who has never loved has been deprived of an extraordinary experience. I mean... I think the sooner you fall in love, the earlier you fall in love, the better. The more often you fall in love, the better. Because I think that every human being is like a teapot, and there’s a spout and a handle and a lid and a knob on the lid and so on. And every love affair you have knocks off one of these, so that you end up just with the central carcass. We are all the central carcasses by the time we reach our age. I know you’re younger than me, but you do need to get your odd bits knocked off, one way or another, otherwise you don’t learn anything about yourself, or the human race.
So it’s all part of a rich experience, nothing to do with illness at all.

I’m not sure that the continuation of the species depends on it at all. I think it… whether it’s chemistry or not, I don’t know. But I mean, all you have to do to continue the species is fuck. It’s as simple as that. And the effectiveness of fucking in the most unpleasant of circumstances is demonstrated by what happened when the Russians invaded Germany in 1944, ’45. Because they raped every woman they could find and special arrangements had to be made by the Germans to allow abortions. Now that... if the abortions had not been allowed, the human race would have been multiplied by the consequences of mass rape, angry rape, military rape, rape… but that rape is a congress which begets children. So it has nothing to do with continuing the human race.
I don’t quite know what it does have to do with, because I remember falling in love at the age of 14 with a boy in the Hitler Youth. And this is not quite as ridiculous as it seems, but where Brent Cross now is, with its great shopping centre... used to be open fields, and every patch of open ground during the war was cultivated. It had to be. Things were grown on it, no matter how small. And this must have been a piece of land of perhaps an acre, not more. It was encased in very high, rather loose mesh wire. You couldn’t climb over it, and German prisoners were working inside it. And I… my school was in Hampstead and the playing fields were in Mill Hill, and twice a week one had to cycle from Hampstead to Mill Hill to play cricket. And I cycled past, and curious… the first time the German prisoners arrived... off my bike to have a look at them. Guarded by a couple of soldiers. And one of them was a very, very beautiful boy of about 16. Blond hair. Absolute Aryan perfection of this child. More beautiful than any other boy I’d ever seen, far more beautiful than any prefect. And we all had crushes on prefects. And I had a crush on this boy.
He could speak no English. I could speak very little German, just sort of 'Wie gehts?' and not much more. And we’d… every time I went to Mill Hill and came back again that they were there, we would just stand either side of the wire touching each other, because there was nothing else to be done. You could just touch through the wire. And I was besotted with him. I’ve never forgotten him. It was my first great emotional experience. Unlike with other boys at school, you couldn’t immediately have some kind of sexual activity, because the wire was there. So this was love. It had nothing to do with a quick wank. It had… it was a moving passion. So, you know, it’s a serious business, but it isn’t an illness.

I had three parents. Only two of whom I know, or knew. One was my mother, whom I knew for the rest of her life. And it’s extraordinary how parents turn from… parents... or mothers... mother turns from mother into big sister and great friend, stays great friend for a long time, and then slowly but inexorably, becomes a child. So you reverse the roles.
My father died before I was born, but left, I think, an inheritance of guilt and penury.
And my stepfather was a very decent man and I treated him very badly, because he came too late. He became my stepfather just before I was 11... ten and a half, or thereabouts. And by then I was old enough to resent him deeply. Which is a destructive emotion for a boy soon entering puberty. 

We were, throughout the '30s, very poor, but then everybody in the '30s was poor. This was no way an exceptional thing. And I think it’s very difficult for people who are younger than me to realise just how difficult life was in the 1930s.
I was born in 1931. The consequences of the depression were already abundant, and they only got worse. For a woman with a child and no husband, things were exceedingly difficult. And in a way, the war made them easier. It’s curious, but you know, everybody was hungry during the war. There were shortages of everything. If your clothes were out at elbow, it didn’t matter, because everybody’s clothes were out at elbow during the war. But during the 1930s, the poverty… you still had leftovers so you didn’t necessarily look almost destitute.
So… no, it was tough. And I think my mother was quite valiant but I think when the war broke out and this nice, much older, man who had been wooing her in a sense for some years, just suddenly turned from being a decent sort with whom she occasionally went to the theatre and so on, into being somebody who offered security.

And then there may have been the problem of my education. That may have been one of the tipping factors, because I hadn’t gone to school. I’d reached the age of ten and a half or so without ever setting foot in school, which was wonderful, because I was a highly educated child, but in all the wrong areas and never the right ones.
[Q] How were you educated, then?
Oh, well I can’t remember not being able to read, so I think I was taught to read at a very early age. And that was the... I think, the biggest single weapon in education. I could read, so I could read anything.

I was taken, I think, to every museum and gallery in London.  A great many that have disappeared, like the old London Museum and the Imperial Institute. And you go around something like the Imperial Institute, and it had glass cases full of stuffed animals and birds, butterflies and so on. Any question you wanted to ask about any animal could be answered either in the Institute or the Natural History Museum just across the road. And nothing, nothing that wouldn’t tell you what you wanted to know about Kenya or Borneo or whatever. It was all in one museum or the other. And there is, I think, no better way of having your curiosity aroused than by seeing things about which you wish to ask a question, and then get the answer. I know it’s no longer possible, in the Natural History Museum, to look in drawers at bird skins, but there I was, at the age of seven and eight, being allowed to pull out drawers and there’s the skin of a bird. It’s been taken off the carcass. It’s not stuffed. It is just the perfect feathered outer skin of a bird. And to be able to look at those.
I mean, I don’t think they would allow it now, even if it were allowed, if you see what I mean. And they would say, no, you are too young, you must… you couldn’t… but we were trusted. I don’t know why I say 'we', I mean I know that I was trusted to look at these things without pulling the feathers out or damaging them.

I have just answered 1600 questions for a television programme, and so have several other people. And it’s some kind of reverse jokey quiz thing, where you get asked a question and then they say, now before you answer it, you have to say do you think that Brian Sewell or Tom Smith or the Prime Minister or whatever could answer this question? Did he get it right or wrong? And they were astonished at how much I knew about natural history. I knew more about natural history than one of people who had chosen that as his special subject. And that’s what… that’s where my education was. It lay in looking at things in museums. So it’s not entirely a disconnected career, in the sense that I end up by looking at things in galleries and getting paid for it.

It was... it was a very good education. I knew about Roman myths and legends. I knew about the Argonauts. I knew about all sorts of basic things in our cultural backgrounds. The things on which literature and art are based. And then, when I did eventually get to school, of course, I couldn’t add two and two together.
[Q]  Can you say a bit more about your mother? I mean, how did she come to know that… or believe that this was the way to bring you up? Didn’t she have to go to work or anything? I mean…
I… no, I think there was a tiny stipend from my grandmother. My father’s mother. My father went to Eton and left at the age of 16, having had some fairly conventional, but nevertheless ghastly, experiences at the hands of other boys. And I think my mother may have been influenced by that. She was educated at home. Her father was quite well off, had a house in Fitzjohns Avenue. And, like many women of her age and class, there was no question of going to school. You had… I’ve forgotten what they’re called… tutors. What’s the word?
[Q] Governess?
Governess. Or governesses. So she was educated in the conventions of the day.

[Q] What happened to your father?
He died. Put his head in the gas oven. Literally. At a time when gas was poisonous. Very carefully put the cat out before he did so.
[Q] Goodness.
My mother was three months pregnant. And she, I think… they weren’t married, which made for further difficulties. She, I think, as a Roman Catholic, had absolutely refused to do what my father’s other girlfriends had been compliant in, which was to... having an abortion. And she said, 'No', and I… my… insofar as one can talk to one’s mother, much later, after the event, about such matters, I think that her feeling was always that she had in some way precipitated his suicide by having blazing row about the abortion or not... very shortly before he put his head in the gas oven.

My mother came from a strict Roman Catholic Irish background. Having an illegitimate child was unforgivable. Hanging on to the child was even more unforgivable. It couldn’t… you couldn’t just… there was no question of an abortion. You had the baby and then it went into a home, and that was the end of that. That is, in my case, what didn’t happen.
My mother was therefore cut off without a shilling, as it were, by her family. My father’s mother, who was very substantially well off, gave my mother a small stipend until she got married. But after the age of three or four, or something like that, she no longer wanted to see me. Now there’s a certain logic there, in that there was a legitimate son. My real father had, at one stage, married, much earlier, and he had married because he’d already got a girl with child. They had the child and then decided to marry, so that the boy, Nigel, was legitimate, or legitimised.

Well, my mother wanted to go to Slade, but again this was one of the family problems. Her father said respectable young women didn’t go to art schools, and so she wasn’t going either, which didn’t help matters. But she was allowed to… apprentice is quite the wrong word, but it’s the only word I can think of. She was allowed to go and work with a couple of artists, one of whom was Frampton, who is the sculptor who made the Edith Cavell monument. So she had at least some knowledge of how things are carved and modelled and so on about sculptural practice. And she then went to assist, again, may be too strong a word, but play some sort of part with a woman artist called Kate Coughtrie of whom almost nothing is known. I have a few letters and I have one drawing by Kate Coughtrie, but almost nothing is known. I think in the last half century, two watercolours have appeared at auction and nobody has known who Kate Coughtrie is or was. Anyway, my mother had some sort of artistic practise, both as a sculptor and a painter.
[Q] [Unclear.]
She was a very good musician, too. She had a great cello. She had rather a good violin, which she eventually handed to me. And an exceedingly good cello, which she played until arthritis got into all her knuckles. So…
[Q] And your father? But he was artistic, too.. or?
He was a composer. But he had very much run out of steam towards the end of his life. I think he was 39 when he committed suicide, and for about five years before then was really producing nothing. Was, indeed, trying to get jobs. Trying to get a job in the manuscript department of the British Museum, for example, and was refused. Quite rightly, I think.

I think you’re sometimes born with things that… I know scientists will say this is impossible, but I do not remember a time when I was not interested in looking at pictures. Tiny child, going around the National Gallery. In those days, there was a day… I can’t remember whether it was Wednesday or Thursday, when you had to pay sixpence to go in, and it was called Connoisseur’s Day. And we didn’t have sixpence to spare, but that is the day on which we went. And specifically that day, because it meant that my mother could do what she wanted, which was… and this is what she did every time... we’d go to different parts of the National Gallery, which was then rather considerably smaller than it is now, and we would get to a point, and she would say, 'I want you to go into that room and find me a picture that you really like. I’m going into that room and you come and find me when you’ve decided which picture it is, and tell me why you like it'.
Now that’s very different from just saying, 'I like it'. And as a child, you come up with some fairly puerile reasons. And I remember a number of pictures. Well, the Dürer, for example, the so-called Dürer, Red Madonna, which I adored, because it was red. All other Madonnas were blue and this was different. And the Madonna has fair, curly hair in sort of wiry curls. And this, again, is different, and so I had reasons for liking this picture, of which I could tell her, and did.
And it starts at that pretty basic level: I like it because of a colour or this sort of thing. But eventually, you begin to find other reasons for liking it. And so seeing pictures again and again and again, your perception of them, even if you’re only a child, begins to deepen. But that’s how it began. It was cut short by the War. It was in 1939, everything was taken down. In 1939, I was eight. Everything was taken down and went away. But then, of course, the Gallery recovered, in the sense of having… it brought back a picture, a different picture, every month from the slate quarries. And took extraordinary risks. I mean, they brought back the Velázquez Rokeby Venus, and it was rather like the little exhibitions which the National Gallery runs from time to time, just putting one great picture in a room, and that’s it. And it compels you to contemplate.
So looking intently at a picture, because it’s the only picture, became a practice. And then exhibitions by… paintings by Sickert, I think, in 1942... Augustus John, the War artists, John Piper, all sorts of people. They would have an exhibition for a month or so. And... so my experience of pictures broadened from the Old Masters at which I’d been looking in the Tate and the National, to things that were actually being done more or less then. So I was, as it were, with it at the time. It was all hugely important.
When the War came to an end, extraordinary things happened, so quickly. 1945, the National Gallery... the National Gallery, had an exhibition of, I think, something like 150 paintings by Paul Klee. I mean, just think of it. Darkness and dereliction. The War is just over, we’ve none of us got any food or any money. A lot of people with no work, no housing, no repairs to any of the devastation that had happened to London. And there’s the National Gallery offering us Paul Klee, of all people.
And the V&A... the V&A… again, the astonishing sort of… the brilliance of the idea, of the V&A putting on an exhibition that winter of Picasso and Matisse. I mean, you know, astonishing. We had a bunch of wartime Picassos, which are in my view, now, the worst of all, on the walls of V&A. It was wonderful the way London came to life so quickly. And in the most unlikely places, efforts were being made to nourish the spiritual side of the... and the intellectual side of the nation.

I think it was a very rich upbringing, culturally, intellectually. It was a very deprived upbringing in terms of creature comforts and the conventional things. And when… when my stepfather, as it were, took control: 'The boy’s got to be educated, got to go to school'. I remember the arguments. And he wanted to send me to a boarding school, get me out of London. Always the argument: 'Well, he’ll be safe'. And my mother saying, 'No, absolutely not. Never. We’ve never been parted. I’m not going to be parted now'.
And I’ve forgotten which school my stepfather went to, but it was somewhere up in the North. And he could, I think, have got me in without difficulty, whereas in London, he had to start from scratch. So it had to be a day school. And so I remember a kind of dreary trailing around from City of London to University College school, St Paul's and I can’t remember the others. And eventually to Haberdashers', which the mere name of it prejudiced me against it from the beginning, because haberdashers was a department in Pontings, which was a shop in Kensington High Street, where one went to buy needles and thread and stuff to mend clothes.
I didn’t want to go to anything called Haberdashers'. But that’s where we went. I was interviewed, and it became apparent that I knew nothing of arithmetic or algebra or geometry. And whoever it was who was interviewing us, said, 'Well, the entrance examination to the school is on the 13th of July, which is about two and a bit months away, and if you send him to a crammer just to get some arithmetic in and so that he can pass, he might get in. But without arithmetic, he won’t'. And so I was sent to a crammer, and that was my first experience of school. And of course, I didn’t know how to behave. Not at all.
And I passed the exam, and I’m convinced that it was much less a question of passing the exam than of a school absolutely at the tag end of its reputation, desperate for fee-paying parents to… I think it would have taken a dog if there were somebody prepared to pay the fees. So… it was a lousy school.
[Q] Was it a good idea, to send you to school, really?
I don’t know that idea came into it. There was no alternative. It was illegal not to send me to school. My mother had been breaking the law for a decade. No, not quite, but, you know… I should have been going to school. At 11, I should have been going to school for six years, shouldn’t I? Yes. I can do arithmetic now, you see.

[Q] Were you conscious, when you were a child, I mean, eight, nine, whatever, of being at all special?
No. Absolutely not. I had no comparison, so there was no question. It was made abundantly clear to me the moment I got to Haberdashers' that I was a bit odd. I remember a boy saying to me, 'You’ve had elocution lessons'. And I said, 'What’s elocution?' And so, you know… it started then.
We… in 1942, just 11, just through the exam, put into Form 2B at Haberdashers', which had a form mistress called Irenie Johnson. We had mistresses because there were no young men to come in. There were lots of old men at the school, beastly old men. But the first form had a mistress called Miss Woods, and 2B had Irenie Johnson. And Irenie Johnson said, 'Now, we don’t know each other and you must call me Miss Johnson and I’ve got to learn all your names, but I want to learn other things about you, and so I need to ask you what… to tell me which books you’ve most recently read'. And when she got to me, in alphabetical order, I ran off a series of titles by people like Warwick Deeping and Dornford Yates and Sydney Horler and Francis Brett Young and Eleanor Farjeon and… and all the other boys had been reading William books. So that didn’t endear me to them.
And then... very soon afterward, she said, 'Now, I’m going to ask you all to give a little lecture. It need only last two or three minutes, but your homework is to go home and think about what you will deliver your lecture on'.
So we couldn’t all do this on the same day, so over a period of a week or so, in English lessons, we were delivering our lectures. And as an 'S', I was again right at the end of the line. And I had decided to lecture on Wagner. And there was a piano in the room, and there was a boy called Kingston who could play the piano. So I had said to Kingston, 'I’m going to need your help, because I want you to play some themes for me'. So I talked about Wagner, and then produced a miniature score, one of my mother’s concert-going scores, and plonked it on the piano thing, well... rest. Kingston had been sitting for the last few minutes. And then said, 'Play that'. And of course, the poor thing, he’d got a complete score in front of him, and he didn’t know what to do with it, and the whole lecture fell to pieces, and I got very cross, and that didn’t endear me to my peers, either.
The one thing I learned very quickly was not to show off, as they put it. And it wasn’t showing off, that’s the point... it wasn’t showing off. It was just things that seemed to me to be perfectly natural, I had to shut up about.
[Q] And were you bullied?
Yes. Quite a lot. And as I never fought anybody, I didn’t know how to deal with it. I didn’t know how to fight back, to begin with.

[Q] So what should we understand about your school days? Happy or unhappy?
On balance, I think a great deal unhappier than happy. There was a period in the middle of them, or rather just, sort... past halfway, when I got put into 'remove', which meant that you wasted the year but… when you were 15, you were regarded as ineducable and would go at 16.
The authorities, as it were, were determined that I would not get through school certificate, which was the equivalent of O-levels. And if it hadn’t been for a couple of schoolmasters, to whom I’m deeply indebted… One was called Lewin and the other called Locke. One taught English and the other History. If it hadn’t been for their saying, well, he may not be any good at Science or Arithmetic, but he’s very good at these two things, you know, we ought to somehow make allowances.
But it was very difficult, because there were compulsory subjects. I get very angry now when I hear educationalists on both sides of the House talking about essential subjects and how Maths is still an essential subject. I must have wasted a year of my education, in terms of time, I must have wasted a year trying to learn Maths. And it… I don’t know why, but it is completely beyond me, and there was nothing to do in a Maths lesson, except count seconds. I can count a minute, now, with perfect accuracy. And that’s a skill I learned in school, letting double periods, 90 minutes of Maths go by, perfecting the accuracy of my count of seconds. That’s as far as it went. And you had to get through in Maths if you wanted to go for a higher school certificate, matriculation. And I think that, in the end… I think that I was extraordinarily tough, and I’m very angry that it was ever necessary. But I did… my year in the remove, sit school certificate at the end of it, and failed.
I got distinctions in History and English and English Literature, and I’m perfectly adequate in French and Geography and things like that, but I could not get passed in Maths. You had to pass in a modern foreign language, English grammar and Maths. Grammar was absolutely not a problem. French was not a problem. Maths was just a total block.
Well, with three distinctions, which was not bad, it was decided that I should go into the lower sixth and sit the exam externally. This was in June. You could sit it again in December, externally. Slightly different syllabus. So you start learning the higher school certificate, which is two years hence, and the adjustments to the syllabus for matriculation. And you go on struggling with Maths. And you sit, in December, and you fail. You sail through everything else, but you fail Maths. You’ve failed it twice. So you sit it again the following June and the following December. And in the end, I was, as it were, still sitting that bloody exam at the same time as I was sitting higher school certificate. And then I got a piece of paper from the university, a little slip of brown wartime paper, no bigger than that, just saying that the university authorities have decided to give you a subsidiary pass in Arithmetic, not Maths, not Algebra, not Geometry, Arithmetic. Simple Arithmetic. You may now proceed to further university examinations.
And I think of that every time I hear politicians talk of mandatory subjects in exams, it’s all wrong. Children… for whatever reason, children will have a block in something, and they cannot do it, and it doesn’t matter who teaches them or for how long, it will remain a block. That has to be recognised. And the aptitudes of children have to be recognised, and not denied.
Though there they are… that’s the story of my school days, apart from the sex, of course.

Well I think most of my school friendships were based on sex, I’m afraid. Sex was something which began to interest most of us towards the end of the first year at Haberdashers'. And there was one boy who was… oh, you know how things are done by years and ages, and where the thing had cut for him was that he was… he could either have been a class above or stay with us, or whatever, but anyway… he was Jewish, and he was very good looking. And he was 13 when most of us were 12. And Irenie Johnson, who was, actually, very important in… throughout my life in the lower school, because she encouraged an interest in music and so on, in which I was already interested, but her encouragement was a great relief. But she seemed… and we knew it, that’s the funny thing. She seemed always to manage to come through the changing rooms at the point when Harry Claugh [?] had no clothes on. Harry Claugh was the only one of us who had any pubic hair. And he was the very first to ejaculate. So that Harry ejaculating was something which we all wanted to see from time to time, indeed quite frequently, and he would demonstrate. So we all knew… actually it was frightfully useful, because we all knew, when it eventually happened, that we were catching up with Harry.
Harry was the first person to bring a dirty book to school. And he’d read odd bits of it to us, and… be completely befuddled. And that’s the thing I have never forgotten, because it… I knew this was something I couldn’t ask my parents or anybody. I had no one I could ask, but there was a story about a woman who’d gone to bed with two men, and it had this extraordinary phrase in it, the love juices were streaming down her thighs. And I loved the language of it, the love juices were streaming down her thighs, but I had no idea what it was. What can this mean? You know, this wonderful adult life one was eventually going to grow up into when love juices would stream… so, you know, quite dotty.
And then, of course, we all discovered masturbation at roughly the same time, and it ran rife through our lives ever after. It was during the War, 1943, we had a great deal more in the way of daylight raids from the Germans. And we had to go into the air raid shelters. And the brave ones amongst us would go into the air raid shelters and remove the electric light bulbs so that they were all in pitch darkness, and you could have as much sex as you wanted with as many boys as you could get, really. And there were all sorts of rumours about how many times in a lifetime would you be able to masturbate? You know, is it 20,000 times or 30,000 times? How many times? How many times have you done it in the past year? And you’d say, well, I’ve done it seven times a day for seven days a week. And you had enough grasp of Arithmetic to work out that, if you were in fact limited to 20,000 orgasms, you were getting pretty near it. And so on.
And then there was the feeling that, as occasionally we had to bow our heads in morning assembly because somebody had been killed in an air raid or one of the senior boys had gone off to the army and been killed, and we’d all think immediately of sex. And, you know, I bet he regrets that he didn’t wank seven times a day, seven days a week. So it just encouraged us to get on with it and let the future look after itself. Then, of course, one began to have really affectionate relationships with other boys.

I got fucked on my 16th birthday by a boy called Michael Jessett [?], with whom I was deeply in love. And it hurt mightily, and I didn’t really enjoy it at all, but when it was over, he withdrew and sat on the side of my bed. I was now stark naked, face down, and he just sat on the side of the bed and lit a cigarette and he put his hand on my bottom and said, 'God, that was good. If you were a girl, I’d do it again'.
I mean... screaming rage, because this was nothing about being a substitute for a girl, this was about boys being in love. This was nothing to do with doing it with each other because there wasn’t a girl around. And so my passionate affection for Michael Jessett turned into wild, malicious hatred. So… but that’s getting your odd corners knocked off.
And then about… when I got into the sixth form, it seemed… oh, you know, I thought I ought to grow up. People kept on telling me that boys had sex together because they were so young, but they all grew up and became perfectly normal in the end. And so I tried to grow up and become perfectly normal. What a false hope, however.
[Q] Did you try to become perfectly normal, so to speak?
Yes.
[Q] I mean, you had… you had something to do with girls, then? I mean, if I said to you, well, what about girls, then what would you tell me about that?
I never had sex with them, didn’t want it. But I… you know, I would have a companionable relationship with a girl, if you could find one. But no, it really meant abstaining from sex with other boys, more than anything.

Religion didn’t help matters. So... anyway.
[Q] Was religion an important part of your…? I mean, I suppose it must have been. Your mother was Catholic and so on, so were you religious, or what?
I thought I was. I wanted to be. I thought it mattered. And it really wasn’t until I’d finished… actually, I’m very glad there was a religious element in my life, because it made being a Courtauld student, where every subject in Renaissance painting… not every, but you know, so much of what goes on in Renaissance painting is of… has a religious base. And if you are not aware of what lies behind that, if you don’t know about saints and miracles and whatnot... no... a huge help, culturally. But it really wasn’t until I’d left The Courtauld, graduated, that I finally gave up attempts to be slightly normal.

There was a morning in high summer, I think in 1957, when I was on my way to mass at the Carmelite church in Kensington Church Street. And feeling really miserable about sex. And also feeling strongly that I was not in a state of grace, and therefore should not take communion. And I got almost to the door of the church, and then crossed the road and walked into the park, Kensington Gardens, the little alleyway through York Place. And really did, I think, challenge God. I... to say, you’ve had ten years of my life. I have been abstinent. I’ve had sex with nobody but myself for ten years. I can’t go on like this. I can’t. I have to do something. I have to fall in love with somebody, somehow. And you’ve had this sacrifice, and I want a sign. I want something to happen to tell me that my ten years of not having sex with anybody has been enough.
And there was no sign. And there hasn’t been a sign since, so… and desperately out of practice, I just went out that night and picked somebody up and went home to bed with him. And having broken my duck, as it were, my life changed. I’m not to say it changed for the better, but it certainly changed.
And I… you know, I think, in terms of living comfortably in our society, homosexuality is a bit of an affliction. It’s a bit of a nuisance. It gets in the way. People are patronising or indulgent or try to – even at my age – try to find, you know, somebody for you. And that never works. You have to find for yourself.

But there has been a hell of a change in my lifetime, between the way things were. I mean, when I went into the army to do my national service, the prejudices that abounded then, well, one could not let anything slip by accident. Just couldn’t. Couldn’t afford to. So I was quite adept at being deceitful. But I didn’t like having to deny it. No, that may give you the… I have never denied it to anybody who’s asked the question, direct. I have never denied it. But then, way back in the early '50s, people wouldn’t dare ask that question, couldn’t bring themselves to ask. They might nudge and wink a bit, but they would never ask direct. So…
[Q]  Well, it was, of course, illegal, wasn’t it?
Yes, it was quite easy, nevertheless. And I think Edward Montagu was unlucky. Really, deeply unlucky, rather than anything else. And it was a time when the 'then' Conservative government was witch-hunting, as it were, was determined to stamp out what it regarded as this foul disease, so…
[Q] What was the Montagu story? I can’t… I think I was too young...
Oh, it happened when I was in the army. He and a man called Peter Wildeblood, and I think there was a third person. Yes, Pitt-Rivers... had entertained a couple of boys from the air force in the changing hut that the Montagus used to go swimming in the river. And they’d then written one or two rather foolish letters to the air force boys, who were quite clearly not as innocent as they might have been. Certainly hadn’t been seduced. They kept the letters and then the air force police had some reason to break into their lockers and... for other homosexual reasons. And they found the letters. And the police in Hampshire were informed, and arrests were made. And trials were had, and they went to prison. That was the Montagu case. And it was a hell of a scandal at the time. And it was hyped by the press as, sort of, rich and idle young men of aristocratic birth seducing the honest working classes. Well, I’m not sure about the honest working classes. My subsequent experience has been that there are as many faggots and buggers amongst the working classes as anywhere else, so...

[Q] Did you have…? I mean, do you mind if I ask you if you did ever have any relationships with women? I mean, did something…? Did you ever try it out, or…?
Well, no, I didn’t have… I think I had sentimental relationships, certainly with two girls at The Courtauld. A girl called Jill Rigden. And Jill came in one morning. We used to work seated at the same desks in the main library, and break off halfway through the morning and go and have a sixpenny cup of coffee at The Gondola across the square. And she came in and I was already working and she said, 'Let’s go and have some coffee'. 'It’s too early'. 'No, I want to talk to you'.
So we went to The Gondola, and she just said, 'Are you going to ask me to marry you?' And I said, 'Why?' She said, 'Well, David', who was her boyfriend, 'proposed to me last night. And if you are not going to propose to me, I’m going to accept'. And of course I had absolutely no idea that, in her mind, it had got anywhere near to that sort of decision.
And I just… I said, 'No', immediately. And then at the end of my life at The Courtauld, there was a younger student who did much the same thing. And who was really very broken when I said no. She had not… she had no alternative in mind. She just wanted to know whether, as I was graduating, was anything going to continue afterwards.

The second one was a couple of years behind me, and when I graduated, she really needed to know whether this warm friendship had any chance of continuing. And the friendship could, but nothing else. And a year after I’d left, I’d gone to work for Christie's, and Christie's had said, why don’t you go to Rome for us? And there are other things you can do on the way... people who want to show pictures and so on. And so I thought it would be fun to take Helen as a companion, and did. And even then, she thought that, you know, we were… there was a possibility. By then she knew that I was queer, but she had that foolish idea that all you have to do is get into bed with a girl and you’re immediately converted. And it ain’t true.
So, you know, but that’s pretty well the extent of it. There was an unfortunate moment with an older woman, a much older woman, in Paris. My last… at the end of my second year at The Courtauld, I got a job as a guide to a party of American tourists who were running around England and France, and we were in Paris. And the group had really begun to fall to pieces a bit. It was at cross-purposes with itself. And in Paris, the women all wanted to go shopping and not look at anything.
And so on. So I found myself saying to them, 'Well, tomorrow, we are supposed to go to Malmaison, and we are leaving at nine and it’s a long day, and if you’re not there, we shall leave. We can’t delay'. And I went down, and nobody turned up. Not a single person wanted to go to Malmaison. So I went on my own, and I had a lovely day, really memorably beautiful day at Malmaison. I came back to the… to Paris. On my way to the hotel, past… went down a narrow street with lovely things in the windows, like custard pies and salamis and whatnot... snails. And I thought, I really… I don’t want to have dinner with these people. I will have dinner in my room. And so I bought myself a picnic. And I had a tiny room at the very top of the hotel. All the travellers had rather grander accommodation. And I’d set... tiny table... I’d set it with everything I was going to have, by the window. Great view. Bottle of wine.
And there was a knock on the door, and it was one of… it was… her name was Mrs Heller, Peg Heller. And she came in and said, 'I’m old enough to be your grandmother, but I’m going to bed with you'. And I said something feeble, like I don’t do that sort of thing, or whatever. And before I knew what had happened, she’d got my trousers undone and my cock in her mouth. And she hadn’t taken her glasses off, and they were big, sort of, diamanté frames with wings to them. And they kept on catching in my pubic hair as she moved backwards and… and you know, when you’re twenty-something, you have an erection whether you want to or not. And oh God… anyway, that was… that really was the most physical thing that ever happened to me with a woman. So…
[Q] It's terribly funny...
Peg… when… she kept on writing. She lived in South Carolina, in Charleston. And for several years afterwards, she would send me boxes of Carolina cookies or Charleston chocolates or whatever, with letters of such filthy imaginings that I did not know that human beings could do this sort of thing together, certainly not women well into their sixties. And so I thought… very instructive, though, eventually. When you get around to it yourself.

[Q] And you were studying English, History and Art, I assume, at A-level?
Yes, well I… but I took History of Art, as well as Practical Art. And I got a distinction. Then arrangements… it’s all a blur now, it all seemed frightfully complicated at the time, because there didn’t seem to be much help. Careers officers appeared from time to time, and I remember being interviewed by one who just despairingly said, 'Well, I think you’d better sit the Civil Service examination. You won’t get through with the top, so it’ll be the Ministry of Ag and Fish for you'.
And I just… never, you know... I’m never going to be a civil servant. This is not what I want. And nothing, nothing in the terms of an interesting career was offered. And obviously not going to be doctor or lawyer or whatever, but... I don’t see why not a lawyer, frankly. But certainly nothing in the arts was considered, which to me was the obvious thing to do. I mean, there am I, playing the violin like mad, painting whenever I had the opportunity, dreaming about looking at pictures, studying the History of Art on my own because the school doesn’t teach it, and they can’t come up with an idea for… oh.
So it…. I got a place at Oxford. I was going to read History, and then, quite by chance, and I don’t know what the chance was... I really do not know now. I’ve forgotten. There was… I discovered The Courtauld, where I could take a degree in the thing in which I most fervently was interested. So I got on my bicycle and pedalled to Portman Square at a great rate of knots. Got in, saw the bursar, who was a man called Charles Claire [sic]. Charles was an enchanting man, a nice man, very sort of silvery-grey sort of person. And he said I could come in October... sufficiently qualified to do so. And so I went. And that, I think, was a terrible mistake, because in… it was 1950, and most of the other students had either been in the army doing the tag end of war service or had been to another university and already done a degree in something else, or had already done their national service. And I was really far too immature to deal with a course like that. I was talking to another student, exactly my generation, last week, a girl... or elderly woman now. And she said that she remembered my delivering an essay at Peter Murray, reading it, on Filippo Lippi.
And he… I had completely forgotten this, but I remembered it when she told me. I reached the end of my essay, which I had to read aloud, and he said, 'Well, it’s the most remarkable thing. It’s the first time I’ve ever had an Art History essay without a single date in it'.
But we talked about this, and we, you know, she and I had no previous experience of really adult education. We had no idea of what a complicated, difficult thing we’d both decided to read for a degree. Because Art History is not just a series of dates. It’s a matter of interpretation, and in order to interpret, you must know something of the background. In the end, you realise that an art historian, to be any good, is not only an historian of art, but he’s a plain, straightforward historian in terms of diplomatic history and social history and economic history. He has to know all these things. He has to know the climate of the times in other cultural areas. In other words, he has to know what the literature of the period is, what the music of the period is, and all those things. We knew nothing.

And it… I also wanted to go on painting, and I didn’t want to stop playing the violin. I had a violin tutor who I think was wickedly dishonest. He... a great violinist, but I think that he thought that I was an easy pupil to deal with, which was certainly true. But what he should have told me was, you’re perfectly adequate. If you go on, you might, with luck, be a first violinist, more probably a second. And you will spend your life in an orchestra. Is that what you want to do? Looking back on my abilities then, I think even that was probably pushing it. I was very good, but I wasn’t good enough. He should have told me.
So there was I, a Courtauld student, trying to paint, trying to put in at least four hours a day on my fiddle, not spending enough time dealing with the real matter in hand, and at the end of two years… I wasted those two years. At the end of two years, I was in such confusion that I decided I’d just go and do my national service. I don’t know whether I want to paint, look at paintings, or play this bloody violin. If I drop out for two years… the term didn’t then exist, one didn’t drop out. But there was this heaven-sent opportunity to go away for two years, and somehow or other, things would resolve themselves. As indeed they did. There was, over that period of two years, a growing determination to go back to The Courtauld and do it properly. Being a painter no longer had any overwhelming appeal. Being a violinist didn’t either, and looking at pictures did.
And so I wrote again to Charles Claire [sic], while I was still in the army, and said, is this going to be possible? And I was taken back. And, you know, the second time around, I was a totally different student. I’d had two years in the army, which had, again, knocked a lot of corners off, rather different corners. And it had given me an immense amount of reading time. And every time I’d had a chance to come up to London on 24 hours or 36 hours leave, it was straight to the National Gallery or an exhibition or whatever. And when I went back to The Courtauld in 1954, it was with a great deal more knowledge and a great deal more determination. And I think I was, that time, I was a good student. It was worth teaching me.

The time factor is essential, and the repeated experience is essential. I… when people would say, how should I look at pictures? My answer is always the same, and it is this: that you go to the National Gallery, for example, and you do not look at every picture. You look at a picture that, in some way, communicates with you. There is something about the picture that makes you pause. And it’s that picture and not these. And that you spend a little time with. And you ask yourself, what is the subject? And then you might ask yourself: what is essentially the subject? Because if it’s pilgrims on the road to Emmaus, it may be the landscape that matters, and the pilgrims are only the excuse for the landscape. Or it may be entirely figurative and have no landscape, and you have no idea through what kind of territory these pilgrims are walking. That’s a beginning. You’re getting a hold on where the painter looks at the story. And then you go and look at something else, which may be Judith and Holofernes, and what is the story of Judith and Holofernes? Is this a great moral story, or is it really fiendishly immoral? Here is a woman who kills a man for not going to bed with her, you know. She thought he was going to seduce her, and he didn’t, but she cuts off his head nevertheless. This is a great Jewish heroine, you know. Think about it. So what element is the painter bringing into this? Is he… does he paint Judith so that she is exultant? Does he paint her as though she is melancholy? Look at the Rubens of Samson and Delilah. And it seems to me that there is, on Delilah’s face, in his picture, an expression of extraordinary melancholy. She’s cutting off the curls and she’s looking at him, and she knows what is about to happen. And she is not entirely convinced that she is doing something that she should.
Look at Rembrandt’s interpretation of it, and you have somebody who is mean and wild, rushing away from the tent, you know, with a backward glance, and curls in her hand. A different way of looking at things. Compare one subject shared by several artists, and each picture will tell you something about the other. Then poke your nose in pictures and look at brushstrokes, because if you look carefully enough, you can see how big the brushes were, and how small. You can see where the brushstroke began and where it ended. You can see whether it’s a heavily loaded brush, with thick paint, and it leaves a little tail behind, an impasto, as we call it. And you lift it away... a little thick point. So you get some idea of the gesture of the painter with the brush.
Look at a shipping picture and it’s full of rigging. How do you think it’s done? Is it done with a very thin brush and very little paint on it? No, it’s not. It’s done with a very long-haired brush with quite a lot of paint on it, and an expert sweep, so that the whole piece of the rigging gets done in one stroke.
Look at the knots in the carpet in Holbein’s Ambassadors. And how do you think they’re done? Well, they’re done with a perfectly normal brush, from which quite a lot of the ends of the hairs have been cut. So it’s short and thick, stumpy. And it carries exactly as much paint as you need for one knot in the carpet. So one knot, one touch of the brush.
Then you see a carpet somewhere else, by Velázquez, perhaps. And it’s impressionist. There are no knots in it. They are loose paint, like this. Slowly, you will get an idea, not only of how different painters paint, but how French painting is different from Italian, and Italian from German. You will get a feeling of how this painting could only have been done in the 17th century, not the 16th, not the 18th. It has to be 17th. And you’ll be soon be going around galleries saying, I don’t know who it’s by, but it’s mid-16th century, and it’s Italian. Then you go and look at the label and you congratulate yourself, and you find that it’s by Parmigianino and the only thing you’ve got wrong is that it the first half of the century and not the middle. But, you know, you’re getting there.
This is how it happens. But it’s a repeat experience. And if you look at the pictures that you looked at the very first time, after you’ve looked at 100 or 200 or 300 other pictures, you go back to them, you will see them with entirely different eyes. And if you do this all the time, you will never stop seeing. You’ll never stop learning. I am constantly… I’m nearly 77, and I am constantly surprised at how much I still learn. And that’s the great joy of looking at pictures, because unless… I mean, there are a great many awful pictures. Jack Vettriano for example. Seen one, you’ve seen the lot. You need never look again. But you look at a painting by Elsheimer half a century ago, and you’ll get something more out of it now.
It’s not a quantifiable discipline, anyway. It’s not a precise discipline. And your response to some painters will be much stronger than to others. Some painters who have great reputations, like Watteau for example. For me, I don’t know where the magic lies. I’ve never seen it. I still can’t see it. Other painters, whom I puzzled over when I was younger, I can now look at with much greater perception. And it’s just a matter of never closing your mind to anything, and…

It's not a quantifiable discipline in any way, it's not a precise discipline, and your response to some painters will be much stronger than to others. Some painters who have great reputations like Watteau, for example, for me, I... I don't know where the magic lies; I've never seen it. I still can't see it. Other painters whom I puzzled over when I was younger I can now look at with much greater perception. And that's just a matter of never closing your mind to anything.
I do close my mind to music. I listen to the music... I get the most enjoyment out of the music that I've always listened to. I don't want to listen to anything new. I don't want to dig up the obscurites of Donizetti... I've never heard that, I knew it existed but: must go and see it? No, no, no. It'll be bad tum-ti-tum-ti-tum stuff and you're just ticking it off on the list. No - I want to go and see Rosenkavalier for the 55th time.
But pictures are a different matter. Pictures - I'm always prepared to look again. That's where my life is.

Well, art is not for 99% of the population. It really wouldn’t matter how much you gave them in terms of pegs on which to hang their own perceptions. It wouldn’t matter. But for the 1%, then it’s the thing that makes their lives worth living.
Art is… you know, what is art? Art for me is painting and drawing, sculpture, architecture. And I know I can’t live without them. I don’t have to think about it anymore, but in the days when I skied, you know, the first three days up the mountains were wonderful, and then an itch… whatever companions I was with would say, 'Oh God, you know, he wants us to go to Munich or Vienna or somewhere for the day'.
Yes, I do. And I need to look at something. I don’t care. I just need to look at something. I can’t… I can spend three days on a beach, but then I have to go and find a gallery. Which has been great fun. It just… I guess my awareness of really bad painting in really bad provincial galleries all over Europe has come entirely out of this addiction. And it is an addiction. And I… I get withdrawal symptoms if I can’t look at something. And it needn’t be good. I just have to see something.

I went to The Courtauld Institute straight from school, quite by chance. In my last term at school, I had gone off to Oxford to sit some kind of examination and be interviewed by various people, as one did in those days. I don’t know what the system is now. And I found Oxford really rather terrifying. And I was given a place and I was going to read… I cannot now remember whether I was going to read History or English, or possibly both. But anyway, that’s what it was. And so by the end of my summer term at school, Oxford was the next step. And then in the post, one morning, very soon after, there was an envelope addressed to me, with nothing in it other than a syllabus of The Courtauld Institute. A sort of slim three or four pages thing in a green paper binding. And I read this and it was like receiving a gospel, you know. Here was something that absolutely fitted what I wanted to do, because although I had had a distinction in the History of Art in my Oxford examination, there was no way of being taught the History of Art at Oxford at that stage.
And so I got on my bicycle and cycled to The Courtauld Institute, which was then in Portman Square, and rang the bell and went in, and was allowed to see the… I can’t remember what his title was, but the man who decided these things. His name was Charles Clare, and he was one of those kindly men of a certain age who address you as 'dear boy', and he listened to me and he looked at my exam results and so on, and said, 'Well, dear boy, why don’t you come next term?' You know, 'Come to us in October'. And so I bolted straight home and told them what I was going to do, and in a way, it simplified things, because I live in London and here was an education in London. And it meant that the whole terrifying business of uprooting myself and going to live with lots of other boys of the same age in a quad didn’t have to happen. And I must say, every time I go to Oxford, and I was there quite recently, I thought, thank God that I didn’t have to come here. I would never have put up this damned silly ritual. Everything is ritualised, it seems to me. You have to do certain things and be in certain things, and belong to certain things. And I was given a boy as a runner to look after me, you know, see that I got… it was the Oxford Literary Festival, which had spread over the whole city. And I had to perform three times in three different places, and therefore I had to be looked after and not lost. And there was this boy looking after me, and I thought, yes, I could... exactly… you have to go in through this door, you have to go… no. Not for me.

So off I went to The Courtauld in October, and it was, I think, a disastrous step, because my education had so far been that of a schoolboy being taught by masters. And at The Courtauld, you were a student, you weren’t a schoolboy. And the most distinguished people in the discipline were there to give you lectures and seminars and so on. But you had somehow to do the rest yourself. And although I was not entirely ignorant of Art History, the level at which I knew was so far below the level that was expected of any Courtauld student, that I drifted. And there were other things to deal with. I was still thinking of… that I might want to be a musician, I might want to play a violin to earn my living. And you can’t do that unless you practice, so four hours a day of practicing on the fiddle didn’t actually help my studies.
And I stuck it for two years, and then there came the opportunity to really face what I knew to be true, which was that I had no business to be there. If I got a degree, it would be a pretty poor one, and I ought to go away and do a lot of private study to build up my knowledge and my experience. And we then had national service, and so the logical thing to do was break. So I told Charles Claire [sic] what I was going to do, that I was going to stop, that I would like to come back in two or three years’ time and start again, or from scratch, and I'd go and get my national service out of the way and hope to be a bit more grown up when I came back the second time. Which is exactly what I did.
So I’d wasted two years, well at least I thought I had, but in the event, there was some kind of residue, a really useful residue, which served me quite well in my second attempt to be a Courtauld student. The point about The Courtauld was that it was then such an adult place, and most of the other students had done their national service, or had even been in the army, or had come from Oxford and Cambridge and were simply taking a second degree.
And so at the age of 18 to 19, I was mixing with young men who were 24, 25, 26, and more. And you are much better educated when you are older, if you see what I mean. Your ability to understand what you’re being taught is much better when you’re well into your 20s than when you are a boy. A good education is wasted on a boy, as indeed most things are.

Being a Courtauld student is a full time job, or was. I don’t think it is any longer. Times change. And trying to continue with my violin meant that there really was no spare time for anything. It was one of the reasons why it was… Courtauld was not a good place to be, if you’re going to spend four hours a day practicing, because that four hours a day is much better spent gallivanting off to Dulwich or, you know, fairly local museum of paintings to see what is there. Because what you really need to do is add to your computer, as it were. You’re building up images, you’re learning more and more about painting all the time. More and more is coming into your head that you need to retain. And if you don’t actually go out and gather that stuff, if you don’t get on a train and go to Birmingham to see what’s there, if you don’t save up your pennies and take a weekend in Amsterdam to go and look at the Rijksmuseum or Paris at the Louvre and so on, you are impoverishing the whole of your education as an art historian, because you’re working entirely from books and photographs, which is not the same as looking at pictures.
So from that point of view, it was difficult, and I wasn’t getting enough intellectual nourishment from travelling and looking at museums and galleries elsewhere. As for any other enjoyment, well, there were occasional evenings at the opera, and my friendship with Alan Harverson, the organist, was still, sort of, very important for me, because he would occasionally whisk me off to listen to a recital or actually… he had a whole circle of organist friends, and anyone who was coming from France or Germany or America who was an organist, to give a recital, would connect with Alan. And Alan… I was always tagging along. And so I met people like Fernando Germani from St Peter's and Jeanne Demessieux from Notre Dame in Paris, and Virgil Fox from the cathedral in New York. And so on. So all these extraordinary people. And we’d go to… we went once, Jeanne Demessieux and Alan and I, we went off to Westminster Cathedral, the Roman Catholic cathedral, and played the organ far into the night. And it was marvellous, because she actually defeated the organ by having so many stops out, and it was my job to pull out the stops, so I was, sort of, pulling and then rushing around the back, pulling them out on that side, and then the whole thing just went [deflating sound] and didn’t have enough wind to go on. So, you know, there were memorable experiences of that kind that I thoroughly enjoyed and I’m glad I had. But they were rather irrelevant.

[Q] In art history, why is it so important to actually look at the actual paintings, and why can’t you learn all about it from books?
I think that’s the silliest question I’ve ever been asked, but on your side, you have art historians like Gombrich, for example. I’m absolutely convinced that Gombrich is an art historian who is much more interested in ideas than in art, and as long as he had an image of some kind, he could work with it. It might be an outline image of some classical sculpture, you know, and that’s enough for him. He didn’t need to have the classical sculpture. He could… all he needed from the Apollo Belvedere was the image. He didn’t need the experience. I’m sure he had the experience, but I’m not sure that it enriched his ideas about such things. Whereas my response, and I think the response of anybody who is a really… is interested in the art more perhaps than the idea, you need the paint on canvas. You need to see it. You need to be able to walk around a sculpture. If you are looking at Michelangelo’s David… I remember that Johannes Wilde, who was the greatest, the most marvellous of teachers at the Institute, always said, in his lectures, that it was like a high relief. And of course, as you walk into the Accademia in Florence, there it is at the far end, in the niche, and it does look like a high relief, because you only see its front. But when you get to it, there is something very subtle about the movement, the way the arm falls and the other one rises, and the tilt of the buttocks and the bending of the spine, that actually draws you round, and as you move round, you are drawn still further round, so you are walking around the back of the thing, you’re in the depth of the arch. And it is still exciting. You’re too close to it, but you are still aware of the movement that is inherent in this great chunk of marble. And so Michelangelo quite clearly meant it to be free-standing. He meant you to walk around it. It was never meant to stand in a niche, it was never meant to be up against a wall. And to me, it’s an example of where you have a really great teacher who is wrong.
But Gombrich would have been quite content with a head-on photograph, because that is the most influential view of the sculpture, and anyone who has translated that sculpture into an element in a painting, for example, has always taken that view. So in terms of the transmission of ideas, that view is all he needs. The actual experience of looking at it, doing what it’s instructing you to do… my belief is that every single work of art you look at has a viewpoint which is determined by the sculptor or the painter. If it’s a painting, the painting will tell you: stand here. The picture may be like that, but the painter… the spectator is meant to stand here, because the whole structure of the composition directs him to do so.
You have a piece of sculpture which doesn’t instruct you to move, so you will find that there is an ideal point from which it should be viewed. And then you will find many sculptures which actually compel you to circulate.

[Q] Would you have gone to the Rodin Museum in Paris and had a look at that, or…?
Well, lots of… we were a very small student body. There were only 12 new undergraduates in my year, and that was fairly standard. But there were students who, because they were that much older, and they been about a bit, had rather more money than I did. I was still managing on pocket money. And so they could do it. Bear in mind that it was infinitely cheaper. When I made my first journey of exploration to Italy, it cost £35 from the moment I left London to rather more than four weeks later... I came back. That’s what the traveling and the expenses cost, so you didn’t need that much money to, sort of, cross to Paris or Amsterdam or some other… you know. It seemed a huge adventure. I remember the one student who went to Madrid for a weekend, which seemed an absolutely unbelievable adventure, you know, and very brave and probably very expensive. Must have cost all of £10.
But if you’re not accustomed… this is soon after the War, when all sorts of prohibitions and restrictions have come into play. You can’t take enough money out of the country. Everything has to be measured and so on. And travelling hadn’t returned as something that people did. So to cross the Channel was something of an adventure. A great unknown, and possibly an expensive unknown. In the end, it wasn’t expensive at all.

Well, national service was, in my day, for two years. Two full years. And I think I went down to Aldershot, which was a kind of mustering station, on the 7th of September, 1952. I’d taken the precaution of going to have my hair cut before we went and so it was fairly short. I’d taken the precaution of not carrying my violin with me. My stepfather was quite certain that would be a terrible mistake. So I took his advice.
And got out of the train at Aldershot with a lot of other boys, and we were gathered outside the railway station and bundled into trucks. And the bullying began, there and then. You know, everything had to be done in a hurry. Everything had to be done at once. And I don’t suppose any of us had ever clambered into the back of a… unsupported, into the back of a three-tonne truck, but that is what we were expected to do. And the only thing that could help you was a rope which you had to grab and haul yourself up, but it meant that you… you know... and your very first day there, you barked your shins and your knees and everything was hard and cruel and uncomfortable. Then you got marched into a place where you had to take all your clothes off, you had to be looked at stark naked, and there you could easily tell the division between the boys who’d had public school educations and those who hadn’t, because the public school boys didn’t think twice about taking their clothes off, and all the others were very, sort of, ashamed and covering themselves with their hands and sort of... must I take my pants off? And so on.
And then we had our hair cut. Mine was already short, so it got cut shorter, because it’s part of the humiliating process. And then we very quickly realised that we had no will of our own, we had no purpose of our own. We were there to serve the general beastliness of non-commissioned officers. A lance corporal would be in charge of a platoon and he would bully you. He’d shriek and shout and spit, and... he’d be nose-to-nose, insulting you, and he did so because he pretended to be afraid of the full corporal, who would come in occasionally and would do it with even more beastliness.
So the next step up was the sergeant, who was worse still, and worst of all, would be the company sergeant major, and we had to endure all these abuses. But looking back on it, I realise perfectly well why it was like that.

I managed to develop, not a thick skin at all, but a kind of… well, something very useful, and I don’t really know how to describe it, but it’s like distancing yourself from something that is really deeply unpleasant, but going through it. This is an experience which I cannot avoid. I cannot walk away from it. Whatever happens, I have to go through it, so I will make it as easy for myself as I can. In other words, when this man is shouting at me and his face is purple and I’m getting his spittle all over my face, and he’s calling me a poofter and a God-knows-what, I’m fine. This isn’t really happening, this isn’t really important. It really isn’t important.
And the same thing happened with bayonet practice, because there you… and 50 yards away, you have a sack of straw hanging from a gallows, and you have your bayonet mounted on your rifle, and at a given moment your training officer, your lance corporal or corporal, whatever he may be, tells you, 'Go', and you go, and you’re supposed to go screaming, you know, screaming with a noise which is supposed to frighten the enemy. Your're not screaming with your own fright. And then you have to dig the bayonet into the thing, and then you have to pull it out again. And if you do it in the wrong place, because you think, you know, fool that you are, that you’re going for the ribcage, for the heart, but then it is demonstrated that by the time you’ve stuck your bayonet through the ribcage, you’re going to find it bloody difficult to get out again. Meanwhile, some Russian or German or Chinese or God-knows-what is going to shoot you. So you must stick it into the soft parts, because it comes out as quickly as it goes in. And we have to absorb all this and go along with it, and my rather active Christian background is saying, 'No, no, you can’t ever…' and my common sense is saying, 'You’re not really doing it. The time to have this argument with yourself is when you are actually doing it, not now'.
And that, I think, was my saving device for getting through whatever the army made me do: it isn’t really happening. It’s happening, I know. Here am I, on my knees, scraping the crystalline deposits of the urine of a hundred young men from this urinal with half a razor blade and bare hands. I am scraping. Of course I’m really doing it, and I’m going to do it really rather well, so that I don’t have to do it again. But it’s not important. It’s unpleasant, but it is not important. It doesn’t change my soul. It has nothing to do with me. So it’s not important, don’t worry about it. That, I think, is what got me through.

But there were always, I think, really rather valuable things to learn, because you were 21 boys in a barrack room, and you sleep together, and you eat together, and you bathe and shave and shit together. You have no privacy. You could occasionally hear other boys sobbing themselves to sleep. You could occasionally hear the regular creak of a boy who was bringing himself to orgasm, though most of us were far too exhausted to do that. You have no privacy. And some commissioned or non-commissioned officer will storm in at any moment and disrupt what peace and quiet you have in the evening, when you’re polishing your boots and your buckles, and blancoing your gaiters and other things.
And you will have terrible episodes when you’ve spent hours tidying your bed and learning to fold your blankets immaculately. Boxing your bed, I think it was called. No, boxing your blankets. You had to fold your blankets to exactly the same size within a millimetre, and then pile them on top of each other so that you had a box of blankets. That was a pain in the arse. And you really needed two people to do it. So the thing to do was to share with the man immediately beside you. You know, I’ll help you, you help me. And that extended to things like sewing on buttons. I had no difficulty sewing on buttons, so I could, as it were, exchange that skill for something which was less to my taste and abilities. And it was curious... you’d have a boy from a very working class background having a really dyed-in-the-wool attitude towards things like sewing on a button. If you could sew on a button, that’s women’s work, so you’re a poofter. All you can do is say, wait and see. You’ll have to do it in the end. You might as well start now. Get rid of your attitude. But there. Deeply uncomfortable, but actually very useful. In the end, it teaches you to endure anything. It also teaches you that you have something in your soul which is steely hard, and which will come to your rescue from time to time.

I moved on to Mons, which is the officer training unit, and had an officer there, a captain from the Glosters, who had been really rather routed, I suppose is the word, in Korea, and he had come home wounded. The Korean War was still on, and he… we were out on a manoeuvre one day, and we’d been out, I think, two or three days. And it had been pretty tough, and we were bivouacking for the night somewhere, and having to dig trenches and all the other things which you do.
I was sharing a trench with another boy, and just over there, there were two others. And I remember… I can’t remember his name, but he wandered around, this Glosters man, looking at what we were doing, just sort of saying virtually nothing. And then, at this neighbouring trench, after a moment or two of standing there with his hands on his hips, he said, 'Any fool can be uncomfortable', and walked away. And I thought that was brilliant. 'Any fool can be uncomfortable'. It said everything to both the two boys who were being commented on, but also to their neighbours. And the difference between us was that we had made ourselves reasonably comfortable, and the other two had chosen the wrong direction for the lie of the trench, and all the usual things that make things go wrong, so…
And of course, it’s true, any fool can be uncomfortable. You can always make yourself more comfortable than you might. And I mean, years later, and wandering around Turkey and occasionally having to spend the night in the open air or in a bus station or something like that, I would remember that captain in the Glosters and say, 'Well, any fool can be uncomfortable', and find some way of adapting my knapsack and whatever luggage I had to making myself comfortable. It was a well-learned lesson.

The very last thing that you could ever admit was that you were a poofter. People got called poofters who were… it was just an insult, really. It wasn’t an observation. It wasn’t an accurate identification. You know, if your hair was slightly long, or you tripped over your boots or something, you know, poofter would be as readily the word that came to people’s minds as any other. But the one thing you could never admit was that you were in the company of other boys whom you might want to fuck.
And of course, you played along with it. You pretended. So your conversation never betrayed you.
And I had a pigskin wallet, of which I was rather proud. It was a kind of pale, shiny thing, and I carried a condom in it. Condoms in… so long since I’ve seen a condom, I don’t know how they are now produced, but they used to be in tiny little square packets, and they were rolled in a ring. And I had this in my wallet, and the process of wear and tear... pulling it out of your pocket... this ring shape came through on the pigskin.  And people would say, 'What’s that?' And I’d say, 'That’s my French letter'. Which somehow convinced them that there I was, sort of, ready for any maiden who might throw herself at me. And so… so it, I don’t think, ever occurred to anybody that I was queer. There were temptations. They had to be resisted.

I remember once, I’d been commissioned by then, I was what they call 'duty dog' for a week, where a junior officer has to wander around the camp, sort of 24 hours a day for seven days. It’s usually a punishment for some kind of misdemeanour. My misdemeanour was modesty, but I will tell you about that later. Anyway, I was doing this, and I… you have to go into a barrack room and pull every lavatory chain and see that, you know… you have to test every door handle. It’s the most boring thing in the world. You have to check that the coal is correctly… we used to have to paint coal white. Well, that was a punishment, but it also meant that if anybody stole coal from the coal heap, to put in the stoves that heated the barrack rooms… in other words, you couldn’t go beyond your ration of coal because… unless you’ve got some white paint as well. So it was a precautionary measure. It may have sounded like idiocy, but it did prevent everybody from stealing coal. So when… how did I get there? Oh yes. And I went into a barrack room one day in the middle of the afternoon, and God knows where all the other boys were, but there was a bed. And a very narrow single bed, in which there were two boys entwined and fast asleep. And I thought, oh God, thank heavens it’s me that’s found you. So I tweaked the toe that was sticking out most prominently, and said, 'For God’s sake', you know, 'if you’re going to do that, then be more sensible about it'. And that was that.
But heaven knows what would have happened to those two if they’d been found by some militant corporal. There would have been all hell to pay.
No, you… there were people. There were regular officers of quite long standing who, looking back on it, were quite clearly queer. But whether they were doing anything about it or not, I don’t know. But certainly, as a National Service subaltern, you would have been a damned fool. Nobody would have given you any quarter on that. You would have been out. And disgraced. And everybody would know about it.

I’d been transferred from Aldershot to a new posting, and had the bog standard interview with a commanding officer, and sort of, you know, 'What are you going to do when you grow up?' and so on. And, 'What sort of games do you play?' And I said, 'Well, I used to play rugger at school'. 'Do you play well?' 'Not particularly'. End of topic. And about, oh, two or three weeks later, our battalion was in some kind of organised scheme of weekly rugger games with the navy and the air force in the more or less immediate area, and this was to be against the navy. And influenza or something had struck the team a bit, and the normal hooker, who is the man in the middle of the scrum, who has to get the ball out of the scrum... once it’s put in you hook it out, with, you know… He was too ill to play. And it had actually reached lunchtime on the day when the captain of the team let this slip over lunch. And I said, 'Well, if you’re desperate, I used to hook at school'. Oh, so there we are.
And I played hooker that afternoon. And we beat the navy and we beat them well, and I… it was a wonderful game, really, you know. There are… you know sometimes when you’ve had a game and it’s been a good game. It hasn’t been all one way, but you know you’ve done it. And I was off to change when some lance corporal appeared and he said, 'The commanding officer wants to see you'. I said, 'Oh, I’m just going to have a bath'. And he said, 'He wants to see you now'. And I said, 'Like this?' And he said, 'Yes, like that. He wants to see you immediately'. So I trundle off to the HQ, and into the commanding officer’s room I go. He said, 'You didn’t tell me the truth when I talked to you on your first day here'. He said, 'You told me you didn’t play rugby very well'. 'Oh. I was being modest'. He said, 'Well, modesty will get you nowhere. You will be duty dog for a week'.
So that’s how I know about being duty dog.
But it’s also another lesson, you know. You really… yes, I should have told him I played rugger quite well, but the other part of my background is to never boast, never push yourself forward. Always, sort of, wait for something to happen. Well, I waited for something to happen and it did, and I got punished for it. So, you know... what conclusions about life can one draw from that?

National service was one of those experiences that, in one particular, consolidates an interest. I mean, I was already interested, in a desultory way, in motorcars, because I thought they were beautiful to look at, but what the army gave me was the experience of driving and handling everything that moves on wheels. So I learned to ride a motorcycle, which I hugely enjoyed, but I also learned how to drive a tank. And a three-tonne lorry and jeeps and articulated lorries and so on. And so my later, almost scholarly, enthusiasm for motorcars was really consolidated and advanced by what the army gave me.
And of course one of the things the army had the potential to give every national serviceman who might come in as a, sort of, an uneducated and perhaps uneducable rogue, a thief living on his wits – we had those; we had to knock it out of them, as it were – was that, at the end of the two years, all the… no, I would say that only those boys who were so bloody-minded that they spent two years resenting the fact that they were doing national service came away from it without benefit. And that an enormous number of boys did their two years and learned some kind of trade. They may have learned to become drivers or electricians or typists or radio mechanics or whatever. There were all sorts of areas in the army where you didn’t just do soldiering. You weren’t the poor bloody infantry. And all those who were in the electrical and mechanical engineers, for example, would come out with an ability, a technical ability, that allowed them immediately to get a job. So it had an extraordinary effect on unemployment, because it took out of the unemployment figures... for two whole years, it took out every young man of 18 to 20 or thereabouts. And when it put him back into the employment pool, he was much more able to get employment than he had been two years earlier. It was a very considerable social good. We have nothing like it now.
I’m not suggesting we should reinstitute it, you’d never get anybody to obey the discipline. But at the time, it worked many a small miracle.

I went in on September 7th, and I came out on September 7th, two years later, which left me four weeks before I had to go to The Courtauld as a student again. But I went back to The Courtauld, not as a boy anymore, but as a young man. A young man who had been through the mill, to some extent, and had been given some sort of authority. And all sorts of odd bits of training. But who had also had, because this is another point about the army, you have a great deal of leisure and you often have leisure that you must find a use for, because it isn’t long enough to go home. You have 24 hours, 36 hours, 72 hours. It’s hardly worth going home. In some cases, you’d go home and have to turn around and come straight back again. So you find something else to do with it, and that means that you, in my case, it’s off to the nearest abbey or cathedral or the great country house, or the nearest museum or nearest gallery, so that this learning process that The Courtauld required was happening concurrently with the learning processes of military service. And that was of enormous value to me. My one regret, and again, it says something about the army. When you graduate, as it were, as an officer, or indeed as an ordinary serviceman, you have to fill in a posting application, which is a normal-sized form and it says, you know, list three postings in order of preference. And I hadn’t really learned my lesson at this stage, because what I did was to draw two parallel lines across the whole form and put, in capital letters, anywhere abroad.
So I was sent first to Aldershot, which is where I’d begun my army career, and then to Blandford, which is in Dorset. And what I should have said was, Germany or Cyprus or Malaya or whatever other station I might have… I quite fancied going to Aden. But again, you see, the army got its revenge.
Anywhere abroad, huh, we’ll show him. Do as you’re told. You know, do as you’re told, you might get what you want.

So back I went to The Courtauld, feeling much older and stronger and more able and more experienced, and I had, as it were, improved my small command of French and German while I was in the army, and so reading books in foreign languages was much less of a trial in the second stint.
The second stint was infinitely more rewarding. There was a girl called Jill Rigden. We were 12. One of the 12 was Jill Rigden, and she had been brought up in Persia. Her father was employed by the Anglo-Iranian oil company, and she’d been there through part of the war and so on. And she, like me, had floundered a bit on leaving school. She had wanted to be an artist and had wasted time going to an art school and so on, and had eventually concluded that she wasn’t remotely interested in painting and design and all the rest of it, but wanted to be an art historian. So she came at the same age as me to do… and we fitted together very well. We were a bloody-minded pair, because we knew what we wanted. The 12 was reduced to six at the end of the first year, so it was tough going. And six of them dropped out. So it then became incredibly intense, because your had all these tutors and professors who were there to teach you, but your class was reduced, sometimes to… you were the only one.
So everything you did was face-to-face. It wasn’t… you know, it was extraordinary, because I would never have survived it if I’d gone straight from school into that particular year, because it was incredibly intense and demanding. And at certain stages, I was having to produce an essay a week, as well as go to tutorials and early lectures and all the rest of it. And my work now, as an art critic, is for me exactly like being a Courtauld student again, because I produce an essay a week. I am forced to think about what I think I already know, or I am forced to find out what I think about something that I don’t know, which is very much what a Courtauld student was doing, except that I have no professor, no tutors to look after me. And I look at my reading public as my examiners. So I write for that public, and in the end, I am… the last 30 years of my life, I have been a permanent student. And it’s been wonderful.

For me, The Courtauld was almost a monkish experience. I went to The Courtauld really not at all sure what I was going to do with the degree, if and when I got it. And when I came away from The Courtauld, there was nothing I wanted to do except be an art historian in some sense. So it was, I think, as a result of that extraordinary concentration, unrelenting, that I became what I am. And it was… rather like your earlier question, what did I do for fun? There wasn’t any fun. Whatever fun there was was Courtauld fun. Fun was getting in the car – because I’d bought a car by then – and gallivanting off to look at a country house or a provincial museum or Dulwich, even, usually with two or three other students sharing the petrol costs and so on.
And in the very first, sort of, long break in the first year, at Easter, six of us crammed into a car and went off to Rome and took a month doing it. And in those days, of course, there were no motorways, and so you trundled along at 45 miles an hour and stopped whenever you saw anything that looked interesting, because roads, in those days, went through towns. Now roads just go through the countryside, you’re cut off from reality. Whereas if you’re going anywhere near Reims, for example, you used, in the old days, to have to go through it. So stopping to look at the cathedral was the automatic thing to do. And you could… you’re trundling along at this slow speed and look out of the window and you see something wonderful on a hill over, you… 'What’s that?' The hurried, sort of, inspection of the map and it’s identified as something. 'Oh, well let’s go, let’s go'. And so it was a very, very leisurely movement south, looking at things all the time. Not necessarily things that were part of our chosen syllabus, but we had that wonderful sense of curiosity, that everything was grist to our mill, that made sort of stopping to look at a wayside church well worthwhile. And we eventually got to Florence and we had extraordinary good fortune. You’d turn up in Florence and find an hotel which was run by a family called Bruggi, Familia Bruggi, and they had the first floor of what had been a palazzo in the Piazza Santa Maria Novella.
There were shops below, and you went through a rather little side door and up a staircase, and there on the first floor, was this pensione. And we were six, and they said, 'Oh, gosh, yes, well, how would you like to have our grande salone?' And they put four beds for the boys in the grande salone and put the two girls in a smaller room. And they all went and lived in the kitchen. And we had a lovely time, because we had these beautiful painted ceilings and frescoed walls, windows on to the piazza, a wonderful church with wonderful things in it, 50 yards away up the road and so on. Walked everywhere, saw everything. And one of the advantages of being in a small group of six, is that you can all exchange material, an idea, an observation and so on, and if you don’t all want to do the thing, you break up into pairs or trios and so on, and then come together elsewhere.
And we ate like mice and spent no money and drifted down to Bologna and Orvieto and Siena and so on. And then, on the way back, went to Venice and it was non-stop looking. But you can’t do that now. There is nowhere in Italy where you can turn up and just knock on a door, but you could, then. And I think this is a great shame. And it’s partly to do with motorways, and it’s partly to do with the enormous increase in traffic and tourism and so on.

In France, on the way down from Paris... arriving in Dijon on a Friday night and not being able to find a cheap hotel, but we did find a sort of office where they would put you in touch with a family in a house. And so we knock on the door of the house, six of us. And, 'Yes, yes, yes, that’s alright. Do you want to eat?' 'Yes, we would like to eat'.
And so we are shown into two rooms, two girls in one, the four boys in the other. The four boys are expected to sleep in one bed. One admittedly enormous bed, but nevertheless. And the ceiling up there has one very weak, sort of, 25-watt bulb, and you are moving around in the gloaming. And I remember looking above the bed and seeing a rather random pattern of what I thought were painted rosebuds and thinking, to myself, how charming. Then we all got into bed and slept for the night, and woke up in the morning. And they weren’t rosebuds at all, they were squashed bedbugs.
Dinner that night, as it was Friday and this was a good Catholic household, consisted of bread and lentil soup. And lentil soup is a very sort of farty diet. And so four boys in a bed farting was quite eventful. And then we had breakfast, and moved on. And gosh, you know, you don’t have experiences like that. Of course, we’d all got lice. The girls had got lice, too, from the bed. So by the time we arrived in Geneva, we were, all of us, itching like crazy, and... Jill had experienced lice before, so she knew what was going on. So Jill and I went into a Swiss chemist, and rather hesitantly explained, in our inadequate French, we didn’t know what… what is the French for a louse? And this very severe woman with her hair strained back and her rimless glasses, in perfect English, said, 'You have lice. You need this. Apply it generously'. So we all retired to our various places to apply this awful white liquid. Which was a killer. The lice didn’t have a chance. Nor did our genitals after that. It was terrible.
But I… you know, it’s experience. And I don’t think people get it anymore. I don’t know, I… what boys and girls do now on their gap year, I don’t know if having no real objective deprives them of what we had, which was this driving thing about looking and talking about what we were seeing. And I was very touched, the last time I was in the Uffizi, because there was a group of about half a dozen German boys and girls of 17 or thereabouts, in the great room where the big Botticelli’s are, and they had obviously come prepared to talk to each other. And so five of them would sit on a bench and one would stand up and talk about some aspect of painting. And I thought, that is absolutely brilliant, they are teaching each other. That is precisely what we did all those years ago: we taught each other. We shared our knowledge, we shared what we could see. And it’s such a help, because, well, you looked at that picture and you didn’t see the dog. And there would be… if there were half a dozen of us here, someone would talk about the dog and someone would then talk about dogs in art... and how important the dog is for Titian, for example, or van Dyck, or Velázquez, that without those dogs, the pictures don’t work. So you have to look at everything.

My first encounter with Venice was again with Jill. We arrived in Venice quite late in the afternoon, and we had to dump the car, or garage it, rather, and take out what luggage we felt we might need, and get on a boat. And somebody had that useful bit of advice that we should go first to the Giudecca, because if you were going to find somewhere cheap, we’d be more likely to find it there. And the Giudecca is the outlying island of the main part of Venice. So there we got off, and it was already evening.
And we were carrying everything we needed. We had no idea where we were going. And again, by an extraordinary stroke of luck, we found a flat, occupied by an Englishwoman who was, I think, desperately lonely and let rooms in order to have conversation. And so we had the run of her apartment, and she said, if you get up very early in the morning, you can get the ferry from Giudecca to the… well, pretty well to the Doge’s Palace, straight across, without having to pay for it, because it’s a workman’s ferry and it’s therefore free. 'If it’s after eight o’clock, you’ll have to pay'.
And so our days were fixed, as it were, by the free ferry on the way… after six o’clock on the way back. So we all got up very early in the morning, and arrived on the quay, the Molo, pretty well where the Doge’s palace comes down to… and got off there... ten past eight? Brilliant spring day... April, wonderful sunshine. And I said to Jill, 'Why don’t we go and have some chocolate somewhere?' And she said, 'Why?' And I said, 'Well, because my mother told me that drinking chocolate in Venice is like drinking chocolate nowhere else, and we haven’t had any breakfast. So let’s have some chocolate and a sticky bun or something'. The others didn’t want to do it. 'It'll cost a fortune', I remember one of them saying. And indeed it did, but we found a café almost immediately, with the water here, and the piazza just through there, and the city coming to life.
And we sat in the warm spring sunshine and had our chocolate, which is… it is molten chocolate. It is not a drink. It is, you know, it’s like lava from Vesuvius. It pours. Oh, it was wonderful! It was a kind of magic. And that’s how we began our day. We didn’t do it again, but it’s kind of stuck in my mind. When I was last in Venice… Jill is now dead, and I burst into tears – I’m doing it now – with the sort of fierceness of that memory. It sort of… it was… I can only describe it as a moment of pure unalloyed happiness, contentment, and never to be forgotten.
Having drunk our chocolate, we then trundled off to look at God knows what. But, you know, again, Venice was… there’s so much to see, and fortunately it’s all close together.

[Q] Were you in love with Jill?
No. I think if you can imagine a love in which there is no sexual element at all, then the answer is yes, but how can you… how can you be in love without sex? But I wasn’t interested in her sexually. That would have been a disaster, an absolute disaster. But she was a really good companion. Made that trip work for me. I think if Jill had not been there, our power, our resolve, our determination would have been very much reduced. Because I think there’s no doubt that the combination of Jill and me… oh God, we may have been insufferable, for all I know. But I think the others got out of it what they got possibly because we were there, and that they wouldn’t have got it if we hadn’t been there. We were energetic and purposeful and determined to a really difficult degree for other people to keep up.
On the other hand, you see, we… it suddenly… I remember, we were in Florence on Good Friday and everything closes. And we hadn’t exactly forgotten that it was Good Friday, but I think we were sort of suddenly taken by surprise that there was really nothing to do and nowhere to go. And so we bundled a sort of picnic together somehow and got in the car, drove out of Florence to somewhere that… we didn’t know where we were going, we were just going to find somewhere nice to spend the day, and we found a deserted farm and there was nobody there, and we parked the car and spent the day. And we read to each other. We’d all taken… we’d all agreed that we would take six books each, which meant that there was 36 books in the car, and so we would never run out of reading matter, because we were going to be away for about 36 days. And I’d taken Boccaccio... two volumes of Boccaccio stories and… oh, I’ve forgotten what else, but I remember particularly Boccaccio, because we sat down in this idyllic circumstance and nibbled and drank wine and nibbled some more, and read another Boccaccio story and so on, and had just an absolutely delectable day of reading stories and picnicking.
And then on the way back into Florence, we found a public swimming bath. And of course, none of us had anything, but that didn’t matter with your five lire or whatever it cost to get in, they actually gave you a bathing slip and a bathing cap. There didn’t seem to be a great deal of difference between them. And so we all went swimming afterwards. And that… I said, gosh, yes, well, you know, a great day.
So it wasn’t… I don’t think it was ever disagreeable. I can’t… I can only remember having one cross moment, which was with our only smoker, who was a boy called John Acton, and we had put quite a lot of luggage on the roof, on a roof rack, and it was the day we were leaving Florence, and therefore it had to be proper packing, and John was down on the pavement, and I was running up and down stairs with cases and bags and whatnot, because the packing… the packing was one of those things that had to be absolutely precise, or there was no room inside the car, because we had to have things on the floor and so on. And John was there with a cigarette in one hand and a suitcase in the other, sort of idly trying to lift the suitcase up on… all the way up on to the roof rack with one arm, and repeating this sort of damned silly gesture, banging the suitcase against the side of the car. And I said, 'For God’s sake, John, put that bloody cigarette down'. So… but I think that was the only cross moment. It’s certainly the only one I can remember.
[Q] It must have been quite some car, if there were six of you.
It was a Vauxhall Velox, Phase II.
[Q] Not a lot of room for six people, is it? Must have been three in the front, three in the back. Yes, three in the front. It had bench seating in the front.
Yes, it had a bench seat and a steering column gear change.
[Q]  Ah, yes. Yes. Who did most of the driving?
We were smaller in those days, I think. Well, that actually was quite good, because there were only… only three of us could drive. Jill could drive, I could, and there was an American boy called Alton Jenkins, who had done the equivalent of national service in America and had been in the navy and so on, and who was really sort of very calm and adult and beautiful. And so the three of us, sort of, we managed. I think if there had been six people wanting to drive, it would have been a bit fractious.

There was one particular thing in Venice that I wanted to see, and so indeed did Jill. Again, reverting to Johannes Wilde, that best of all teachers, he had spoken of Titian’s Assunta, which is a great altarpiece, arch-topped, of the assumption of the blessed Virgin Mary, and had said that no one should ever go to Venice without seeing this picture, not only in the morning, but in the late afternoon. Because it’s in the apse of a Gothic church with high Gothic windows, and the light comes in from one side, and then it comes in from the other side. And the light is an entirely different colour in the afternoon.
And I thought that encapsulates a lesson, a great lesson: that you should never make up your mind about any painting, or any building, for that matter, on seeing it once at one time of day, that one should always go back and see how it feels, or get up very early in the morning and see what it’s like in the cold dawn light.
And again, Jill and I swanned off to see it, well, rather more than twice, because it changed. It was an extraordinary picture. It changed from morning to afternoon.
And having picked up that hint, you then apply it elsewhere, and particularly to architecture, it’s hugely important, because the shadows get thrown in a completely contrary direction, and the thing does not look the same.

[Q] So you came back from that trip knowing a hell of a lot, really.
I think it was the most intense educational experience, and… because we had seen things from, sort of, Gothic architecture in northern France to Baroque and Renaissance architecture in Italy. And we had also, I think, had the actual experience of approaching Florence, and indeed other places, sufficiently slowly to take it in. You get on an aeroplane, you go [plane sound] and you’re down. Whereas if you’re tootling along at, sort of, twice bicycle speed, you come from off the old road to Bologna, and you go up a slight crest, and suddenly, over that crest, there is Florence in a sort of shallow bowl down below you. And it’s a revelation. It’s extraordinary. It’s heart-stopping, it’s so beautiful.
And again, it’s something that, if you see it in the morning, then the light is coming from over there, and if you see it in the evening, the light’s from here, and it’s entirely different.
And then you go around the other side of the bowl, to San Miniato, ostensibly to look at San Miniato al Monte the church there... Alberti church. And you get the light coming in a different direction, and you are looking in a different direction, anyway, because you’re looking north, and the whole thing has changed, and it’s magic. It’s magic to drive into Mantua from the south, through the lakes that lie to the south of the city, and gradually become aware, through the clouds of mosquitos, of the beautiful city on the other side of the water. Well, that’s… Orvieto. You’re approaching Orvieto, and there’s this wonderful thing up there on a hill, and you have to do a sort of corkscrew around the hill in order to… that kind of a… it gives you an insight into the siting of things, and how people must have felt when going to market in Orvieto in 1350. It felt, still, something like this.
But autostradas and motorways have really rather destroyed that. The aeroplane has completely done away with it, because there you are, you’re in a city, or you’re at the airport. You get in a coach and then you’re in the city. It’s not the same. And I wonder if it can ever be the same. The last time I was in Italy, I did deliberately take the old road from Bologna to Florence, just to go through that experience, but the old road is now so decayed, it’s not even signposted. You really have to look for it, otherwise you find yourself on the motorway and you’re there in half an hour, which is not the point. The point is to take your time. And I think that is one of the great losses that we now have to suffer, almost without realising it. You get to places too quickly.

In my first incarnation at The Courtauld, I didn’t see anything much of Anthony Blunt. In the second, I saw a great deal of him. I was specialising in the 17th century, and quite a lot of the 17th century means dealing with people like Claude and Poussin and with French architecture, Mansart with his particular enthusiasm.
And he taught with such clarity. There were the two… the two great men there were Johannes Wilde and Anthony. And they both had a capacity for distilling all the available knowledge and producing it. And you’d come away with... from Johannes, with an absolutely clear picture of the development of Rembrandt or Rubens or Michelangelo. You would… you didn’t know everything, but you knew everything that was important to know, of immediate value. And Anthony was, to some extent, the same. The material was distilled, but it wasn’t the final distillation. It was never the final distillation. There was always something more to be discovered, to be identified, to affect. And it might be something which had nothing to do with the subject, but which was philosophical or scientific or mathematical or something, but then, because that was happening over there in that discipline, it was having an effect on the discipline of art history. And so you could, even as a student, have an idea about something, which had not been published by anybody else. And you could produce it at a tutorial, or in the middle of reading an essay or whatever. And I remember once having an idea about Mansart, the interpretation of one of his town square designs. And he said, 'My God, I think you’re right'. And he sprang from his chair and went over at the other end of the room, hauling 17th century books of ground plans and elevations and so on off the shelves. And the only place to put them was on the floor. And so he was on the floor, I was on the floor, the other students were on the floor. We were all turning pages and, sort of, trying to prove a point. And he said, 'You’re absolutely right, you must publish this. Sort of knock some sort of sense into it, and I’ll see that it gets into the Burlington magazine'. And that was a mark of his generosity and his honesty, because I know an awful lot of academics who would simply have swallowed that idea and then regurgitated it a year or two later as their own, but never Anthony. He was always, always trying to push students into being their own man, as it were. And so he was… well, they were both inspiring, in their way. Their ways were different, and I’m very glad I had that sort of experience.
[Q]  And were you close friends with both of them, as well as a pupil, or…?
You couldn’t be a close friend of Johannes. Johannes was so eminent. And Johannes had friends of his own generation. And, you know, you were dealing with a man who is 50 years older than you. You don’t make friends. You venerate, you adore, you respect. And you love, in a funny kind of way. You love in a way that is entirely giving, because he is so good and so great.
Anthony, there was no friendship while he was my tutor. The friendship developed very quickly after I’d graduated. For Anthony to have been a friend of a student would, I think, have made things difficult and led to all sorts of insinuations. But once I’d graduated, once I was free of being a student, then we kind of got on very well and very warmly.

Under Anthony Blunt, The Courtauld rose from, let us say, nothing, an academic joke when the war came to an end in 1945, within five years or so, into being the most esteemed home of art history. Not only in England, where there were no rivals, but in the whole world. There was nothing like it. It was an extraordinary achievement as director to change it from what had been regarded by lots of people as a, sort of, rather flighty finishing school, into something which was profoundly serious and profoundly academic and better than anywhere else. Students from France and Germany and Italy came to it because it was the best place in Europe. Students from America came to it because it was renowned. And The Courtauld proved to be the breeding ground of a whole generation of really first-class, impeccable art historians and administrators, you know, people who look after museums and galleries and so on. Quite extraordinary to have achieved so much so quickly, and then to have sustained it for so long, because he… I’ve forgotten when he retired, but it was sometime in the mid-'70s, and so he’d had 20 years of sustaining The Courtauld Institute right at the peak of the discipline. And of course, once he’d gone, it immediately began to slip and even slide.
One means by which he achieved this, I think, was in having such a range of contacts amongst European art historians that none of them passed through London without coming to the Institute to give a lecture. And sometimes they had no command of English, and so they lectured in whatever their language was, and we might then be given a precis in English, hurriedly produced by Anthony or Johannes a day or two later, though we picked up what we could. But it meant that we had a kind of nodding acquaintance with every great art historian. And some of us moved on to the Warburg, which is associated academic institute, much more interested in ideas than in the art on which the ideas are based. And there were professors who were going there, too, from… to use the extraordinary library. And they, too, came to The Courtauld. So we were always being given these exciting gifts of scholarship from other sources. And sometimes, as with those of us who were studying 17th century Dutch painting, a really important professor like Gaston and van Gelder, would be asked to come and stay for a week, and give us tutorial after tutorial on the subject. And so I know of no other academic… no other university which could have done that. It was entirely because of the international fame of Johannes and the fame that Anthony attracted by being so good at his job. It’s never been the same since. You know, it’s almost measurable in its decline. It isn’t what it was. But there’s nothing else, nothing has replaced it.

Well, Michael Hirst went on to be the new great Michelangelo scholar. John Shearman, who ended up in Princeton, became the great Raphael scholar, and not only Raphael or Michelangelo, but all the whole circle around those great figures. There are several who might aspire to have taken on Titian. Juliet Wilson-Bareau is the person to go with Goya. Wendy Baron is the Sickert expert without rival and so on. So many of them have turned out to be the great expert.
And I think that is… that, in a way, is another measure of The Courtauld’s greatness, that it produced so many people who have lasted for half a century as the expert.

Well, what happened next was that I took finals, and immediately after… and it was immediately after my viva, Anthony followed me out of the room and said, 'You have to do research. You have to go for a PhD'. And I said, 'I’ve made no preparation for this. I haven’t applied for a grant, I haven’t any money, I don’t know how I can do it'. And so the next thing that I found myself doing was working at Windsor on the Royal Collection of old master drawings and architectural drawings. And that was an extraordinary experience, because there you are with masterpieces in boxes. Gosh. You know. Another very rapid learning experience. And I slogged on with that for a couple of months, and then the Royal Academy was having a Winter Exhibition that year, opening in January, of 17th century French painting, which had been very much my… one of my areas. And they needed someone who could translate the catalogue from French and add various bits and pieces to it, like biographies of painters and whatnot. And so I was given that job, and the man who was responsible for the exhibition was called Michel Laclotte, who worked at the Louvre, and eventually became a man of enormous distinction in French art politics. And Michel and I got on very well together, and we had three months of a very, sort of, intense relationship over the catalogue and the hanging, eventually, of the paintings and so on.
And that was a formidably useful experience. And then I went back to Windsor and did some more on drawings. And then I heard from the British Council. They rang up and said, there’s a Council of Europe exhibition to which we have to send various things. And would you like to do the catalogue for us? And so I did. And so there was yet more experience of an international exhibition, and all the problems that go with it. And then I went back to Windsor. And then there was… Anthony said, 'I’ve heard from Christie’s that they want an expert on old master drawings. How would it be for you to go and work there for a couple of years and save some money and then do the doctorate?' And that seemed rather a good idea.
And so I got the job, and then I really got stuck in it. It seemed somehow immoral to go there and do the work that they required from me, which eventually turned out to be much more than I expected, over a much wider range. But also, you develop loyalties, and loyalties very often get in the way. And there were moments when I should have resigned. There were moments when I could have said, 'I don’t want to go on with this'. But I didn’t. And in the end, I stuck there for ten years, and then there was a crunch and I really did have to leave.
One of the directors made it impossible to stay, and he was the director who was immediately in charge of everything I did. And so I left.

In putting an exhibition together, your very first thing is your list of desirable loans. So you have that list. This is perfection. And then you find that something which is really rather crucial to perhaps the internal argument of the exhibition, can’t be borrowed. It may be promised to some other exhibition, it may be in too fragile a condition to travel. And so you can’t have it, so you have to find something else. And that means you’re really back... sort of, going through all the possibilities of… we want a picture which demonstrates precisely the same thing.  Where are we going to find it? This museum, that museum? You have to know something about the alternatives. You then have to find out whether the alternatives themselves are going to be possible. And you might… and it does happen. You might get not only the first refusal, but a second and a third and a fourth refusal. So you end up with a picture, if you’re determined to follow this argument through, you may end up with a picture that you’ve never seen.
And I will give you an example, not one in which I was involved, but there was an exhibition at the Royal Academy some donkey’s years ago, to which a picture from São Paulo in Brazil was sent. And I said, for God’s sake, why did you ask for that heap of rubbish? It must have cost a fortune to get it here, and it’s in appalling condition. And of course it transpired that precisely the process I’ve just described had been gone through and the last thing that they thought would demonstrate the point was the picture that they knew only from reproductions or photographs. And, of course, it was a disaster when it arrived. But they had to put it in, because it was the logical sort of chink in the argument, that this picture could fill.
So that’s one thing. Another… you learn from working on an international exhibition that there are problems in translation.

I’ll give you an example of what happened with the European Rococo exhibition in Munich in 1958. The editor of the catalogue could not speak or read English, but I had to send my catalogue entries to him in English and I also had to translate all the other entries which had been sent in various languages to him, and had been translated into German.
I had to translate the German into English, so that something that had a French entry was at the risk of mistranslation into German, and then at the risk of rather mistranslation into English by me. So you actually had to go back to basic to check that you’re not compounding errors. My misfortune was that he couldn’t edit my entries until he had had them translated into German, which was done. And then they lost the original English papers from me. And instead of telephoning and saying, can you send us a duplicate, because I had a duplicate, they translated them into German. With errors... with absolutely ghastly errors. So there is a language problem when you are dealing with an exhibition of that kind.

Then there are personalities, and German personalities in an exhibition tend to be rather dour and earnest and academic. Italians tend to get very excitable. The French are absolutely insufferable. Posses of French experts and critics and God knows what arrive, all dressed for the part, you know. They have immaculate clothing. They wave their [unclear] about and they’re gesticulating. They demand to be given lunch and all the rest of it. And they are insulting in a way that Englishmen never are, and so on. And all these things have to be endured.
I was working on the… for Michel Laclotte. He said, 'We are sending various things over to the Tate for an exhibition of romantic art'. And one of the things was the great Delacroix of The Massacre at Chios. And I had to go to the Tate and watch it being unpacked, this huge picture. And when I got to the Tate, there was a case which was about nine feet long, but only about 18 inches square.
And they had taken it off the stretcher and rolled it and then it was to be put back on the stretcher. The stretcher and the frame had also come, had been dismantled. So all these three constituent parts had to be… just put together again. But as they opened the box containing the painting, which is the most important part of this, it became clear that, instead of screwing the lid of the box down, they had nailed it. They had used long wire nails, which had gone through the lid and then curved. Instead of going down through the wall of the box, it had curved into the picture. And when we flattened the picture, it was not quite like lavatory paper, with perforations running down, but there were lines of punctures where these nails had gone through the canvas. So there were urgent telephone calls. You know, shall we arrange to restore it? Anyway, the Louvre restorer came over. And that was an education in itself, because their… he wasn’t in the least abashed by this damage that had been caused by his own technicians, but was sort of plugging each of these holes with wax and then putting a little dab of paint on top and camouflaged them, quite invisible. But you can imagine the horror of realising what had happened, of the nail going through several layers of canvas before it finally came to rest.
So those are the sort of experiences you get. And of course, if you are dealing with a picture like the Brazil picture, which turned out to be irrelevant rubbish, you may find that having worked from only photographs, that the picture isn’t the original picture at all, it’s a replica. It may not even be from the studio. And that upsets all your catalogue entries and everything you’ve said about it, and you have to do a considerable amount of adjustment. You have to dance to that particular disaster, because if you don’t, you’ve got a picture which you aren’t putting on view. Then you have to explain that to the people who lent it. 'Why aren’t you showing our picture?' 'We decided it was a copy'. Ahhh. You know.
You still see these things happen, because in the Leonardo exhibition last… not this winter past, but the one before, the Leonardo of the Virgin with the Christ child at the breast, the Madonna Litta, is not by Leonardo. But the entry had been written by the… the catalogue entry… had been written by the curator of the Hermitage. And nothing could be done. Putting that picture with all the others made it perfectly clear that it is not by Leonardo, but you could not… if you were to retain the picture in the exhibition… the curator demanded that the entry stand as she had written it. In other words, this is a genuine… so you have a terrible error of connoisseurship perpetuated in the very catalogue that should undo that error. How do you deal with it? It was important that everybody should see the picture. In the end, it was decided that it was more important to see the picture than to have the argument out in public about its genuineness or otherwise.

[Q] So what is it to be an old master drawing expert at Christie’s? That job you had?
Well, old master drawing master expert sounds rather highfalutin. You can’t be a drawings expert if you’re not also a paintings expert, because the drawing very often leads to a painting. Very few drawings stand in their own right. They are for something. So if you look at a painting… and this is why it’s so important to have this huge visual memory, because you’ll see a drawing and you need to be able to say, oh, that looks like the left-hand figure in the Adoration of the Magi by Guatieri [sic] or somebody. And then you need to go and look it up. And sometimes you know that a picture must exist somewhere because of the nature of the drawing or drawings, and you’re standing in the vaults below Christie’s, and you’re going through picture after picture after picture, and suddenly something comes out of the stack, and ah! You know. You’ve recognised it, because you already knew the drawing. Because the drawing… the drawing is of a quality that tells you that this must be for a work of art that you do not yet know.
And in my day, more than half a century ago, Christie’s and Sotheby’s were treasure troves of discovery. All sorts of things passing were through their hands. And so you needed somebody like me, who had the visual memory that was really enormous, over a very wide range... deep as well as ranging, who could just relate things to each other.
And that was the great joy of being there. You were, in fact, identifying things all the time. And sometimes you didn’t know, but you had an idea that this might be the case, in which case, off you go to The Courtauld and you use the photograph library there, to either confirm or deny what your connoisseurship is telling you.
That’s… it’s a very practical kind of art history. It’s an essential part. It isn’t the detail of art history… well, it is the detail, in fact, because what you’re doing is filling gaps. You find something which is… which fits perfectly between this picture of 1550 and this picture of 1554. So you can slot it in. So you are actually contributing to the fine detail of the history of art when you do this kind of identification. And sometimes what you do is you have the drawing and the picture is in Brunswick and so you then write to Brunswick and say, here is the drawing, so that their archives are kept up to date with… they may not be able to afford the drawing, they may not want to buy it, anyway, but at least they know they have a photograph of it and they know what it is and where it is. That kind of thing. So you’re drawing things together all the time, and that I… that was really rewarding, because although the business of the auction house was essentially to sell things and make money, you know, you made money for the owners and took 10%, that’s how it ran, the real business for me was doing this kind of drawing together and filling in the jigsaw, and that’s a huge intellectual… it’s also an emotional reward, a real sense of having done something worth doing, when you put things together like that, and everybody’s knowledge is that much more precise and complete.

One of the things you learn in a position like that is what you loosely call connoisseurship. It’s being able to tell not only this painter from that painter, but is this genuine or is this being concocted by some forger somewhere?
And quite often, I used to get… I still am irritated by people who say, but how could you know? Because if you know, you know in exactly the same way as standing in front of a greengrocer’s shop and you know an apple from an orange. It’s as clear as that. You know, if you want it in detail, this is the wrong paper, it’s the wrong ink, there is… he’s using a reed pen instead of another pen, whatever. It’s the wrong medium. Ultimately, it boils down to the thing that it just doesn’t ring true. And I sometimes make the remark that nobody seems to understand, which is that, in some peculiar way, your stomach is telling you that this is wrong. There is something nauseating about it. It’s a visceral reaction to it. It’s not right.
Technically, you can usually find a technical reason. It’s much more difficult with paper... with a drawing than it is with a painting, because with a painting, you can take a paint sample from it and scientifically examine it and see whether it’s the right yellow or whatever, and this business of things on panels, where you can look at the panel and tell where the wood came from and when, and even from which tree it came off, it came from the same tree as another picture somewhere else, which is fine. Right, yes, yes, yes, you can do that. A drawing is more difficult, because if you’ve got paper of the right age, then the forger is off to a good start. But mostly, the beginning of the argument about genuineness or otherwise starts with a plain, straightforward reaction to it. That’s not right. And everything that you know about this particular painter tells you that this is not right. And then you set out to prove that it is or it isn’t.
[Q] You have to know alot to have that stomach [unclear], don't you? 
Well, you have to know a lot, but then so doctors have to know a lot. Scientists have to know a lot, mathematicians have to know a lot. It’s my kind of mathematics, put it that way. You know, I don’t find it difficult. I can’t add two and two together. I daresay the average mathematician would look at a painting quite blindly and have no reaction to it at all. You know, we all have brains that are useful for a particular purpose.

Yes, there is a wonderful moment of excitement in looking at something that purports to be Rubens and it isn’t a Rubens, and it isn’t a Rubens, because it’s a copy by Delacroix, because Delacroix has made subtle alterations and so on. It tells you so much about Delacroix. It might not tell you anything about Rubens. And it’s only the surface of it, the subject that has given you the misleading thought that it is Rubens.
I have a little painting, of which I’m very fond, by Matthew Smith, and it’s after Delacroix, so it does exactly the same thing. It tells me so much more about Matthew Smith than it does about Delacroix. There’s a painting there which is a copy of Ribera, by Glyn Philpott, and it’s a very instructive little thing about Philpott, and you look at it and you say, but this is a Ribera composition, this is Ribera colour and so on, but it’s not Ribera’s scale and it can’t possibly be Ribera, it… just look at it. And then you have to do this… and sometimes it’s the most difficult work in the world to… when you have one really good painter working on another really good painter, because the qualities of both are coming into play and lending confusion. Then you need some kind of proof, which will be either documentary or a letter recording something, or, as in the case of the Philpott, there’s an inscription on the back... his signature.
So no, that’s… but that’s an entirely different matter from the forger who is setting out to deceive.

[Q] So there are forgers who could… who can draw like Goya, say. They can produce… well, they can’t… you told me they can’t produce a Goya, but they can produce a Goya that would fool a lot of people. I mean, they can do…
There are, of course, forgers who fool a lot of people, but it’s a very complicated business, because there are a lot of people who want to be fooled. There are a lot of people who want to discover another Rembrandt drawing. He’s the man who found the Rembrandt drawing, you know. It’s a kind of… if you find a genuine Rembrandt drawing of enormous importance, you become associated with it, and it makes you important, because it is important. It’s the problem with the Dürer in the National Gallery. It’s not by Dürer and we’re all beginning to come round to the fact that it’s not by Dürer. It’s not a forgery, but it’s a mistaken attribution. But the little Madonna of the Pinks, supposedly by Raphael, again in the National Gallery. It’s so exciting to have identified an important early Raphael. All those involved in this discovery and identification are sort of preening themselves with the excitement of it. And then the sceptic comes along and says, 'But where does it fit? You say this is 1504, well, this is what he was doing in 1503'. This is what he was doing in 1505. How does it fit?' You know, they don’t want to know. And then gradually another person comes along and asks the same question. I simply cannot fit this in. And another and another. And ten years have passed, and there’s now a considerable degree of scepticism about that picture.
That’s when it takes time, because so many… if you have enough really eminent people going along with it, happy to be deluded, it’s much more difficult to knock it off its perch. But eventually, it will tumble from its perch, because people who are not involved in the discovery can be very much less… very much more dispassionate about it.

Well Christie’s was a curious place to work for, because it was what used to be known as a partnership, and the directors actually owned the business. They weren’t appointed by shareholders. They had a percentage of the shares. It was all very simply done. There were 100 shares and about eight directors, who had anything from, sort of, 15 or 16% down to 1%. But in order to be a director, you had to have a share. And in order to have a share, if you were appointed or wished to become a director, you had somehow to persuade other directors to part with a share or a part of a share. So you might… somebody might end up with 17.5, having promised that he would give you, or sell you, his half of one share. And this meant that you couldn’t really rise through the firm. You could go in as some kind of dogsbody, clerk or whatever and do the arithmetic, the accounts and whatnot, and be frightfully efficient. But you would never get anywhere else unless the company secretary resigned, and then there would be a post, or the company auditors and so on.
And of course, in the picture department, or the picture and drawings department, we had a director called Patrick Lindsay, who was the son of Lord Crawford, who ran things like the National Art Collections Fund and was the trustee of this, that and the other thing, and hugely important in the art world. And Patrick thought that he, simply by inheritance and association, was equally important and equally gifted and so on. In fact, Patrick knew absolutely nothing about anything. He had no eye for quality and was exceedingly difficult to work for, because he was the kind of young man… he was only four years older than me, but with his kind of background, he felt that it was perfectly possible to wander into the great houses of the land and say, 'Oh yes, of course, that’s by Caravaggio and of course that’s by Van Dyck'.  And did so. And having then given an attribution which was entirely wrong, would give a valuation which was also entirely wrong. And he’d come in on a Monday morning, having spent the weekend somewhere, saying, 'Oh, Lord So-and-So is sending his Rubens for sale. I’ve told him we’ll put it in the...' whichever sale it is. 'We ought to catalogue it immediately it arrives. It will… let me know when it comes'. And the picture would arrive and I’d look at it and say, 'Oh God, this is not by Rubens', you know.
And then Patrick would come down and say, 'Well, I’ve told him it’s by Rubens, so you’ve got to catalogue it as by Rubens'. Which of course was not what I was there for. I was there to say this is by Rubens or it isn’t by Rubens, not to tell a convenient lie for him. And it always meant that I had to go and get hold of somebody whom Patrick did respect in terms of expertise and knowledge and say, 'Will you come and look at this Rubens and express an opinion?' And then I could go to him and say, 'Professor So-and-So or Doctor Such-and-Such says that the picture is not by Rubens. With a stroke of luck, it’s by a minor follower, and it isn’t, you know… what do you want me to do with it now? You told Lord So-and-So'... and leave him to extricate himself... part of the procedure to which I was never privy. But that was exceedingly irksome. And occasionally, he got us into such difficulties that only by the chairman of the board driving down to talk to the Marquis or the Duke or the whatever, could you actually remedy the situation, because the… and then the situation was slightly ridiculous.

I remember arriving at the office at nine o’clock, which was the time I was supposed to arrive, one morning, and Peter Chance, who was the chairman, was sort of really hopping at the top of the main stairs where my office was. And said, 'Oh, thank God you’ve arrived. We’ve got to go down and see So-and-So, the Bentley’s outside'. So we drive hell-for-leather into Somerset and arrive at the house, and the situation is explained to me that Patrick has been there, has valued the van Dycks at proper van Dyck levels, but the earl or duke or whatever knows perfectly well that these are substitute pictures, that the originals were sold to Duveen in 1902, and these are copies, which Duveen supplied so that nobody would know that the pictures had been sold. And so we were caught out. You know, Patrick was caught out, and…But the man himself was in a rage about it, because he felt that he’d been deceived and perhaps nothing else that Patrick said about anything at the house was of any truth.
And so we arrive. We look at the pictures, they were quite clearly early 20th century canvasses. Early 20th century, we can tell that immediately. And they’re perfectly good replicas, but they have no standing. They’re not even School of van Dyck, they’re centuries later. And so we have the duke and you have the chairman and you have me, the smallest of the three by far, in front of the pictures, and I explain to the chairman that these are really very expert copies and I knew Duveen’s copyist was a man called Pierre Colette [sic] and Colette used to tell all sorts of stories about the stuff that he had faked, and that they were the best of their kind and it had been really perfectly reasonable of Patrick, not knowing the background, seeing them hanging on the wall in normal circumstances and so on, to mistake them for the real thing, which was what Colette intended when he faked them. So you really can’t blame Patrick.
The chairman then turned to the duke, who’d heard all this, and repeated, because there’s a kind of protocol, where I, the minion of absolutely no importance, but the one who knows, cannot speak to the grandee. It has to go through the chairman. And so we have this tripartite conversation. Duke talks to the chairman, chairman talks to me, I talk to chairman, chairman talks to duke. Never the duke and I talking to each other. And that sums up the sort of relic of the class system that obtained in the art world in the early '60s. And it really was… it was ludicrous enough to be bearable.

And Sotheby’s, for that matter. Sotheby’s did it with Bruce Chatwin, Christie’s did it with me. Pretty young men, whom they suspected were homosexual, who could be sent off to scout for a weekend. When… and the chairman was at Eton. The chairman knew which of his peers at Eton was queer, and so if one of them rang up and said, 'Oh, I need someone to come and look at my pictures', they wouldn’t send Patrick, but they would send me. And there would then perhaps be an attempt at flirtation. And I remember one occasion... which I had gone to bed, and I woke up and found his lordship sitting on the end of it. And actually, we were expected to sell our souls for the firm. So it wasn’t exactly plain sailing. And then, my real reason for leaving Christie’s was that I’d reached the point where I was the old master drawings expert in the house. There was nobody else who knew as much as I did. And Patrick was still my titular superior, and I’d gone to America and, I think, secured a very important collection for sale by an old man who happened to be Jewish. And I’d spent a week going through his drawings, every day I had spent with this old man, and we had discussed everything in detail. We had fixed every reserve price, every estimated price on everything. We got it absolutely tied up.
Then, on the last morning, I was leaving for London later that day, and that last morning... He was a judge, and he’d judged it very well, because he said, 'And now, what are the terms?' And I said, 'Oh, we charge 10% on whatever figure is reached at the auction'. And he said, 'No you don’t, not for me. I’m giving you a whole sale. It’s a complete collection. There are enough pictures here, enough drawings here, to fill a whole sale. So your costs will be much lower, the prestige of selling my collection is worth something, so I don’t intend to give you 10%'. And I said, 'Well, I’m afraid I can’t discuss this'. 'Why not?' I said, 'Well, I’m not a director and only…' and I got no further. I didn’t… he shouted at me, 'Do you mean to say Christie’s have had the impertinence to send me somebody who is not a director and who cannot discuss terms?' I said, 'Well, I can go back to London and discuss terms with a director'. 'That’s not good enough, I want to settle it now. You’ve been here for a week. I’ve fed and watered you, shown you everything, confided in you. And no, I… no'. And that was very difficult.
I flew back to London that night, and went straight to Patrick the following morning and explained the situation and said, I thought that he ought to get on an aeroplane and go straight to New York and secure the collection before it got turned over to Sotheby’s or anybody else.  And Patrick said,' I’m buggered if I’m going to fly to New York for the convenience of some old Jew'.
So I then went to the chairman and said, 'I’m sorry, this is very difficult, but this is what happened, this is Patrick’s response. And the best he is going to do is pick up the telephone, and I think it needs something better than that. I think it needs the presence of somebody who really is a director and can make, you know, concessions'. And I don’t know what happened, but all that the chairman said was, 'Leave it with me'. Nobody did go, and Sotheby’s got the sale.
And that told me that all my knowledge, all my expertise, all my experience, counted for nothing.

And then there was another similar experience before the end of the year, and which tipped me into actually going to Peter Chance and saying, 'You know, twice since I came to the firm, you have told me that sooner or later I will be a director, and I think the time has come. I’m… you know, I need to take over the drawings, lock, stock and barrel. To do that, I need to be a director. Otherwise, we shall lose more and more. You know, Patrick’s attitude to drawings as a commodity is pretty brutal, but the way he treats people and he treats the rest of the marketplace, no. It won’t do'. Which meant that they had to have a debate at some board meeting a week or two later. And it was generally agreed that it would be a good thing for me to be a director, but it had to be agreed by all the others, all the partners. And Patrick just said, 'We’ve got one homosexual on the board, we don’t need two'.
So David Carritt, who was the other homosexual, was appalled by this. I mean, it is so irrational. And he came and told me immediately what had happened at the board meeting, and said, 'I don’t think you’re going to get through'. And this is what happened. And then I was called in by Peter Chance, the chairman, who told me in rather gentler terms. And I said, 'It’s Patrick, isn’t it?' And he said, 'Yes, I’m afraid so. I can’t budge him'. And so I said, 'Well, in that case, I’ve still quite a lot of work to do on the Devonshire collection. I’d been doing a valuation and a, sort of, inventory. I will leave when I’ve finished it. I won’t ditch you now, I mean, there are two or three months of work still to be done. But when I’ve done that, I’ll go'.
And over the next couple of months, he was constantly poking his head around the door and saying, 'Come and have lunch'. And always the conversation was, 'You don’t really have to go. You don’t really have to go. We might manage something in two or three years'. To which my answer was, 'No, I need it now. I can’t go on in this humiliating position. So you either have to reverse Patrick’s view of it, or I have to go. I cannot continue to work under him'.
And so Patrick wouldn’t budge, so I left. And that’s how my Christie career… otherwise I’d have been in Christie’s forever, you know. I was astonishingly loyal to that firm. It was… you know, it was what I did, as it were, by then. It… I couldn’t really think of going anywhere else. What I discovered, of course, when I left Christie’s, was that the academic field was closed to me, because at that… it doesn’t work like it now, but in those days, if you had worked for a dealer or an auction house, that was the end of you as far as academe was concerned. You couldn’t go into it. Your knowledge was soiled by Mammon, which is a totally ridiculous attitude, because if you look at people nowadays who are in the drawings field, like Noël Annesley at Christie’s, my successor. Noël is at least as much a scholar as he is an auctioneer.
And that is precisely what I was, though nobody recognised it. Nobody recognised the scholarship, but the scholarship was there. And no museum man ever has the opportunity for testing his knowledge and his connoisseurship that the man in the auction house has, because that sort of material just doesn’t come his way. So the range of knowledge that I had, as well as the depth, was hugely important. And it’s really been wasted, I mean, apart from finding drawings for the museums that took me on board as an advisor and helping to form one really significant private collection, my knowledge has been wasted. Five years later, it would have been very different.

I was very angry. I was wounded. There was… and I’ve never… When I was buying and selling things to pay my bills, I never deserted Christie’s. Christie’s was where I sold things, I didn’t go to Sotheby’s, but I could so easily have done. But my loyalty to the firm as a whole did not die. But I… you know, I did feel wounded. However, my leaving was the making of the career of Noël Annesley, so at least somebody came out of the situation with some benefit.
[Q] But it was also making of the career for which we all know and love you, isn’t it?
That may be, that moving from the backwaters of the art market into very public criticism in a newspaper may have turned me into a public figure, but it’s not… being a public figure is something that in no way attracts me. I don’t see myself as a public figure or any… or one with influence. Well, I know perfectly well I have no influence, because I… but there we are, that’s another problem.
As a critic, you can’t be as outspoken as I am and expect to be part of the establishment.

Why am I outspoken? I don’t know. I think it goes back a very long way. My childhood and my education. I think the instruction always to tell the truth was constant, and there were ways of not telling the truth, which were silence. And that was as bad as lying. In other words, one should tell the truth when it is necessary to tell it. And I think that was partly my educational background and partly my religious background.
And I bring that up because there was an occasion at my school when a master who was a conscientious objector, which was not a problem, but he was also very 'low church' preacher, in his private life. He was Welsh, and he belonged to one of those strange Welsh congregations, and he persuaded our headmaster, probably because there was a shortage of masters or something, that he should teach us religious instruction. And it reached a pitch with him where I remember – I was about 15, certainly not more. I remember standing up, very, very angry, and saying to him, 'You have no right to deny the transubstantiation of the Host. It is what Catholics believe in, it is fundamental to our belief, and you should not just put it down as a piece of bread and a sip of wine. And I will not'… I don’t know what the word was, but I remember saying, I will not put up with it or stay with it, and walked out of the classroom.
And in the strict order of things, I think there should have been quite a ruckus about that; I had disobeyed all the rules. But… his name was Barling. Taffy Barling. At least, we called him Taffy. How odd to be able to remember that.
Anyway, he did nothing. He didn’t report me to the headmaster, there was no disciplining for my indiscipline. And I got away with it. And I have to say, he had either the decency or the common sense not again to directly attack the rituals of the Roman Catholic Church. So I won a small battle, but I… everything in my background said, this is a point at which you have to take the risk. And I think the next point at which I took such a risk was much, much later, over Anthony Blunt. It was again a matter of principle. So it’s always been there.

I’ve been accused by many people of taking advantage of the Blunt affair. The Blunt affair, in the end, the unlikelihood of anyone not knowing what it was is very simply, there was Anthony Blunt, who was head of The Courtauld Institute, and also Keeper of the Queen’s Pictures, suddenly unveiled as a communist spy during the later '30s and throughout the '40s and possibly the '50s. And all hell broke loose, politically. Mrs Thatcher got up on her hind legs and had her say in it. And the exposure pretty well destroyed him. He had already retired, he was a very sick man. He was too frail to endure this kind of assault, right at the end, not only of his academic life, but at the end of his physical life. It happened in 1979 and I think Anthony died in 1972, maybe '71, '72? I think '72 [sic]... of a stroke, or a heart attack.
And I think there were four Courtauld students who… or we may have been five, who openly stood up for him. There were two letters in The Times. One was from me and the other was from the four others. The Courtauld itself sort of absolutely shuddered and turned away and said, it’s nothing to do with us. You know... hasn’t been director for years and hasn’t taught anybody for years, and he was an elitist. And, you know, The Institute has changed now. And I listened to these people on the BBC, and thought, you shits. You know, you are not acknowledging how much you owe to Anthony. You wouldn’t be there if Anthony had not preceded you as director. And then The Institute told him that he could no longer use the library. Then they told me that I could no longer use the library. You know, as though I were in some way associated with his espionage. And that left a great deal of bitterness behind it, from which I really have not recovered, because, well, you know, it was so unnecessary.
There were people… there was one member of the staff at The Courtauld, Michael Kitson, who remained loyal to Anthony and who took him food and shopping. Anita Brookner, who had been on the staff before she became a great novelist, she started going to the library and getting Anthony’s books out for him and then taking them back and so on. So the library bar was broken without their knowing it. I took him food and drink and took him to the doctor and encouraged him to move out into his old life.

I had a close friend called Joe McCrindle... an American and a very considerable collector of drawings, a man to whom I owe a great deal, and Joe had also known Anthony, and one day we decided that we would, come what may, take him to the Italian restaurant a hundred yards away from where he lived, where he very often had just sort of slipped… Anthony was a lousy cook, and so it was easier to go into an Italian restaurant and have some spaghetti.
And I went to the restaurant first, and said, we propose to do this. 'If it’s going to upset you, we won’t, because we… we don’t want to spoil things for you'. And they said, 'Oh, oh, oh', you know, 'wonderful, bring him back', and so on. And so when the door opened and the three of us came in, they welcomed him as though he was a long-lost brother. And that was the beginning of getting Anthony back into normal life, the feeling that he could actually go out on the street himself, he could be brave and get on a plane and go to Rome to look at Roman baroque architecture.
And so… and I think the whole espionage thing has never been satisfactorily and in any way detailed... proved. It’s all assertion. And it may be that there are proofs, and they haven’t come out because, you know, things are held back for 50 years or whatever, and so not even in my lifetime will this come out.  But nobody who has written about it, nobody who was researching, nobody who was writing those awful articles in the Daily Mail and other papers, The Daily Telegraph was the worst of the lot. None of them really knew anything, because there was nothing to know. There was nothing to prove. There were indications here and there, but there was no proof. And I’m very surprised that now, more than 30 years after the event, people are still capable of whipping themselves up into a froth about it.
For me, the fundamental thing is not what Anthony may or may not have done during the war, but what Anthony did, as I said earlier, talking about The Courtauld when I was there, is how he had managed to make, miraculously, without the expenditure of huge amounts of money or anything, he’d managed to turn No 20 Portman Square, an 18th century house, into a real olive grove of academe. Nothing in ancient Greece can have been as intensely philosophical and argumentative and enquiring and speculative as The Courtauld Institute was within five years of Anthony’s taking over as its director.
That is where his fame lies. His secondary level of fame lies in his treatment of the Royal Collection, because it was Anthony who brought it out into the open. Anthony set up, as it were, a pantheon of scholars who were the greatest of their kind to write about various aspects of Old Master drawings and paintings and so on. Everything eventually was catalogued. It was Anthony who persuaded King George to lend the Academy 700 paintings for an exhibition, the King’s Pictures, immediately after the war, in 1946. It was Anthony who persuaded them to adapt some rooms at the end of the palace into an exhibition space, and constantly show their pictures. And that, of course, has developed into the gallery we now know as the Queen’s Gallery, where some of the best exhibitions in London occur, usually twice a year. That was Anthony’s real achievement, not what some, sort of, people intent on vilifying him for espionage have constantly said and still maintain.

Well, Anthony had done a great deal for me, and the least I could do when this crisis occurred in the late autumn of 1979 was an old-fashioned thing: stand by my friend. Anthony needed to escape from his flat in… near Marble Arch, because the journalists were already gathering outside like wolves, and I did get him out and I drove him to stay with another friend, and his instruction to me was, diversionary tactics.
And I have to say that diversionary tactics cost me a great deal. They were physically draining, they were emotionally draining, they went on for months, having to deal with angry journalists, having to fend off accusations which were manifestly untrue and so on and so on. And what was most difficult was that, almost without exception, the American museums for which I had been working, withdrew their employment. That’s partly due, not to the directors and curatorial staff of the museums, but almost entirely due to the fact that they have boards of trustees and they have committees which are in charge of the American system of buying things from museums that you, a rich man, might say, well, I will buy that. I know the museum wants it and it hasn’t got the money. I will buy it. And you might keep it until your death, but at your death it will then revert to the museum. So everybody’s happy. But it means that people who sat on boards and committees were extraordinarily generous, and were expected to be generous. They were also very largely extremely conservative. And the whiff of communism, that by association was attached to me, they could not tolerate. So one by one by one, I was getting the letters or the telephone calls saying, you know, drop out for a year or two. Well, you can’t drop out for a year or two. If you do that, somebody else takes over, and then you can’t push them out because you want to come back. And in any case, what are you going to do in the year or two, when there is no job and there is therefore no money?
It didn’t matter to the few German museums for which I was working. It didn’t matter for the Swiss museums. It certainly didn’t matter for the people in South Africa, for whom I was working, but the final straw was the American authorities withdrawing my visa. Because you then had to have a visa to go to America, and I was going five times a year, and suddenly couldn’t go at all. And so part of my life, a very large part of my life was suddenly wiped out. And I didn’t know… you know, it was another… I was that much older than I had been when I left Christie’s. There was no question of saying, well, I’ll go back to my scholarship and write my thesis now. I didn’t have the money to sustain myself. I couldn’t think of any alternative career. There was no way of joining a firm. I was soiled goods, you know. If, in the extremely unlikely circumstance of being taken on as an advisor or whatever to a London dealer, it might have ruined that London dealer’s reputation, or at least affected it seriously for a year or two. So nobody was going to do that.
And then suddenly I had a letter from… oh God, I can’t remember her name. The newly appointed editor of a magazine called Tatler. And she asked me to become their art critic. And I was to write ten columns a year and be paid £100. And I said, 'Yes'. And my first experience as Tatler’s art critic was to go to the Tate Gallery’s exhibition devoted to Salvador Dalí. And the normal thing if you go to a gallery exhibition is that the gallery gives you the catalogue, and I asked for a copy of the catalogue and I was told that I was not important enough to be given one.

Salvation of a kind came with a note from Tina Brown, of whom I knew nothing, but she was the newly-appointed editor of a magazine called Tatler. And she was trying to breathe new life into it. It was completely dead. And had thought how amusing it would be for me to write a monthly column as their art critic. And she offered me ten columns a year at £100 a column, and a solid £1000 a year was the difference between penury and just managing. And I said, 'Yes'. And so it began.
My first errand for the Tatler was the Salvador Dalí exhibition of… I can’t remember, 1981 or something, at the Tate Gallery. And I went to the Tate, to the press view, and the custom was that you signed in and then they gave you a catalogue and then you went and looked at the exhibition. So I signed in and then I asked for a catalogue and they said, oh, you’re not important enough. You’re not important enough, Tatler’s of no standing, and so you can’t have a free catalogue. You will have a catalogue if you pay for it. So I paid for my catalogue and went in, and the place was absolutely crammed with television and radio and other journalists, all busy talking to each other and being interviewed and so on. And I listened to some of the people being interviewed, and I thought to myself, I’m the only person here who’s actually known Salvador Dalí, and I’m the one person who everybody is shearing away from. And that was my, sort of, baptism. There was nobody there who would talk to me.
And that is why my autobiography is called Outsider. Again and again and again, I’m always the outsider. And never was I made to feel an outsider more than on that day. You’re not important enough for us to give you a shoddy catalogue. No. You’re not important enough to ask anything. Nobody thought of saying, do you by any chance know… have you come across him? Grrrr.
[Q] Did that toughen you up quite a bit?
I think it put some kind of steel into me again, you know. Bad experiences always reinforce you. They don’t knock you down, they gave you more strength.

Salvador Dalí. Well, I was a convenient friend for about four years. And we… I and three friends… no, they weren’t really friends, they were three people I didn’t know at all well, but I had gone to have dinner with Joe McCrindle, the American collector, when... one of his long stays in London. And it was well into September. And one of the topics of conversation was holidays, which some of us had not had. And it transpired that there were four of us who had not been away, and somebody I don’t know said, well, why don’t we all go together? Why don’t we…? Let’s do something.
And I said, 'Oh well, quite by chance, there was what sounded a very attractive holiday flat advertised in The Times this morning on the French coast (the unfashionable French coast of the Mediterranean), the bit that winds down towards Spain. Why don’t we take it for a couple of weeks? You know, can we manage it?' And it was agreed that we would all find the next two weeks, as it were. And Joe said we could even take his car, because it would be better than any car any of us possessed, or more reliable.
And so there was a telephone call to make the following morning, and the arrangements were made, and off we went. We none of us knew the others. It was a hell of a risk to take. And we drove like stink right through France and got to the coast on the first night. And we found the flat and it didn’t seem all that agreeable. And when we woke up in the morning and went in search of the sea, we found that it was, in fact, very disagreeable. It was a real slum of a place and the beach was filthy and horrid and so on. And so we were… you know, are we committed? Can we afford to…? Why don’t we take a chance and go on?
So we drove around the corner and over the Spanish border and well, we didn’t really know where we were making for, and suddenly I saw a notice saying Cadaqués. And I… oh, you know, let’s go there. It rang a bell. And so we turned off down the side road and found ourselves in the bay at Cadaqués. Pretty village, lovely bay, very few people about. Heaven. It just, you know… and we found a very cheap place to stay and settled in.

We had two rooms and a kitchen, and a bathroom, and so it made sense to look after ourselves. And the first morning, I realised what I’d let myself in for, because I was travelling with three sluggards who didn’t get up. I’m up at seven o’clock in the morning. So… and then the following morning, oh at some point, I made friends with a couple of dogs, beach dogs, and called them Hannibal and Scipio. And a day or two later, I’d gone out very early to do some marketing and I wanted something to feed the dogs with, because they were quite clearly, you know, not being fed by anybody.  And I went to the butcher, who was right at the end of the little main street, and asked for something for the dogs.
And he thought for a moment, and came back with the complete windpipe and lungs of some quite large animal, covered in blood and all in a piece. So he gave me that, and I came away, and the two dogs were absolutely slavering at my heels, and went to the local café, which had tables outside, and sat with my great ugly thing from inside the animal. And at that point in my life, I always carried a knife with me.  And, so I started hacking away at this, and I had the lungs, the windpipe, a cup of coffee and a glass of brandy on the table, and the two dogs here, and whisper-quiet, an enormous green Cadillac of 1938-39 vintage just came to a halt 20 yards away. A four-door drop-head coupe, very beautiful, special body. And out got two people, whom I immediately recognised from photographs and all the rest of it, as Dalí and Gala. And they sat at a table, two or three tables away, and were immediately fussed over by the people in the restaurant. So I didn’t take much notice. In fact, I took no notice at all, and went on trying to cut bits off the lungs to feed these two dogs. My hands were completely bloody. You hold on to this slippery thing, which is squelchy. You try to cut it, and you need a razor-sharp knife, and mine wasn’t quite sharp enough. Anyway, the dogs seemed to be perfectly happy at the progress. And then I became aware of somebody standing here, and it was Dalí. And he said, 'Do you know who I am?' And I said, 'Yes, of course, you’re Dalí'. And I think he was disappointed right at the start, because I watched him later playing the same trick on other people.
And the answer was, to the question, 'Do you know who I am?' Was always, 'No'. At which point, he would swell slightly and say, 'I am Da-lí!' And they would then pretend that they were astonished and so on. So… but it developed from that. I was asked to go and have dinner with him that evening, and I said, 'Well, where do I go?' And he said, 'Oh...', you know, an extravagant gesture to the northeast. So I did find out where he was and I found the house and so on, and I enjoyed his company, and I think I was good for him, because I was absolutely direct all the time. He wanted flattery, he didn’t get it from me. And I think he found it very useful for… his career was in the doldrums. He had been put on one side and forgotten. I’m talking about 1967, '68, '69. New York wasn’t interested in him, London and Paris were not interested. They had, as it were, rebelled against his rather corny success and written him off. And my friendship with him came to… let’s say it withered when he… when New York began to adopt him again. And the moment he was taking the ship to New York, then I was no longer useful. And I don’t reproach him. He loved adulation and he needed a daily dose of it, and if he didn’t get it, then he was prepared to settle for my kind of scepticism. But he would rather be adored.
So after 1970, I didn’t see him again. And he came to a rather sad end, really. Both of them did. Gala first. And then Dalí sort of… an invalid in bed, fading away. And he was already fading when I knew him. But there was quite a lot of life left.

Well, I suppose we plunged straight into something in that on the very first evening, we were up on the terrace at the top of the house, where there were three enormous concrete eggs which looked as though they’d been eaten by a giant and broken roughly off, so they had serrated edges like that. And they had little dog-kennel entrances, that you had to go onto your hands and knees and duck through, and then you popped up, sat on a little bench, and peered over the serrated edge at the three… you know, perfectly silly. Gala was really too tiny to do this. She was also stone deaf, so that if she couldn’t see your lips, she didn’t know what was going on. She didn’t even know if anything was going on. And it was very difficult for me, because I was put in the middle one, with Dalí  here and Gala there. And so if I spoke to Dalí, she was off on a trip of her own. Anyway, it was bearable. And then, as it was getting dark-ish, Dalí  said, 'Let me show you my Christ'.
And, 'Yes'. I thought he was going to take me into the studio to show me another of these wonderfully glutinous late paintings. But no. We trudged further up and away, because the house kind of grew out of a hillside and a cliffside, so where the terrace was and where the Christ was, was all part of a quite long garden. And there was this enormous figure. You would not… no, you couldn’t get it in this room. It was constructed entirely of bricolage, of rubbish, of broken tiles and motorcar tyres. The hands, the outstretched hands, the fingers on them were made of quarter motorcar tyres, which will give you an idea of the general scale of the thing. You’re talking in many metres, not feet. Metres.
And there it was. And the ribcage was an old boat, from which most of the timbers had fallen away, so you got literally the ribcage for the boat. It was ingenious and surreal and all the rest.
And then he said… I didn’t see him pick up the camera, but somehow or other, he had a camera in his hand. And he said, 'Let me photograph you, let me…' I hate being photographed, but you can’t refuse in such a situation. And he said, 'I want you in the left armpit. Curl up in the…' you know, sort of… just… so I, sort of, adopted a foetal position in the left armpit. So he then, sort of… 'and it would be better if you took your clothes off'. So, alright. Shit. And you find yourself lying on bits of broken tile and half bricks and stones and God knows what, all pressing into your flesh, you know. So it’s quite different if you’re wearing trousers and a shirt of some kind, the pain of lying on these things is not nearly so acute. Once you don’t have that flimsy bit of material between you and it, it cuts into your flesh and so on. Exceedingly uncomfortable. More photographs. And then, 'Straighten out', and sort of, 'Adopt the same position'. You know, 'Be Christ within the armpit'. And you do that. And then came the command: 'And now masturbate'.
And there flash through your minds all the obligations of hospitality and so on, and what you can refuse and what you can’t. Only, it’s a bit like refusing to eat the sheep’s eyeball when you’re having dinner with a sheik. So there you are, sort of idly teasing yourself to erection, and it’s click, click, click, click, click all the time. And then you get urged on: 'More, more, more'. And so eventually you complete the whole thing with an ejaculation and at that point, you begin to wonder whether, in fact, he’s just focusing the camera on you while you do this, but as a kind of total exclusion of all else. And whether he’s actually taking photographs or not, you know. Because my feeling is that there ought to be, in the Dalí archive, some hundreds of photographs of me over a period of four years. But I… I’m told there is nothing.

The following day, we had dinner, and all the rest of it and in the restaurant, where we had met. We didn’t have dinner in the house. I don’t think the kitchen was ever used in the house. We got into the Cadillac and drove down to have dinner, and were treated like princes. And dinner arrived and was eaten, and then we all got up and left. And I went back the next morning again, to pick up my dogs and feed them, and have my glass of brandy and coffee, and I said, 'Nobody paid the bill last night, you know. Can I pay it? Because I know we all walked out without anything'. And they said, 'No, no, he always does that. His secretary will come down at some point to… next week, perhaps, and we shall do some arithmetic and… so no, no, don’t worry about it'.
And then, at some point during the day, I was bathing, just lying on the beach with the others, and we watched Dalí do it again. It was, by then, a weekend, and Cadaqués kind of filled with students at weekends, and then emptied again. And he picked up about 20 and invited them all to come to his house that evening.
And I was again invited, so I went. And that evening, he ignored all the girls, so I was left behind with Gala, sitting in her egg. And I was sitting in my egg, and the various girls were scattered around this rather derelict sort of terrace because he hadn’t, at that point… later on, he installed a swimming pool up there, which was the shape of an erect phallus, you know, which wasn’t really very funny. And he’d put all sorts of absolutely ghastly kitsch pieces of sculpture and pottery and stuff around. None of that was there at that stage, and so the girls, who had been deserted, because he’d gone off with the boys, and he’d gone to the Christ with them. And I… I thought, you know, is this going to be a sort of last of the Medici experience? Where… the very, very last of the Medici, Gian Gastone used to lie in bed masturbating, while boys, perhaps as many of 50 boys were brought in to entertain him by sodomising each other. Times have changed.
So God knows what went on in the armpits that evening. And again, I don’t suppose there were actually photographed. I’m sure he was there with his camera, going click, click, and it was… there are certainly none of those photographs in the archive.
But that’s what he did: he needed people to adore him, even if they knew nothing about him. You know, so… and that’s, year after year.

[Q] Did you also have other, more substantial conversations with him about art and so on?
We had very substantial conversations about art, yes. And about forgery, because by then he was being naughty. He was signing pieces of paper, and, you know, I said, 'You shouldn’t do this'. And he was being quite unabashed about it, because it brought him money. And he and Gala were very much… money was the engine room of their lives. And Gala was amazingly extravagant. Gala was, you know, absurdly generous to her picked up boys.
But it was pretty clear that the pictures at that stage were really largely painted by… I can’t remember his name. He had an assistant who came in from the village, and who was pretty adept at doing a Dalí.
[Q] Wonderful.
But he was very… it was interesting for me, because he was very confiding about his own sexuality. And he talked to me about his huge affection for… oh God, I can’t remember his name. The Spanish writer who was shot by…
[Q] Lorca?
Lorca, yes. And I think I know what happened. He was still obfuscating, but when somebody tells you the story in dribs and drabs, and the dribs and drabs, when you piece them together, do not conflict, then I think you end up with something very near the truth. And there is no doubt in my mind that Lorca, who was queer, attempted to bugger him. And was only partially successful, because Dalí didn’t want to go beyond the pain. He was… when you’re fucked for the first… when a man is fucked for the first time, it is not pleasurable. You have to get used to it. You have to have a sort of technique of relaxation, otherwise it… and Dalí didn’t give it a chance, shall we say. And so it never… anyway, I… Dalí also… I… he quite clearly had problems with his anus. It didn’t open easily. I remember my sort of arrival gift one year was an instrument that I bought in John Bell & Croyden, and I can’t remember what the technical term is, but it was… oh yes, I have... it was an anal dilator, which was the sort of thing that Damien Hirst might put in one of his cabinets. But when I gave it to Dalí, he was absolutely delighted and knew at once what it was for. Whether he used it or not, I don’t know.
He had, in his studio... in his studio, of all places, a drawer full of dildos, which was in a curious way enlightening. I think it was penis envy, you know, rather than that he did anything with them, but I think that, you know, if he saw a rubber penis, then gosh, it gave him a frisson of something or other.

Well, of course, one of the advantages of leaving Christie’s was that I had rather more leisure, and I had a boyfriend… I’d had… Claudio was Sicilian. He came from Taormina, and was intensely proud of being the very last of a family that had lived in Taormina for a thousand years. The Corvajas. 'I am the last of the Corvajas', which sounds like the kind of line that Dalí might have said, but there we are.
And the only decent old building in the town is indeed the Palazzo Corvaja, which is now the town hall or something of the kind, because when the Risorgimento happened in the middle of the 19th century, the Corvajas of this world were displaced. So there was this enchanting boy, and… oh, I didn’t fall in love with him immediately, but it kind of developed. It was… in the beginning, it was like having somebody else’s dog. You like it well enough, but it isn’t yours. And then gradually Claudio became my dog and then my lover. And then, you know, we were going to spend our lives together. But Claudio was as queer as I was and there were difficulties at home. And he… his father was insisting that Claudio should get married and have children in order to perpetuate the line a little longer, and I think Claudio left and, at least in part, to attempt to do this family thing.
But we were happy for seven years or so together. But I suppose… I never really understand the term oversexed. I think that… I don’t understand the idea of being undersexed. How could one possibly be undersexed? How awful. And if Claudio wasn’t there, then I went off on adventures of my own. And Claudio was away for months on end sometimes.

Very quickly… I don’t know who told me about it or indeed whether I simply observed that it was happening, but I bought a house near the river at Barnes. And it transpired that, between Hammersmith Bridge and Putney boathouses, there was a path along the river, quite wide, with quite a lot of shrubbery, and that extraordinary things happened there. And I went to explore, and extraordinary things did happen. It was pitch dark, because there was no lighting at all once you… 50 yards from the bridge, and you were in pitch darkness. And there were men. And you could have any kind of homosexual activity there. It was risky, because occasionally the river police came along on a boat. They’d shut the engine off and coast along in the water, and when they saw something, switch on a searchlight. Wham. So you had to be wary and you had to know how to deal with that situation. The best thing to do was lie down as close as you could to the earth and face away from the light, because nothing shines so brightly in a searchlight as the human face. And sometimes, you might be in the middle of a coupling, call it, and there you are, still attached, and you throw yourselves to the ground and stay attached, because you can’t… you must not move.
Why the police never… I think it was a bit of sport for the river police, because they never seemed to do anything in coordination with Policeman Plod on the ground, who, if they’d just sent one policeman from Putney towards Hammersmith, and another from Hammersmith towards Putney, they could have caught a hundred of us. But it was a funny… well, it wasn’t at all funny. It was a time when you simply could not legally be homosexual. You were not allowed to perform any kind of homosexual act in public. You were not allowed to importune male persons, which meant that if you spoke to somebody, not even by suggesting a sexual activity, but, you know, 'Can you tell me the time?' 'Have you got a cigarette?' or sort of, 'Have you a match?', or any of those things were dubbed importuning for indecent purposes. And you could be sent to prison, you could be fined, you would quite certainly lose your job, if you had a decent job.
It was asking for expulsion from any kind of decent society, and the penalties were out of all proportion with the crime. And it was believed to be a crime. And judges and magistrates were pretty beastly about it. But then, of course, you occasionally came across the queer policeman. And I had two affairs with policemen. They were very instructive. Lessons in how to be careful, how not to be recognised, and all the rest of it. But if you wanted a quick shag without any complications, there were very few places you could go to. There were the odd pubs where you might pick up a Guardsman whom you’d have to pay a fiver to, which was expensive, especially if you gave as good as you got. And there was a rule with Guardsmen too, which was Guardsmen always fucked, because that wasn’t queer. A Guardsman would never be the recipient, he would always be the donor, so actually there… quite a number of Guardsmen had been, at a very early stage in their careers, had been told by their sergeants or sergeant-majors that if they fell on hard times, this is the way you supplemented your income. And that as long as you did the fucking, you weren’t queer and nobody would mind. But you must never, never, sort of bend over. So…
But one of the places that was notorious for that kind of casual sex was the towpath. And it… well, it was fun. You know, it was sex without responsibility, without affection, without ever saying, 'Oh, what’s your telephone number?' I mean, no, you just did it and went. And what was quite surprising was the number of oarsmen who had been sculling, or whatever oarsmen do on the river at Putney, and had fancied a fuck on the way home. And who were, nine times out of ten, the passive partners. And not terribly rewarding as passive partners. They’d sort of lie on their tummies and let you do it and then get up and go home, which was kind of not what you’d expect. And that kind of exchange of activity is what makes it exciting, or used to.

I think there must have been an enormous number of homosexuals who played the other game, which was to get married and be miserable.
There are people of my generation who say that part of the fun was that it was against the law, that it was so dangerous, that the constant sense of menace added something to it. I’m not sure about that, because your life could be completely destroyed. There were a number of notorious cases in the 1950s when the persecution was at its height, when your life could be completely wrecked. You’d never get another decent job. You were an outcast, and was that a risk worth taking because the frisson of menace added so much to it? No, it wasn’t, but there is a sort of reasonable assumption that if you meet a stranger in circumstances where there are a hundred people stretched along the river, who are all looking for the same thing, it’s sort of unlikely that anything will go wrong.
You could have sex in all sorts of odd places, and I think, at that time, if you… at that time, it was, in a way, easy, because very few people knew about it. Now everybody knows about everything, and I mean if you were standing in a bus queue and you caught the eye of somebody walking towards you and then you turned round to see if he was looking back, and you left the bus queue to go and join him, no one would think anything of it. They wouldn’t recognise the manoeuvre. Nowadays, I think everybody will recognise the manoeuvre. So that privacy lay in ignorance. And lots of people would never believe that you would go into the public lavatories in Harrods and have a quick fuck with somebody from behind the counter. And I’m sure it doesn’t happen now. But then, it did happen. And Harrods was a place where you could, if you felt like having a fuck at three o’clock in the afternoon... pretty well be sure of getting one.
It doesn’t happen in museums and galleries anymore. But wandering around the V&A on a wet Sunday afternoon was a sure way of finding someone to go to bed with.

AIDS has changed everything, and I am very lucky, because if you’re sort of counting the number of stray liaisons I’ve had, that I never picked up anything more than a sort of non-specific urethritis, and that only once in my life. And so many of my contemporaries died of AIDS because they were caught by it before we knew.
But I was lucky, for one reason and one reason only, and that was that in the summer of 1972, I had had a Spanish lover called Angel. Who was really very beautiful, far more beautiful than I deserved. And he was a waiter, inevitably, and what he wanted to be, inevitably, was a model. And I had a close friend called John Vere Brown, who was a professional photographer, and largely people of the theatre, but occasionally he did work for a modelling agency called Nevs in King's Road in Chelsea. And I spoke to him about Angelo, and he said, 'Oh, bring him over and I’ll take some photographs and send them to Nevs, and we’ll see what happens'. And so off Angelo went and did all the things that you’re supposed to do with a model, wearing this and wearing that and so on, and then John persuaded him to take everything off except for a vest, which came down just not covering his buttocks, and photographed that. It was both erotic and beautiful and said everything you needed to know about Angelo as a figure.
And in no time at all, he was off to Bali, advertising some kind of chocolate. You know, plunging into pools and… Galaxy? Or was it? Something, anyway. And he went from that to other very… then, of course, he got swept off to New York and I lost him. And sometime… I think it was in 1982, but it may have been a year later. But I think it was '82... I had a telephone call from New York and it was Angelo, and Angelo said, 'I’m flying to London tomorrow. Are you going to be in?' 'Yes, do you want to come and stay?' 'No, no, I am just coming to New York, I have to see several people, then I have to fly back again'. And he said I reached Heathrow whenever it is, and I can be with you at two o’clock. So the taxi arrived at two, and out got Angelo, and the taxi stayed there, and I said, 'You haven’t got rid of the taxi'. He said, 'No, no, I can only stay ten minutes and I’m going on in it'. And he said, 'Something appalling is happening in New York. My friends are dying. There is a disease of some kind. We don’t know what it is. Totally identified. Stop having casual sex. Only have sex with people you know and you trust, and be very, very careful'. And then he said goodbye, and he was going off to tell another old lover.
And I thought, that’s extraordinary. He’s going to do the rounds. He’s going to tell everybody he’s ever slept with in London that this is the case and then go back. And I thought that was an extraordinarily generous and responsible and decent thing to do, because that is exactly what he did. He didn’t stop for a meal, didn’t stop for anything more than to say, you know, be warned. And he’s still alive and so am I, because the high seriousness with which he dealt with the matter was enough to impress on me that this really is something to worry about. And of course, within a couple of years, by 1984, all sorts of people I knew had died of this dreadful, mysterious, wasting disease. And we were beginning to understand something of what AIDS was about.
So that’s why I’m still here. And yet again, I find myself saying I’m glad I’m as old as I am, because as far as casual sex is concerned, I’ve had the best of it. It’s actually rather an important part of one’s life. You know, the idea that one should be restricted to one sexual partner in a lifetime, that is a penance. I mean, how many marriages end up with, you know, thinking the last person in the world I want to have sex with is my wife or my husband? That must be the case over and over and over again. So you end up with a sexless relationship, which is compelled on you by the church and the law. That’s no way to live a sexual life.

It was very central to my life. I was brought up by my mother as a Roman Catholic and my stepfather was an Anglican and rather anti-Catholic. So there was a conflict here, but I’d been baptised as a Catholic and was confirmed as a member of the Church of England. And even so, I felt myself to be a Catholic. I felt intensely involved with Catholic ritual and the Latinity of it, as it was in those days, because very little was in English and everything was… everything was made, as it were, remote and graceful and beautiful by being in Latin.
And I thought, very seriously at one… for quite a number of years, that I would like, more than anything else, to be a priest. And it affected my life in a way, because at the age of 18 or so, at school, I had been having sex with anybody who came along, and... it was a very sexy school, I have to say. I don’t think it’s the same nowadays, but everybody was constantly having sex with everybody else, singly and in groups, and it… anyway, that’s an aside. At the age of 18, I said to myself: I have to stop this. If I’m ever to think seriously about being a priest, if I’m to do anything about it, then I must get this devil under control. And so I tried, and I tried very hard, and it now sounds impossible, but with the exception of one man, I had no physical sex with anybody from the age of 18 to very nearly my 28th birthday. 

It was sort of just short of my 28th birthday that I was on my way to Mass at the church in Church Street, Kensington. Not St Mary Abbots, but the Roman Catholic one. And I was a bit early, and I walked past the church and into the little alleyway on the other side of the road, which leads into Kensington Gardens, first Kensington Palace and then to Kensington Gardens, to waste ten minutes or five minutes or so. And I suddenly realised I… a sort of… the opposite of a kind of Pauline revelation that I… that something had to give somehow. Either I had to have some support in what I had achieved over the past ten years in terms of celibacy, because I was celibate, but I was not chaste, you know. You have to be chaste in mind. It’s not enough not to do it. You have to not want it. And I was getting sexually very hungry and very hung-up. And I… it sounds a rather grandiose thing, but I needed to challenge God. I needed his help. I can’t do this on my own, I have to have some help. I can’t go on.
And I don’t know if I expected some kind of response, as Paul got, you know. I felt the boot was on the other foot. It was I who was being persecuted, because here was I, trying desperately to achieve chastity with no help from anybody, least of all the body that was really responsible for my thinking along those lines. And by the time I’d finished my one-sided conversation with God, it was rather too late to go… oh, the Carmelites, the Carmelite church... it was rather too late to go to the Carmelites for Mass. And I didn’t feel in a state of grace, and so I couldn’t have… I could only have been a spectator at Mass. And so I went for a long walk in the park, and that evening, went out 'on the troll', as it was called in those days, to see if I could find somebody with whom to have sex. And I found somebody and we had it. I’m sure it wasn’t… I’m sure it was awful for him. It wasn’t very good for me. I’d lost the knack, and anyway, so…
But that was the beginning of the end, I mean, by having broken my duck, then I felt, you know, there is no answer, I’m never going to be chaste. The last thing in the world I should be is a priest, if chastity is beyond me, then I can’t. And in the event, all these years later, I mean, how right I was. Because that is the conflict that so many Roman Catholic priests cannot resolve. They achieve celibacy for years, but they don’t achieve chastity. And then suddenly everything goes away. You know, it breaks. They do something they should not do. And I don’t blame them. I think they have a really tough time. It’s a quite unnatural demand. Though, on the other hand, the… you know, if you imagine your parish priest having a fuck, it does rather… not necessarily diminish him, but it certainly changes your response to him. Because none of us, none of us, when we’re actually at it, is particularly pretty, so the sight of some portly 45-year-old having it away with his housekeeper. No. I think actually you need chastity in order to be a priest, but on the other hand, I see it as a totally unreasonable demand.

In addition to the work that came to me from Tatler, I had the support of commissions from a poxy little magazine called Art and Artists, and I wrote… that came out ten times a year, too, but they paid £30 for a thousand-word article. You can’t do much with 30 quid, even in 1981 or '82. But it was useful experience, because, you know, you have to find your way as a wordsmith when you’re earning your living as a writer. You can’t just sit down and write. It doesn’t happen like that. But I found writing for Art and Artists quite rewarding, not financially, but in terms of experience.
And again, I was perfectly frank in my criticism of things, and I think that it was that directness that eventually appealed to the London Evening Standard, which came out every evening and had an art critic called Richard Cork. And what had happened was that Richard, who is very much the critic of the present-day jargon, in other words, lots of sentences, but no meaning, obscure and difficult. The Evening Standard had got rid of him. And, I mean, they told me that they never understood a word that he wrote, and that all the letters that they got from correspondents was that the readers didn’t understand either. So it was a waste of a page. And that they’d seen my stuff in Tatler and wanted me to do that once a week or thereabouts. And I was delighted, you know, because once you are working for a daily paper, then you’re there.
And I had no more difficulty about being given catalogues. And I enjoyed it. It… there was a pent-up 50 years of looking at things, 50 years of having an opinion and never expressing it, 50 years of experience which, you know, there was a great well of stuff on which I could draw. So my criticisms were informed and well-founded, as well as mischievous and often destructive. It was the mischief and the destructiveness that the paper wanted, and it was the solid ground that I wanted to give them. But we managed to find a balance between the two. And so week after week after week, I would write about this, that and the other thing. And that again was an intellectual stimulus, because you might be writing about Michelangelo drawings one minute, and somebody who is switching a light on and off as a work of art in the next.
And you have to find the language for these, because they are very different things. You cannot write about contemporary art in the same terms as you write about historic art. 

I think I’d been doing it for five years when I won a prize as the Critic of the Year, one of the journalistic things. I was terribly chuffed at that. So were they. And then I won it several more times. And before I knew it, 30 years had passed, and we are where we are now. And I’m described as a prizewinning art critic, which is true enough, and I’m still doing it. And I don’t think there’s anything else I can do.
I did win the Orwell Prize, which pleased me even more, for serious political criticism, because Max Hastings, who was editor of the paper roughly halfway through, asked me to write… he thought I could write a column every Tuesday on some, not necessarily political, issue, but a social issue or something, you know. Perhaps even a theological issue. I did get into a dispute with the Archbishop of Canterbury. Anyway... and I enjoyed that enormously. And I sometimes think, when I’m now, after 30 years of art criticism, having to write yet again about Damien Hirst or Tracey Emin, of whom I’ve already written half a dozen times and about whom I have nothing new to say, and I cannot plagiarise my own articles, but I really have nothing new to say, that I would rather be writing the political column once a week. Because there are issues that I would like to sink my teeth into. You know, I am very much against the idea of gay marriage. I think it is a contradiction in terms. I’m very much against the idea of women priests, for whom I see no foundation in the early church. And indeed, the absence of women priests in the early church may well have been a revolution against women priests in the pagan churches that immediately preceded Christianity.
So once you get away from the Jewish tradition, and you follow the Pauline business of saying that you can become a Christian without being first a Jew, you can believe in Roman myths and legends and Greek gods and so on.  Well, both the Greeks and the Romans had women priests. And there must have been some reason for the Christians to say, no, these we don’t want. Actually, I think the reasons are probably perfectly sound now, and they should… women should never be given authority over men. And so I’m even more entrenched in my views about women bishops. I know these are things for the Anglican Church, but they affect us all, the kind of insidious thinking which is going to creep everywhere in the end. And I would like to write about such matters and stop writing about Damien Hirst. But then, of course, something would come along, you know, a Michelangelo exhibition or something really important, and I’d… my whiskers would twitch and I’d want to be back in that particular field again.

I’m often accused of writing destructive reviews, and I have to say that this is not a customary thing. I quite often go to exhibitions of young artists who’ve still got to make their way, and to them, I write a letter telling them what I think. Not out of any boastfulness on my part, but just making it quite clear that this… in case it is useful for you to know, this is how I reacted.
But when you get to the really established figures like Freud or Kossoff or Auerbach or Gilbert & George, people who are widely collected for even millions of pounds, who are supported by the Arts Council, who are sent hither and yon around the world by the British Council, into whose prosperity the taxpayer pours enormous sums of money… Anish Kapoor, for example. Antony Gormley. Then I think these are fair targets, and one should not hold back. And if I see Anish Kapoor producing something which I think is frankly infantile, then I’m perfectly happy to say so, and with no holds barred. And you mentioned Kossoff, and I remember when I was eight, encountering… it was right at the beginning of the war, 1939, and I had to share quarters for a few days with a boy from the East End, who was perhaps five, and who had never seen a civilised lavatory before, and he didn’t know what going to a lavatory really involved, and he had retrieved his stools, and on the tiles of the bathroom, had made drawings with his fingertips. And there is, of course, as you learn years later, a Freudian observation in this, that Freud was well aware of children using their stools as a drawing material. And then, years later still, you come across Kossoff, who produces pictures that look extraordinarily like the material that you’ve seen by a five-year-old spending the first half hour in a decent bathroom with a lavatory. And there it is. The connection is so clear, and you cannot resist bringing it out. And of course, once you’ve made that allusion, it means that lots of people cannot look at a Kossoff painting without remembering that children put their fingers in their stools and make drawings in exactly the same way. You know, the round heads and the stick bodies. So it’s what I said to you a moment ago about 50 years of knowledge and experience suddenly there as a well on which to draw my criticism.
[Q] Honesty’s one thing, but relish is possibly another.
I sometimes think… I’m not any more. I mean, my writing now is very, very controlled, and I think a good dead duller than it used to be.  And in the years when it wasn’t dull, I sometimes read my things before I sent them to paper, and said, where the devil did that come from? Because it seems to have been inspired by something else, something outside me, something that is not me. And it’s idiotic to talk of possession, but I think there was, at a certain stage in my work as a scribbler, a feeling of something other than just me writing these things, that my brain was on a very long leash. I found it rather disturbing, to be frank, I found it disturbing, because I’d occasionally read things a year or two after, and take a breath. You know, how did I dare do that? Where did that idea come from, you know?
It doesn’t happen now. I’m that much older. And I’m very wary of what I… I am very aware of what I write and what its implications may be. And once you’ve written a really destructive article about somebody, you can’t write about it again. You know, I don’t want to write about Gilbert & George again. I’ve said what I think about them, I’ve said what I feel about them, which may not be quite the same thing. So I… there is no point.

[Q] And do you, as a critic, have a sort of responsibility to the emotional welfare, one might say, of the person you’re writing about? I mean, I’m thinking of Kitaj in fact...
I have no responsibility for somebody who is immensely wealthy, immensely popular, is subsidised by the state, who is sent off to Venice to represent us in the Biennale, who’s sent to São Paulo, to that Biennial, who’s in the great German show that occurs… documenta. No, I… no, no. He is there. He is my target, because part of what I’m saying is: how did you get where you are? Because you’ve been the beneficiary of unalloyed adulation by idiots who give you money. You don’t deserve to be where you are. So pricking balloons and emperor’s new clothes and all the other clichés, that’s what I’m there to do. I am a critic. It’s not for me to go along with every critic who thinks this man is marvellous, because there are so many critics, like Richard Cork, who preceded me, who are vicars of Bray where these things are concerned, and who will never express an opinion unless somebody else has expressed it first. And if the tide of opinion is that somebody is marvellous, is worthy of the Turner Prize at 25,000 quid a year, you know, and is so great a painter that he must be made a trustee of the Tate Gallery, no. No. This has somehow to be checked. Even if I don’t succeed in stopping it, at least there may be, as a consequence, a reconsideration of this artist. Some of them are so entrenched and so powerful that they are invincible, and I’m constantly saying I have no influence, because I have no influence. I’ve never been the trustee of anything. I’ve never been asked by a Minister of the Arts for my opinion on any of the idiotic things the DCMS, the Department of the Arts does, or whatever.
So I have no power, but I feel that having no power, I must use the only instrument I’ve got, which is my page in the Evening Standard.

It is a lonely path, and I knew that, right from the very beginning. If you are going the other way, you are going it alone. And I’m constantly going the other way. I look at the big figures of the contemporary art world, and in my mind, compare them with the big figures of the past. And make a judgement. How have you got here? You’ve got here because you’ve been supported by critics who’ve never been able to go back on their opinion, never reversed. You’re… because they’ve always supported you, you are followed by the Arts Council and the British Council. You have no idea, unless you’re in the business, how hugely influential these two bodies are. They determine who shall become a national figure. The British Council determines who shall become an international figure. And with that nationalism and internationalism, comes money. Money in vast quantities. There are artists who now command millions for a single picture, and they got there because of this combination of critics in support, and then the institutions in support. We all laugh at the Turner Prize, but that Turner Prize establishes artists who have no business to be established, they are so bad. That prize is given every year. Nobody on the Tate Gallery committee for the Turner Prize has ever said, we didn’t get a suitable entry this year. There was nothing good enough worth 25,000 quid. There was nothing worth the fuss and bother of the party and the exhibition and all the rest of it.
The whole machinery of the Turner Prize is thrown away on a rubbish artist. Whereas it would be so good if they just said, there was no-one this year, so we’re holding back the funds. They don’t do that. They should.
