brian.aldiss

Brian Aldiss (1925-2017) was an English writer and anthologies editor, best known for his science fiction novels and short stories. He was educated at Framlingham College, Suffolk, and West Buckland School, Devon, and served in the Royal Signals between 1943-1947. After leaving the army, Aldiss worked as a bookseller in Oxford, an experience which provided the setting for his first book, 'The Brightfount Diaries' (1955). His first science fiction novel, 'Non-Stop', was published in 1958 while he was working as literary editor of the 'Oxford Mail'. His many prize-winning science fiction titles include 'Hothouse' (1962), which won the Hugo Award, 'The Saliva Tree' (1966), which was awarded the Nebula, and 'Helliconia Spring' (1982), which won both the British Science Fiction Association Award and the John W Campbell Memorial Award. Several of his books have been adapted for the cinema. His story, 'Supertoys Last All Summer Long', was adapted and released as the film 'AI' in 2001. His book 'Jocasta' (2005), is a reworking of Sophocles' classic Theban plays, 'Oedipus Rex' and 'Antigone'.

As far as I know, I was born in Norfolk, in the town of East Dereham. And my father was a gent's outfitter and had an extensive store. That was part of a much more extensive area, owned entirely by my grandfather, HH Aldiss. And it was the great playground for children, that is to say, for me and for my cousins, Tony and Derek. And there we could play and in that area there were various bits of the whole function as a shop. For instance, there was the way into the furniture shop, there was a vast factory, so-called, that stored the goods, although at the top of it there were mysterious tailors who would run you up a suit in a couple of days. And then there was a place where some rather hostile women lived, two storeys up, and made hats.
What else was there? Well, down the garden, or further down, there was… there were the stables, and connected with the stables was a little hut where a man whose bad temper had earned him the name of 'Rero'. Rero lived in this hut and dried off the harness for the horses that not only acted as delivery horses, but also, if there was a funeral, HH Aldiss could do a funeral for you, and then the horses would be dressed in black plumes and would go out the back door with great solemnity.
So the whole thing was extremely complex. Not that I saw it as that as a kid, but certainly it was a kind of paradise for a child and we were often getting into trouble. And at one time I had a girlfriend called Margaret Tout, and she and I could hide in the factory in among rolls of carpet, and… some kind of a carpet that was not cloth, and we would get down there and cuddle each other and people would go by and they would never see us. And I was determined that I would marry Margaret Tout. Except that one day at school, I saw her being sick, being like, violently sick, with a great projectile of vomit, and I knew I didn't want to be married to anyone who threw up in that way.

So that was the end of that romance.
But it was an early romance and after that… up Norwich Street. Norwich Street was a shopping street, up which HH Aldiss' Outfitters looked. And up there was Lamberts.
Now, were Lamberts furnishers? I believe they were. And my family was friendly with them, and there weren't many people with whom my family were friendly, but they were friendly with that particular shop.
And there was... was her name Sheila? Oh, she was wonderful! She was wonderful. And they had a little stable at the back where things were delivered, and we would go… get into the stable and check each other over, to see what the sexual differences were. And I was determined, too, that I would marry her because, well for one thing she didn't throw up and also, she would perform. Her father would put her on the stage once a year and she would sing, 'Today I feel so happy, so happy, so happy. Today I feel so happy, I don't know why I am'. I knew why she was happy, because I'd been feeling her that very afternoon.
So, the secret life that went on was one aspect of that particular imperilled childhood, because there was a black side to all this, not a back side, a black side. 

My mother, married to her… her great love, I believe, Stanley Aldiss. Stanley Aldiss had been in World War I, had been injured, had spent some time outside Cairo recovering, came home, married May Wilson. The Wilsons came from Peterborough. May Wilson was taken to live in Dereham, and Dereham is a long way, I would say, down the social scale from Peterborough... we'll get to that later.
But my mother gave birth to a stillborn child, a daughter, and her grief was great. Five years after that contretemps, she gave birth again. And so I, a boy, emerged in a shower of tears because she had expected to deliver a girl. And so, there was always this thing hanging over me, that somehow, I wasn't what they wanted. My father was not the most tactful of men; he made it quite clear that he felt I was a bit of an obstacle to his ideas.

After another five years, my mother again conceived. We lived in an extensive flat over the gent's department of the shop of HH Aldiss, and there she gave birth, this time, this time, to a daughter! But I had, very foolishly, contracted whooping cough, so there was the possibility I might give it to the baby. So, within an hour of the child's birth, I was packed into a car and driven away from East Dereham to go and stay in Peterborough with my grandmother, whose name was May Wilson. Was she May? I think she was May. Anyhow, she was an old lady then, and not particularly glad to have me.
But, living in that house, in Park Road, Peterborough, number 99 Park Road, Peterborough, was my Uncle Bert, and really, I couldn't explain how much I owed to Uncle Bert. Uncle Bert was wonderful! Wonderful with small boys with whooping cough, and small boys who felt they'd been kicked out of home, and wonderful with all kinds of things.
He was an architect and, for instance, he would take me with him when he visited the local museum to talk to the officials there; there was some scheme going. And so I could wander around that museum, and was encouraged to do so. And in one of the rooms there was a vast glass case, narrow, but very long, and it contained the entire skeleton of a plesiosaurus [sic] and a little bone notice said that this creature had been found in the muds of the River Nene.
Now, if you stood there, and looked out the window, you could see the River Nene, and this creature had come out of it. I thought that was wonderful, and indeed, I still do. See how wonderful I felt it was that this creature had been preserved intact. And were there any more like it? Well no, of course there wasn't. Anyhow, that was one of the things to which my Uncle Bert introduced me.
And then... you could probably date this... there was going to be an eclipse of the sun.
So instead of making nothing of it, or of hiding me away, Uncle Bert took his mother, my grandmother, and me to Milton Park, just outside Peterborough. And there we stood to await the eclipse, which Uncle had dated – he knew exactly when it was coming – there we stood, with this vast green hillside in front of us, and suddenly there was a great shadow on it, rushing towards us and then sweeping over us. Oh, fantastic! You might have thought, that as a small boy I would have been scared, but such was the tutoring of my uncle, that we all enjoyed it. We thought it was brilliant! And the sun had gone, and the birds stopped chirruping and the whole world was revealed as miraculous.
So those were some of the joys that I was introduced to when I was in Peterborough. I thought Peterborough was a very grand place. I was taken to the swimming pool, and there we would swim with my cousins. And I could see that here was a functioning city, quite different from East Dereham which really… it had nothing, nothing of that spirit. It had cows.

So, the time came when my whooping cough had disappeared and I was returned home, and there I became a very naughty and contentious boy.
So, I was returned home to East Dereham, and it's only in recent years that I've understood why I behaved so badly, why I started kicking the furniture, chasing the dog, doing I don't know what, crying, shouting. It was because a) I had been hurt by the way I had been sent away when I was ill, but more than that, I grieved because I was no longer in Peterborough with all those loving and intelligent people. Quite straightforward, quite straightforward. No mystery about it.
So, how could my father deal with this? Well, he could have been more loving and understanding, but he was busy. He had the men's outfitters to run. So, he had a brilliant idea: he sent me away again! He sent me to a preparatory school. In those days there were... perhaps there still are... preparatory schools. What they were preparing us for, God only knows. But this prep school was in Bacton, and Bacton was on the sea coast, rather nicely situated. It had playing fields and it had kind of gardens that the boys could tend, and a back gate. A very formidable solid wooden back gate, that if you dared to venture through it – which was strictly forbidden – if you dared to venture through it you could then see a shingly lane and a beach hut and pebbles and then the beach, and then the grey North Sea itself.
And so that was where I spent three years, and of course, I learnt to play cricket as all boys did in those days.
What else did I do? Ah, yes! I can't help thinking I'm making it up, but I know this is true, that we were strictly told that we could not take toys to school, but we could take other things that would contribute to our education. Very well. So, at five years old, my father took me and delivered me into the hands of Mr Humphrey Fenn. What a Dickensian name! Humphrey Fenn. And of course, there was something else to be distraught about, but my father, instead of kissing me goodbye, shook my hand and cleared off. Oh, God. I still hate that moment.
But, I brought with me the two objects that I was allowed, and one was a book called The Treasury of Knowledge – I still have it, upstairs – I've kept it! The Treasury of Knowledge. And the other thing was a microscope with slides that, again, my Uncle Bert had given me. I believe that was why I took it not for any obscure scientific reason, but those two things gave me a mysterious standing, because it turned out that most of the boys that went to Humphrey Fenn's preparatory school, were country lads. They had never seen a microscope before, nor had they ever had in their hands a copy of The Treasury of Knowledge. So this gave me a mysterious power.

I was so upset, emotionally, that at night, I pissed my bed, every night, regularly. I pissed my bed. I couldn't stop it. But in order that the boys should not despise me for that infantile habit, I had the habit, after lights were out in that dormitory, of telling them a story. A story of ghosts, criminals, all kinds of horror, so that when one of the boys would scream, 'Shut up, Aldiss, you bastard!' that was my triumph, as they scudded down the bedclothes to hide themselves. Now, isn't that very peculiar? You see the whole shaping of the man – perhaps everyone's like that – but in my… in my extreme, I do remember it all, and I'm not making it up, that's the way it was.
And I then started to lecture to the boys after school, and I would lecture to them about the prehistoric world. And the boys would sometimes take notes. As for the microscope, the boys were all keen to look into it and see what they could see. And so, there were various things we could put under the microscope, including a hair from the head of a boy called Mickey. And when we put it under the microscope, we saw there was something living on it. This was death to Mickey... I can't tell you... oh God, he's got these creatures in his hair!
But all these things... and occasionally, Humphrey Fenn or his master under him, a chap called Knowles, would take us down through this forbidden gate and make us swim in the grey North Sea. And that was okay... that was okay. I suppose we liked it. It was a change, at least. And also, inside that gate there was the making of a garden, and so we could have a strip. And, of course, we were ill-fed, and so we devised the idea that if, towards the end of the January term, we planted certain vegetables seeds, when we came back for the next term, the summer term, these things would be growing up and we would have vegetables we could eat – radishes, lettuces, I don't know what else, but… it did teach us something.
Oh dear, those three years with Humphrey Fenn... quite extraordinary. Long after that, I went back to see that place. It had now become a boarding school, and it was actually run by Humphrey Fenn's son who was a kind of a squalid fellow, I thought. But such is fate. And that whole coast, which at the time I thought was most romantic, has deteriorated. I don't know. One becomes more critical, I suppose.

So, that was more or less... well, it wasn't the end of childhood, but I was then sent to a public school in Suffolk. It was called Framlingham College, and I hate to talk about it.
I was in Junior School and Junior School was largely protected from the larger school which was a hive of homosexuality, and I was terrified by it. And I think that many of my companions in the Junior School were also terrified, because it was their fate to be shovelled up there.
But something came along to rescue me, and this is why I am forever grateful to Adolf Hitler. Good old Adolf – he declared war. And the result was my father, quite sensibly, thought that if Hitler's armies invaded England, they would naturally land in Gorleston-on-Sea, where he had quarrelled. His father had died in the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, and what was that grandfather's last words? Summoning up the whole beastliness of the Aldiss family, he said to my father, 'You'll have to fight your own battles now, Stanley'. You don't forget a telling phrase like that. I was there when he said it.
So, my father did fight his own battles, but he lost out to his much more sinister brother, okay. Now this brother... I won't mention his name... he was married to a lady called Dorothy, and my mother hated Dorothy and feared her. But I liked Dorothy, and I think she possibly liked me, so that I would often go round to their house – utterly forbidden, of course. And there, Aunt Dorothy had a large table in their elegant drawing room, with huge jigsaw puzzles, which she and I would do together.
And so, yes, it was crossing frontiers, actually. But, we had left. My father had lost his battles and we lived in Gorleston-on-Sea... the happiest year of my life! My sister and I would go barefoot down the road, across the road, over the promenade down to the beach and the promenade down there. And that was just… just gorgeous, and I suppose we had about a year there.

And then my father, as I say, decided that when war broke out, if Hitler came, he would naturally land his invading army in Gorleston-on-Sea. So, he said to us, devious man that he was, 'We're going to have a holiday down in Devon. You'll love that'. So, we drove down to Devon. And in fact, his plan was that we should stay in Devon, that wherever Hitler landed, he'd never make it to Barnstaple!
So there we were. We lived outside Barnstaple in Devon. And there were attractions about that. For instance, I found that there was a man who had written a book called The Journal of a Disappointed Man. Now, I could look it up, but the mere title was an attraction to me, and actually that is a very funny book with its grumpy side, and I love that book.
I also came across, I can't think how, the journals of a young Russian woman, called Marie Bashkirtseff, and I read that and read that. And I suppose the attraction was that the Bashkirtseff's wedding... marriage in Moscow, had collapsed, and so the wife had gone into exile – goodness knows what her connections had been – she went into exile with her daughter Marie to... what's that town in the south of France? Come on, everyone knows it, but me.
[Q] Nice?
Nice, yes, that's right. They went to live in Nice, and there was no doubt from these journals, that Nice was a lot more attractive than Barnstaple, Devon. So I read that over and over.
And one day I said to my father, time sort of marching on, 'Dad, have I got to go back to Framlingham?' And I knew that if I went back, I was now old enough to have to go into that horrible brothel of the Senior School. There's been a row recently about homosexuality in schools. I've never seen this particular school mentioned. But that's what I said to my father, rather timidly, 'Have I got to go back to Framlingham?' And he said, very casually, 'Oh no, we'll find you a local place'.
A local place! God, I was saved. And he sent me to West Buckland School, which was 10 miles or so from Barnstaple... a wonderful school... I'm now vice-president of it. And funnily enough, from Framlingham that was a hotbed of horror, bullying and everything, West Buckland wasn't like that at all. It's true that it had a lot of chaps who had been sent by their parents from London because London was getting bombed, but it was a very nice school. It was true that one was hungry most of the time, but then that was… perhaps wartime life like that.
And so, when I was there, I more or less continued as I had done in Humphrey Fenn's emporium, which is to say that I told stories. And what I did was, I would write them out, longhand of course, and circulate them, and it was a penny a read. But so eager was I to be read, that I would foreswear the penny in many cases. And these stories became very popular, and the way it ran was you would have the title – I got this from American magazines which I was then reading – you'd have the title and underneath it would be a sort of line of description. And because it was quoted back to me, I remember one of those lines which was, 'He went to New York for a change of obscenery'. It still strikes me as funny. That was the kind of way it went, so that I became really quite popular... always in fear that the headmaster would find me out and I would get sacked.

Three years of West Buckland and meanwhile the war went on and I went... there was a recruiting office in Barnstaple, just a little… a little hut really, and I went into there and volunteered for the Army, or to serve in the war. And the sergeant there had a book in front of him and he looked it up and he said, 'Ah, hmm, yes, well… you could do well in the submarine service – plenty of people wanted there'. So I said, 'No, I can't say that appeals to me'. Turned over the page and he said, 'Hmm, Royal Signals, no, they don't want anyone', and turned over... and I thought – ah, Royal Signals? So I said, 'Yes, fine, thank you very much', and I volunteered for Royal Signals.
And I was sent to train, oh yes, in Norwich, that's right, the barracks in Norwich, which were huge, and curiously enough my father had trained there in World War I because they'd lived nearby in Dereham. But I had come all the way from Barnstaple and I still went into those barracks. And I had the advantage over many of the chaps that, having been in a public school, I was trained in various degrees of bullshit, like smartening up a uniform and getting out the gates and going down into town with my friend Eddie Breeze. And yes, Eddie Breeze and I had quite a good time, in various ways.
And so, then there came a time, when we had gone through the course and we were going to be distributed among the Armed Forces, and so we went on parade and the captain in charge of us said, 'Right, now men, we're going to have volunteers. Which of you will volunteer for Italy?' And to my horror, my friend Eddie Breeze stepped forward. I said to him, 'For Christ's sake, you're going to Italy!' He wanted to go to Italy. He went to Italy, and he was killed.
So the next thing was, 'Which of you want to go to India?' Well, by this time, there weren't many of us left, so I stepped forward. You see, they said India, they didn't say Burma, because Burma was the name of terror; India sounded okay. I mean, it belonged to the British, anyhow. And so, I went out to Burma.
And that, really, is the end of childhood.

[Q] Were you very fond of him – Eddie?
Oh yes. We got on fine - great jokes, great fun. Yes, and since most of the chaps, actually, in that… I suppose platoon would be the word – in the platoon I was being trained, most of them were pretty thick. We'd been to a public school, and whatever else it had done to us, it had made us pretty well alert.
And for instance, there was one guy who had decided he would become friendly with the lance-corporal and the corporal and the sergeant who were in charge of our platoon, thinking that this would get him off lightly. And so – they were bastards actually, they were horrible. That was the Royal Norfolk.
And these guys said, 'Oh yes, come on, come on, Derek, come with us!' And so they took him out and they got him absolutely smashed. And I can remember him. They delivered him at the top of the stairs and then let him drop. And he fell on the stone and spewed all over himself, and that was the way they treated you if you tried to be friendly. And Eddie and I would have none of that. We were used to wickedness after years in a public school. And so, poor old Eddie, he got killed in Italy, but I survived Burma.
And then… then came a whole hiatus.

While we were at West Buckland, of course, we were tortured by news of the war and we were doing nothing, just kicking our heels and attending lessons. And, I have to say, that many… many of the masters teaching us had been combed from all over the place. Why? Because in wartime, men had been conscripted so that the masters who taught us were a very varied… varied lot. Mr McLintock was retired, but nevertheless, he taught the OTC, and he was a good man.
Then there was Mr Dale, Daly Boy… Daly Boy. Daly Boy taught us geography, and I think we made fun of him.
And, there was Harold Boyer... now Harold, I can't speak highly enough of Harold. You see, why was Harold there? Because he was of German extract and he was married to a charming lady, and they had, I suppose, they had fled from any centre of cultivation [sic], and they lived in a small cottage. I visited them there – a small cottage by steep cliffs on either side and this little river running by. So that every morning, Harold would walk two miles up to school to teach us. And he came from this place where the cottage was, which on the map is identified as Charles Bottom – always known at school as Charlie's Arse, of course. Charlie's Arse was where Harold Boyer lived.  And Boyer was a marvellous teacher, and he would walk up and down and say, 'Facts! You must have facts'. We used to imitate him doing that.
But… he discovered that I was writing stories, and instead of beating me for it, he tried to induce me to write better stories. And he and I did establish a kind of rapport – the sort of rapport that, I don't know, I think is rather rare, but then, it was wartime.

At the end of the school year, the four Houses in West Buckland put on their House concerts. Now, I was in Fortescue House.
What should I say about Fortescue? We thought it was the best… the best House, and while I was there, we always sat at the first tables, where the leading House sat. And Boyer encouraged me to write things for the House concert. And in the end, I went the whole hog: I wrote everything. I did poems, I did songs, I did playlets, and I had a marvellous time. And Boyer was sort of encouraging on the sidelines, and we put on… and I acted in the House… in the House concert.
There was a chap in Fortescue whose name was Vyan. How did my poem about that go?
'Vyan, you may wonder why,
Vyan is over six feet high.
For when measured he is found,
To stop two yards above the ground.'
And so on and so on... That sort of thing.
And yes, it was such a success that afterwards I went into the school Sister's room, and she kissed me. She kissed me! Oh, goodness, and… and from then on, she and I became rather closer, so much so... Yes, she had a kind of private part of the school behind where the laundry was stacked, and she had a little… a little bedroom.  And I did get into bedroom with her… into bed with her. Quite, quite extraordinary. Oh, she was beautiful... God, I've forgotten her name… forgotten her name! But, sometimes in the holidays, she would come into Barnstaple and take a room in the Fortescue Hotel, and I'd go and see her there and we'd make love there. I've no idea of what happened to her. I believe... no, I don't know. I was away.
You see, being called overseas, into what, in those days, was invariably called the Far East, it was so far, you couldn't get back. The only planes flying were Dakotas. Dakotas were invaluable! So, you couldn't get back, and so I spent three years in the Far East after hostilities… after they were over.
Most of the places, of course, were British-owned, although that's not entirely so. I spent a year in Sumatra. Oh, how lovely Sumatra was.

There was this about the school Sister was… well, I mean, she was in authority as a… as a Sister, but… so she was calm and collected, she knew what she wanted. The… the other girls I mentioned, oh – they were much younger, I was much younger. We didn't actually know what we were doing or rather what to do with what we'd got hold of, you know, it was just a kind of demonstration. The Sister was… the Sister of schools was another matter. So, what could I say about that? No, I couldn't say anything, but I certainly think it was such good fortune to know her and to love her. She was a really very nice woman.

I had this card from a friend of mine in Australia, Colin Steele. He used to work at the Bodleian. This is a card that contains a quotation by Mark Twain, and Mark Twain says, 'It isn't so astonishing, the number of things that I can remember as the number of things that I can remember that aren't so'. There's a caution for you. But, I believe that everything I've told you so far is as I remember it, because it's tattooed on my arm, as it were.
Did I want to be a writer? Did I know what it was like to be a writer? Well, I mean, I carried on writing… I carried on writing, even in the army, it's true. I wrote, I wrote an erotic detective novel. Actually it was a very short novel, called Her Dear Dead Body... and I lent it to some bastard who never returned it.
So that I was writing then, but it was just something that I did, and when I was in Sumatra, I had a lot of free time there. And so I started a Section magazine, called – a very plebeian name – The Glad Rag. And I used to write things for that.
But did I... what did I think about the future? Well, one thing I thought about the future was this: that I would stay in the Far East, because I met a wonderful Chinese girl, and... sorry, there seem to be a lot of women in this, but, in fact, it wasn't so.

The books I read as a child, I think there weren't very many. My father had on his shelves, only a Daily Telegraph History of World War I, that I did consult quite a lot. But, apart from that, I didn't like Alice in Wonderland; I don't know why. Everyone else was nuts about it. But, his other book I liked – Through the Looking Glass. That seemed to me to have a kind of metaphysical meaning, and that... that attracted me. And I think, even at that time, something that could vaguely be called metaphysical, attracted me.
For instance, HG Wells... my memory here is possibly mistaken. I have thought that there was a time when everyone in England read Mr HG Wells. He was kind of friendly and he wrote marvellous stories, not all of science fiction, but, yes, sort of ordinary, mysterious stories. That I very much liked.
I also found, down in Barnstaple, there was a WH Smith's and outside it had a bench covered with bargain books. And so there I bought quite a few books, although I can't remember what they were. But, Mr HG Wells must have taken a lot of my reading space, I think. As well as... what else? Well, certainly Marie Bashkirtseff... no, I hadn't got into Tolstoy... that was later, much later.
I think I would read all kinds of things. This Journal of a Disappointed Man, and I was reading science fiction magazines quite early, and they were talking about Nietzsche, and I didn't know who Nietzsche was, so I joined the Barnstaple Athenaeum, to their deep astonishment. They had never had a boy of 12 before, and I can't remember them as being very friendly. I do remember sitting in an armchair by the fire, reading about Nietzsche, and people sort of staring at me in disbelief. Later on, my dear literary agent knew far more than I did about Nietzsche. But, certainly that was one of the things that science fiction magazines encouraged one to do: to read elsewhere.

I then read Biggles. Biggles was a great favourite for boys, and I took up a weekly magazine, called Modern Boy. How old was I when I started Modern Boy, I wonder? Possibly eight? And in Modern Boy, there were lots of adventures, week by week, that took place all over the world. For instance, there was a chap with his kanakas, scouring the Pacific that I quite enjoyed.
But what I most enjoyed were the stories of a man calling himself Murray Leinster... no, he was called... sometimes Leinster, but, generally Murray Roberts. He wrote stories about Captain Justice. Captain Justice, my hero! My hero. Captain Justice had a floating island called Station A that was in the middle of the Atlantic. And Captain Justice would be called upon when there was any global problem too big for the USA and Britain to solve. Send for Captain Justice. And Captain Justice had a wonderful airship, called the Flying Cloud. And the Flying Cloud was the invention of a Professor Flaznagel, and Flaznagel was one of Captain Justice's team. And this wonderful Flying Cloud, you could pull a lever and it would become totally invisible. Wonderful! Wonderful!
So, Justice had a great deal of problems on his hands. For instance, it turned out that the Sargasso Sea was full of frogmen, who were six feet high and very nasty indeed, and Captain Justice had to defeat them.
And eventually – I think it was possibly Murray Roberts' last Captain Justice book – he wrote a novel called, The World in Darkness. I collected all of his books – they were 4d, four pence – and I gave them to a science fiction museum on the Continent.

I just loved Captain Justice, and curiously enough, when I was becoming a writer and Faber first wrote to me and asked me if I would like to make a book of the Brightfount Diaries, I then came under the magisterial help and supervision of Charles Monteith. Charles Monteith was a splendid guy, absolutely amazing, with a wide circle of friends, very, very humorous. And we had two things in common: one thing was, we had both fought in Burma, and Charles was injured in the leg and that injury stayed with him and troubled him for the rest of his life. The other thing we found we had in common was that we had both been reading Modern Boy. I never met anyone else who'd even heard of Modern Boy, but Charles and I had been reading it. And so that was something we had in common, and Charles also liked Captain Justice.

And so we come to the Troopship Otranto. Otranto was moored up in the docks of Glasgow. Those of us who were trained in Norwich went by train up to the ship, and it was moored up, securely. We went up the gangplank and immediately I saw one of the guys was seasick – the ship hadn't moved! The power of psychology was demonstrated there and then. Anyhow, we were then allocated various bunks, and as it happened, I was allocated a bunk on H deck. Now, H deck was on the keel! The ship was crowded with people.
So, off we went and actually, one was quite excited you know, and of course it was marvellous to do this extraordinary voyage. And so we got through the Mediterranean and that was okay, and we moored up for a time at, what I suppose would be outside Suez. And signs of exoticism… signs of exoticism were pretty negligible. What you could see there was a huge sign that said, 'For your throat's sake, smoke Craven A'. Terrible!
So, eventually we were slotted through into the Suez Canal, okay. And yes, the Suez Canal actually proved rather boring, but still, there we are. It was the Suez Canal and one was seeing it, for what one thought was probably the one and only time of one's life. Oh, but I've missed out one good bit of terror which is when we were in the Mediterranean, we... the ship stopped. The engines failed. Everything stopped. It was nothing to do with the Germans it was just the ship itself. And so… and then, down on the keel at H deck, all the lights went out! And everyone stood tense. Can you imagine what that was like? If the ship was going to sink, we had to get to the deck above, which was full of people and the deck above that was full of people – we were never going to get out, we were going to drown. Wholesale. And you could actually feel the tension rising. I can... yes, you could feel the tension rising. And then I heard myself calling out in a large, unconcerned voice, 'Anyone want to buy a watch?' And immediately everyone roared with laughter, and the tension dispersed. Anyone want to buy a watch? Yes. Dear, dear.

We got down the Suez Canal and we sailed, whatever the sea might be and when we got in sight of Bombay, the Otranto had to stop again because obviously there were other ships there, and they had to wait for a while. And so, paddling at feverish pace, all kinds of little boats came out to see us, to sell us things. And, of course, we were enchanted by this, well, some of us were. And yes, you looked down from the rail, and there were these guys, 'Sir, you want to buy a wallet?' etc., etc.
And yes, and so I said, 'How much for a wallet?' 'Oh sir, for you sir, only four rupee'. 'Alright.' I hadn't learnt to haggle then, so... did I have four rupees? It must have been four quid, I guess, four pounds. And so, I sent it down on a string and he sent up a wallet. I had no use for that wallet, I've never had any use for that wallet, but it is right here in my study, in one of these drawers. A virgin wallet from those times.
So then, eventually, the ship went in very, very slowly, very cautiously and moored up against one of the docks. And so, we disembarked. And how long had we taken? I believe it was a month on that ship. It was extraordinary, with pretty rotten grub, etc. And there we were in India.
And we went to the railway station. And what happened there? Yes, it had a large waiting area, but to me it was meat and drink, you know, I was in India. Jesus, India! Think of it! And so there was a big stationers, a book store, and I went and looked at that and it had... it was selling a magazine called something like India Cinema with lots of guys and girls on the cover and I thought this would be fun, and I bought it. I've actually still got that, somewhere; I always treasured it. And I found that criticism in there was much harsher than any criticism you'd find in the English equivalent. For instance, they would say, 'Oh, Mr Das Gupta, this is a silly man – he's bald! Who wants him as a hero?' So, I treasured all this, and read it as we got on the train. And the train took us to Mau, which was where Royal Signals trained and I don't know who else.
And so, yes, there was the British barracks, designed and built on the British format. One of the things that we'd be doing in India, and it was okay. It was very good as regards airiness, and of course, you had a mosquito net. Yes, all that was very interesting – on the whole, I think I liked it. Yes, I think I liked it.

There were things that I didn't like. I mean, we were marched about a lot, and we couldn't go far. But that was... gradually, things were relaxed. Some people had become ill on ship-board, and so they were taken away to somewhere, I don't know – hanged, drawn and quartered, for all I knew.
But we... those of us surviving... would go down into the village at night, and it was terribly exotic. Of course, there was no electricity – the British wouldn't have electricity, but chaps would have flares and lights of all kinds of little sparklers… goodness knows what. And it seemed a marvellous place. But, chaps would come and say, 'Sahib, you want something to eat?' Well, of course we wanted something to eat. And so… but there was one restaurant that used to do poached eggs on toast! So, instead of eating the local khana, we ate eggs on toast. Pathetic, when I think of it.

Then, eventually, the time came when we were moved to Burma. And that was a very slow process and it involved… it involved going by train some of the way. And certainly, I remember being shed at one station, and the people in charge of the trains were RTO officers, and obviously some of them weren't very good at their job, because at that station, I had to get off, and I had to sleep on the platform – nowhere else to sleep.
And I can see now, that this wasn't the best of arrangements. But, at the time, I was... I think I was pretty excited by it, thinking oh, this is the bloody army, you know. I mean, fed up as troops were all the time, not expecting anything better. And next morning, a man came up very politely and said, 'You want some breakfast, Sahib? Breakfast khana?' 'Yes, I would like some'. So, I went, but then the train came in, and so they said, 'No, Sahib, you get on the train. We help you'. I got on the train. I sat by the window, they brought me a tray of whatever it was I'd ordered, and the waiter hung onto the train, outside. And we travelled 200 miles, while this poor sod hung on outside, because he had to take the tray back. Oh God, I mean really, was that what we were fighting for?

Eventually, we got to the very doorway of Burma.
I can't remember what happened next. I was certainly allocated to a different Signals Group, and, yes… and we were taken by lorry along a newly built road, that we knew as the Burma Road it – actually wasn't the Burma Road, but it was known as the Burma Road because no-one could think of a better name, I suppose.
And when we got to Milestone 86, we were dropped off and there we stayed... Oh God, oh yes... the accommodation was miserable, and I was put into a tent that was already occupied by infantry. Infantry, of course, has vast contempt for Royal Signals. So I had to pitch my little... what did we call it? What was the word for bed? I've forgotten – anyhow, on the edge of the tent. And in the night, I fell off the edge into the nettles, and – miserable – but, I'll say this for these bastards of infantry, they did come and pick me up and stick me back in the tent.
And, to wash in the morning, they had got... I mean, the mountain stretched up and the mountain stretched down. The mountains that stretched up carried streams, and one of the streams had been induced to go into a vast black pipe, and it spewed its water out into a pool. And so, what you had to do was to strip off and go and stand in this absolutely freezing water! Oh, God! But that was the way of keeping clean.

What it was like in Burma – I would think action would be difficult… different from the true fighting to be in Signals because we had a little Dodge truck – everything was American, everything was American – a Dodge truck, okay. And that would carry us forward, and our job was to be really isolated between Division, on the one hand, and Brigade, on the other. And what we could do would be to communicate between one and the other.
And so, we learnt Morse code, and Morse code, you know, was another form of speech... do they still have Morse code? Probably not, probably not. But in those days, you learned Morse code and you could pick it up quickly, and you could send it quickly at 60 or even 80 words a minute, which was quite, quite fast. But I did get very fast at doing it and at sending it. And that was what we would do, mainly at night-time, but not only at night-time, but we would certainly work through the night.
And, yes, such was the routine. The days were divided into three. One of the days was supposedly a day off, the other day one worked morning and afternoon, and on the third day one worked all night. And these messages poured through from Brigade, and we relayed them on to Division.
And… for more than one time, we were actually attacked by wandering Japanese, a gang of Japanese. You see, at this stage, although our supply lines were terribly extended, just think of the Japanese supply lines. They were very, very bad indeed. And so these guys were starving and angry and they wanted to attack us – well, they wanted to kill us, but they also hoped they'd find some food. And so, we only had Lee Enfield rifles, the old rifle, the old rifle that the British had used in war after war. The Lee Enfield... God Almighty. And with that we could shoot the Japs when they tried to attack our little vehicle.

Well, and so life went on, and there was a time when we were crossing the River Chindwin, and two of us were separated – we were always short of men in Signals – and so two of us were separated from the truck which was our HQ. And we had to work at night with what was then, I believe it was called a 22 Set – we hadn't yet got to the 19 Set, which was better – the 22 Set, okay. So, we'd work throughout the night and we would be absolutely alone in the wilderness; they'd just drop us and then buzz off – collect us in the morning.
And so one of us would work an hour on, full scale, while the other one tried to sleep and then it would change over. And that was absolutely terrifying because, as you lay down to sleep, there was a perpetual rustling and scurrying. And, if it wasn't Japs you were afraid it was snakes which were rife, certainly. And endless birds hopping about, so it was really a terrifying, terrifying ordeal. And then you would do some… an hour's sending and so on, and so it went. And that was about the nastiest thing that happened, and fortunately no Japanese stumbled across us.
But at one place we were outside a place, possibly called Shwebo, but I can't really remember, but it was near Shwebo, and there we actually had a tent and that was really rather... very pleasant to have a tent, quite a long tent. And so there would be possibly eight people sleeping in there. And it was next to a village on the other side of a thicket, and a very tall... a very tall tree which bushed out a great deal at the top. And we were interested in what went on at the top, because we could see there were animals up there. And we didn't like that, I mean, any animal was bad news in Burma.
So, on this particular evening, I was lying in my charpoy in this tent, and one of these creatures came down the tree – you could hear it kind of crashing down. And it then... it stood in the entrance to the tent. I was the only one awake! I suppose I was the only one awake, and I could see this bloody thing, and it then steadily came into the tent. My God! Was it quite large and black in my memory, although I'm not sure that that's to be trusted. And there I lay, and it came… it came right opposite me and it looked at me, and I looked at it, and I couldn't get my rifle out – I didn't dare move. And so it looked and it looked, and then it thought, oh fuck, and it went off out the other way. That was extraordinary. It was my one encounter, actually, with animal life, I think, in Burma although we did see a few snakes we shot.

Oh and then, the other side of this barricade or fuselage... was part of a little village, and there there were only Burmese women as far as we could see, but they would come out and work... I don't know what they were doing with the grain, they were doing something or other with the grain, but they would… they would also have a dance. And so we were allowed to stand and watch them dance. And it was so peculiar that there, in the middle of this ghastly war, women danced. You know, it does say something about the other sex. Amazing.
So then we moved on again and eventually the troops took Mandalay. And so... yes, I think I was rather ill then, but our Signals truck drove into Mandalay, and we got out and walked about. And people used to sing... was that song written by Kipling? 'On the road to Mandalay, where the flying fishes lay' – 'play', sorry – 'and the dawn comes up like thunder out of China, across the bay'. Everyone knew that song.
But then, it's curious to think that even in those times, there were elements of culture. For instance, when we first went into Burma, when we were still in a kind of no-man's-land by Imphal, which was a smouldering ruin, we were then all gathered together before we dispersed into Burma. And the CO, whose name I once had, but I've now forgotten, the CO lectured to us about what we were doing for the honour of the British Empire, etc., etc. And he ended by quoting from... is it Henry V? 'Gentlemen in England now abed, shall hold their manhood cheap, whilst any speaks that fought with us, upon St Crispin's Day'.
And the effect that had was that many of… most of the troops, who'd never heard it before, shed tears or had tears in their eye. I've never forgotten it, it was wonderful that this CO should quote Shakespeare. Very fine, very fine. Yes.

And so indeed, we did manage to re-take Mandalay. And what happened from then? Well, we slowly dispersed; there was nothing more to do, except get the Japs out the way and they were packed off in groups and sent down to Rangoon and sent back to Japan. I don't think they were shot; I never heard the British shooting.
So, yes – and we were in Rangoon or on the edges of Rangoon.
There had been a story... was this about Rangoon or Singapore? I think it was about Singapore, when it was being surrounded by the Japanese, the Governor of Singapore phoned Winston Churchill, and said, 'Mr Churchill, sir, I have here 3000 rounds of ammunition. What am I to do with them?' And Churchill said, 'How about firing it at the enemy?' Yes, well, an instruction, I think, that was not carried out. Anyhow. Then, I suppose, the war was over. Did we celebrate?
Oh, first of all... Oh, Christ... no, there was another crisis because we were then going to have to do a seaborne operation to the islands occupied by Japanese. And while we were… we were on a beach somewhere, trying to get these ships ready to sail and a Sergeant-Major came among us, and said, 'Alright, you men, the war in Europe's over. Break off for a smoke'. The war in Europe was over, but our war wasn't.  But then, fortunately, it was and so we never invaded those islands.

And so then, we hung about in the Far East, as I've said, for three years before we got home. And wouldn't you think when these brave boys came back home, and the troop ship moored up at Liverpool docks, wouldn't you think there'd be a crowd waiting for us to cheer, and a band to play – wouldn't you think that? There was no one there. Bugger all. It was empty and I thought that was such a disgrace. And still, to these days, I hold it against the British that they didn't do anything for those boys who had spent three years out there.
That was very bad. And when we got back, within a month, they celebrated our return by putting bread on ration. It was better in the Far East, let me tell you – it was better in Hong Kong.
And England was so run down, and run down and apparently not making much effort to get out of it, whereas in Hong Kong, everything was still going. People were starting up. You went down to the docks, guys would come in with massive baskets on their shoulders, full of toads, from God knows where, that the Chinese were going to eat. Quite different. And we could swim, of course, in Hong Kong. We did a lot of swimming from Big Wave Bay.
Back in England… oh God, it was so dreary. But what was a chap to do? Well, one thing this chap did, of course, was keeping on writing.
So, that was the end of the war.

Many things you might think... many things we might have thought, but we had no communication really with the outside world.
I suppose we heard about Hiroshima, but of course, that was American. And so communications probably weren't all that good. Nevertheless, it was the Americans that supported us all the way along. I mean, at one time they flew us out of the jungles of Burma.
Oh, God... and that was a nightmare, because there were three of us stationed in the midst of Burma – God knows why or where – and there was a great forest to the south of us, and it had caught fire and it was burning and with the wind to help us, it was burning very fast. And moreover, there were two strands of wood, of forest, with a gap in between. I guess that in peaceful days that had been a landing strip, but now it was full of weed about knee-high. And so, these great belts of flame were coming up the hill towards us, and the two chaps I was with gave up and said, 'Well this is it, we're finished. Let's just stay here'.
But I had another idea, I said, 'Look, let's go and stand in the middle of this landing strip, okay? We should be okay there'. And they said, 'But that's on fire, too'. And it was true that the vegetation and the weeds were there naturally, they caught fire from this tremendous holocaust on either side. Have I ever been more terrified than I was then? I don't think so. But nevertheless, I did have my wits about me, and I said, 'Look guys, let's stand in the middle here. Yes, okay, these things are on fire, but it dies out, you know. We can step over these flames, and it's all ashes. It will be okay'. And so they did that, and we stood there while this vast conflagration roared up to us, and roared past so that the trees were left as stumps. And of course, we were a bit scorched, but we were okay. We lived. We fucking well lived by my initiative!
So then, we tramped up to the top of the hill, and there a Dakota landed that was going to take us… it was going to take us to Chittagong, actually, in India. And it had an American pilot, and so he directed the three of us to get into the back of the Dakota and off we flew.  And we could see – looking back – we could see the scars of this terrible conflagration.
So, anyhow, eventually we got to Chittagong. We landed on a little landing strip, and the pilot, a very friendly guy, came back and let us out, and he said, 'Did none of you guys throw up?' And we said, 'We've had nothing to eat for two days'. He says, 'If you had been Americans, you would all have thrown up'. You know, but you had something to eat, didn't you? So he shut up then. But it was true that we'd nothing to eat for two days. Bloody hell! When I think of those days, I mean, well... But of course, you took it for granted, you know, you were still alive.

[Q] Did you have to do any killing?
I always hoped that I would kill a Jap. Whether I did or not, when our Signal Office on Wheels was attacked, I don't know – I certainly tried to. Once we got to India, I think, the Lee Enfield's were taken away from us, and we were given Sten guns – much better at killing Japs or Indians or anyone else that annoyed us.
And what happened there in India? Well, I dread to think...
Well, one thing that happened was... I was more or less on leave. I suppose I was given leave probably, but this didn't mean much at all. I took a trip in a ferry boat across the River Hooghly, to the Calcutta Botanical Gardens, and there it was that I saw something billed as the biggest tree in the world. And it was big – not as a sequoia is big, that goes up that way – it was big because it kept growing, rather lowly, not much taller than a man, but spreading outward all the time. And it was very carefully looked after, so that goats couldn't come and eat it as they did with many banyans. And many of the branches were painted white, to keep off insects, and so this was a very fine sight to see. You could walk round this... the biggest tree in the world.
And of course, there came to me this idea: what happens when it covers the world? Because, at the rate it was growing, it seemed a distinct possibility.
So, when I finally, finally got back to England, I looked up this banyan tree and found there was an article in... possibly the Cornhill [Magazine]... by Aldous Huxley's brother, Julian Huxley, about the banyan. Yes, very interesting. It was encased within a discussion about life and death, I think, and how some things, with care, could live forever like the banyan tree. And so, I was very pleased to see that it had a kind of an authentication by Julian Huxley.
And I suppose it must have been shortly after that that I wrote a short story, called Hothouse, which I sold to the Americans. And it was very popular, and so the editors said to me, 'Brian, this was so popular... couldn't you continue the story?' And so, I continued it and it became more and more popular, and I continued it more and more, and so that eventually I was forced around the dark side of the planet. And all those stories were a great success particularly, I think, in America where on the whole, they're more indulgent to science fiction than the British ever were, despite Mr HG Wells.
And so, I made them all into a coherent novel, and that sold very well and still sells well, and I believe now it's a Penguin Modern Classic. So, that's how long after that... well, half a century at least. Funny how things turn out.

Things in India became rather more difficult than they were. Before, everyone under the British Raj seemed to have been very obliging. But then, a deal had been done between heads of state that if the Indians fought on the British side, then India would be returned to the Indians. And the people that did that deal were not actually Gandhi, although he was a prime mover, I think, but by the heads of state, whose names elude me at the present.
So, I was in... there was one particular bit of India that I liked very much. This had a large open space, buildings all around it, but two book shops. One book shop on one side and, rather opposite, a slightly smaller one on the other side. Now, the one on this side was run purely by an Indian, and on the other side, the chap was a Muslim Indian, and he was not as friendly as the pure Indian. And I often used to go there, and used to buy books from him, and talk to him. And he was very friendly, he had a very good command of English, and the English were getting out. And so I said to him, 'Well, I suppose this time had to come, and you'll be pleased about it'. And he looked me in the eye and he said, 'You see that man over there, with that other book shop? As soon as the British go, I have to fight him and he has to fight me, so I'm not so happy'.
And it came out that the guy understood the situation; that was what happened. But the British had said they would get out, and as I was crossing this square, a number of Indians came rushing out from somewhere with large stones and hurled them at me!
I ran the faster and at the far side of the square, there was a British lorry and it was revving up to go and so I ran like the devil and managed to cling on to the tailboard, whereupon two guys, who were in there, came and helped me and got me in, and these cobbles hit the side of the vehicle as we left the square.  And that was 'adios' to the British.

What happened to the British troops who were there, possibly in their thousands... maybe not? Anyhow, the solution of Royal Signals was to shift us to Sumatra. Sumatra.
The dictator there [in Thailand] was a pretty ruthless man, but he had taken control over Sumatra, and the trouble was Sumatra had been owned by the Dutch. So, the Dutch were coming back and the British, for various reasons, some good, some bad, hated the Dutch. And so, a deal was done with the Indonesians that the British could stay unharmed in Sumatra for five years, or whatever, provided they wouldn't let the Dutch back.
And so, there we suddenly found ourselves with a little war with the Dutch. I mean, it beats cock-fighting, doesn't it? Oh, dear, we drove them off... you know, they would try and land, and we wouldn't have it. And so, that pleased the Indonesians… Indonesians, yes, and so they put up with us, but it was only going to be pro tem. And there were... again, one understands... there were those people there who didn't want the British any more than they wanted the Dutch. But we didn't interfere much. We had our various bases, and so on and so on. And we took over... well, we took over what had been a small Dutch village, and so we could live in Dutch accommodation, and what's more we could go looting in all the other houses that had belonged to the Dutch.

And there was nothing for us to do, really. It's true now and then, a bullet or two would be exchanged, but there was nothing for us to do. But nearby to where, on the whole, we were situated, there was a large... it was always known as a barn – I suppose it had been a barn – a Dutch barn. And we had taken over this barn. So, the commanding officer, whose name began with a B... something like Bigress... I forget... he was an Indian, because I was then in 26th Indian Division, he called me in front of him and he said, 'Aldiss, I understand you are a painter'. 'Yes, sir, I am. I'm an artist'. 'Very good. Well now, I want you to take over this barn and decorate it with paintings, so that we can ask in the locals and give them something pleasant to think about'. 'Yes, sir!'
So, I moved into this marvellous barn. It had endless... not endless... it had several compartments, including, in the rear of it, delightful little living quarters! And so I moved out of my house and moved into those living quarters, and I had two sepoys to look after me and attend to all my needs and to clean the place. And, meanwhile, I was free to paint gigantic boards with whatever I fancied. And what I fancied, was women dancers. And so, some were gentle, nubile-looking local dancers, and some were big, fat Dutch lady dancers, and so on and so on. And this I did all round.
And the captain came round to see what I was doing, and I showed him, and he said, 'Very good, Aldiss. I shall have to...' – there's a term… an Army term for this – 're-coordinate what you are. You are no longer a Wireless Operator, you're a Draughtsman'. 'Very good, sir. Thank you, I'd like to be a Draughtsman'. 'I think you would like it, because it entails better pay'. 'Oh, thank you, sir'.
So, there we were, living in this marvellous barn. And I got in touch with a cinematic group who came and showed films – who knows, once a fortnight, maybe? And we could have beanos there for the men, but we could also have dances for the local women and men. And people were remarkably well behaved, quite extraordinary. Yes, they'd come and really enjoy themselves. And we had a band going, you know. Some Milwaukee beer, which was rather weak, and thoroughly enjoyed ourselves and it was all under my control. I was laughing, and really, when I look back, it's the one time in my life when I've actually been independent. Can you believe that? Well, it's not quite true, but it's almost the truth.
And that went on for some time.

I had a friend in the MT section, and he hadn't got much to do, so I would go and say to him, 'Have you got a Jeep you could let me have?' 'Yes'. And so I would take my Chinese lady friend in the Jeep, and we'd go down and motor into town, go down the Cassowaan, which was the main street, and she would try on hats, and pirouette and do all those things that ladies did, including some things that not all ladies do. And that was very nice.
And so, really, that time in Sumatra was very pleasant. Instead of this feeling that time was passing and I wasn't doing anything, I felt I actually was doing something worthwhile, and I so liked being in the East. Also, I wanted to marry this Chinese lady.
So, my idea was, really, that I thought if I took her back to Britain, she might be affected by the colour bar, so why don't I just marry her and we go and live in Singapore. Singapore at that time was such a nice place. I could get a job in the bank, and we could live there very happily.
And so, I went to see the commanding officer for permission to get married – you had to do these things – and he was a bit doubtful about this. 'What, you want to marry a Chinese woman?' Now, he himself was Indian so I don't quite know what he implied by that. So, I said, 'I do, sir. I love her very dearly'. So he said, 'Hmm. Well, you know, British Army doesn't go in for marriages. I suppose it could be arranged'. And so I said, 'There is just one obstacle, sir. She's got to get a divorce, first'. And he said, 'Get out!' And that was it. They weren't going to have any of that nonsense.
So, eventually, the time came when the British lease with the Indonesians had expired, and so we had to get out. I don't know how many British there had been there... can't have been a great number... shall we say, a hundred, two hundred? I'm guessing... I've no idea.
Anyhow, we went across the water to Singapore, and the idea was that I should write to the lady, and she should write to me, and we would get it together and she would come to Singapore.
I wrote. I got no answer. I couldn't understand it, but I assumed that she had written. And it took me many a year to use my intelligence, and realise that the British Army was not a postman, and if they had no connections with the place, they didn't deliver mail. And so, since we had left Sumatra, they would never send anything to Sumatra. They would destroy it, and similarly, anything coming from her would be destroyed. So that was it! It was finished.

And then we got posted to Hong Kong. And Hong Kong was really short of... well, actually, it was short of British to run the place and so, for a brief while, possibly for not more than a month, I became head of the Hong Kong Telephone Exchange, which was not as enjoyable as it had been when I had been running the barn in Sumatra. But, it was something, and on at least two occasions, we drove out in trucks with staves to beat up crooks who were trying to cut the telephone lines to Stanley at the other side of the island, because they could get a lot of money for the cable. So, yes – we found them one night and gave them a few bashes, and off they went. So…
But also, we were more peaceful. We went swimming in Big Wave Bay it was called... beautiful.
These days, of course, Hong Kong and Singapore have become so much bigger and so much over-built. I wouldn't think they're quite as nice as they were then. They were lovely then; Hong Kong was delightful. And, yes, we drove all over the place – no-one shot at us. I can't think of anything against the place, really, except that we were stuck there and by this time, I think we thought it was time we went home.
And so, eventually, a ship called... what was it called? I can't remember what it was called at the moment, but I think I will remember it. It came near the docks, and we were taken by rowing boat or motor boat out to the ship. And I knew this meant that I had to cease to be a kind of brigand, I would have to cultivate myself. And so I bought... what did I buy? The great sea-faring epic from Greek times. What am I talking about?
[Q] The Odyssey.
The Odyssey! Yes, I bought a copy of The Odyssey to read. And so there I sat on the deck as the waves foamed by, reading The Odyssey. And, eventually, we got back to England, with the results that I have already given you.

Did I read all of The Odyssey? I can't remember. It was certainly a long journey and finally, of course, the climate got colder, things got drearier, but eventually we moved round the British Isles and into the port in Liverpool – Liverpool docks. And we were all getting excited. There was going to be a band to meet us, and crowds there cheering us.  Three years abroad in the Far East! No one there. Not even the lowliest sergeant major. Just empty docks. And I've always thought that was a swindle, that they couldn't muster someone to come and welcome us. Bastards! Really, really horrid.
And so, well, we got on a train and we went back to Aldershot and there we checked out and as we left by the gate, there would be a corporal with a slate, and he would say, 'Well, now, chaps, that wasn't too bad, was it? Why don't you sign on for five and seven?' Get lost! Off we went, bought some sort of civilian clothes and dispersed to our destinies.
And England was run down and it lacked the vital electra that they had in the East. The East was buzzing, and England was awful... terribly dead. And where did I go back to? Where were my parents then? Oh, I don't know. Anyhow… oh, they were down in Barnstaple, yes, so I also went down to Barnstaple. And I couldn't bear it there. I had to get a job... I had to do something. And so, one day... I suppose after some tiff with my father, I went down to Barnstaple railway station and got on a train that came to Oxford. There's a new chapter for you. And, yes, and so in Oxford I made my living – as I still do.

I had to get some kind of job, and I went to a bookshop in the High... Sanders. And it was then owned by Frank Sanders and by a coincidence, Frank Sanders also came from Barnstaple. And so he interviewed me, asked me various questions. 'Who's your favourite contemporary author?' And I said, 'Eric Linklater'. 'Oh yes, very good, yes... Eric Linklater. All right, yes, you've got the job'. Later on, he said to me, 'You know, Brian, I'd never heard of Eric Linklater'.
Frank was an extraordinary character full of the good and the bad, terribly untrustworthy, but very, very funny. And so, I suppose I worked for him for two or three years. I had digs round the corner from the shop in King Edward Street with a Miss Pond. Nowadays, that's all solicitors; there's no human habitation at all. But, in those days, I had a little room and so it was easy to get round the corner and get to Sanders. And, I did learn a lot there. Well, I learned about a lot of English artists. Frank Sanders was rather keen on artists, and, in particular, I loved [James] Gillray and Thomas Rowlandson. Rowlandson was wonderful – so funny, so clever, such a good artist, and some of his landscapes are not at all well known, but they're absolutely beautiful.
And so, it was a sort of learning experience for quite a while. Until, finally, I had to go see Frank and say, 'Look, Frank, couldn't you increase my wages?' And he said to me, 'Oh. Come up and see me every Saturday evening, and I'll give you an extra pound. Don't let anyone else know'. And I thought that was so, so underhand. The thought of doing that, was beyond my capacity. I couldn't… I couldn't see myself doing it.  
So I left and worked instead for Parkers. And I was in the antiquarian side which in those days had its entry on the Turl.

And while I was there, of course, the magazine of the book world was The Bookseller... The Bookseller and I would be sort of among the last to see it, and I read it week by week. God, it was serious.
So finally, I wrote to the Editor and said, you know you don't have a comic column. Don't you think that The Bookseller would do better if it had a comic column every week? I would like to write such a column for you. He wrote back and said, come and see me. Bring some of your comic columns.
I wrote six of them, and since I was working, in fact, for Blackwells, Blackwell became Brightfount and my bookshop was Brightfounts... The Brightfount Diaries, and my pseudonym was not Aldiss, but Pica, a small type. OK.
I went up to see the Editor, and that man could speak more slowly than any man I've ever met, rationing himself to one word every ten seconds. But nevertheless, a very nice and intelligent and sympathetic man, who said, 'Well, show us… show us some of these Brightfount strips and if I think they're funny, we'll have them'. And so I gave him those six strips and in no time he wrote and said, 'Brian, go ahead'.
And so, I was published first of all, really, in The Bookseller as Peter Pica of The Brightfount Diaries. And this is an easy way to slip into being a published writer, because it wasn't so long. I suppose I'd been doing this for about a year. I used to write them at the weekends.
I received a very nice letter from Faber & Faber, saying, 'Dear Mr Aldiss, We all enjoy The Brightfount Diaries. We wondered if you'd care to make them into a book'. Make them into a book! You know, I didn't have to submit anything – they asked me! Well, I mean, there's the root of arrogance for you.
So, I went to see them, and they said, 'Have you any ideas about how we produce this?' And I said, 'Yes, I'd like it illustrated'. 'Oh, I see. Have you any idea who you'd like to illustrate it?'
'Yes. I would like Pearl Faulkner to illustrate it'.
Now, Pearl Faulkner was a woman, who as far as I knew, illustrated only in women's magazines.
So, this I said to Faber, and they said, oh yes, jolly good. We'll make you an appointment to go and see her. And so I went to see Pearl Faulkner. She was a bit sort of, high-flung, but agreed and she did very nice illustrations that went into the book, and wasn't that wonderful? Well, I could now think of myself as a writer. It was only a fortnight before publication that I got the equivalent of stage fright, and I thought, oh God, what if they don't laugh? Thank God they did laugh, and it did very well. And so, I became a Faber author.
And that really was... well, the beginning of something or other that still goes on now.

And somewhere along the line... I must tell you this... somewhere along the line, I started to keep a journal, and that's what the journal looked like. It was hard bound – this is A4, isn't it? And it has illustrations in it, it's all handwritten, and it's a record of my life and the life around me and what goes on.
And this is Volume 79. So when I finish this, it will be volume 80. And just fancy – 80 of these volumes... it's about that much book space... and the Bodleian wants it.
The Bodleian are being very nice to me, because, apparently, I can only suppose there's a shortage of people doing such things. Anyhow, there it is, with everything in, everything – all that I see from my narrow perspective goes into this journal.
And it's one consolation to think that when I'm dead and gone, this thing will still exist as a kind of phantom life.

It would be hard at that time to think of a writer who was lucky enough to be published by Faber & Faber. They seemed to me to be the prime publisher in London, not least because at the head was TS Eliot whom I was sometimes allowed to see. If I went up to his room, I would stand there, Eliot would stand there and he would talk to me, and in his room, on the one hand, over the fireplace was a wonderful pencil drawing of Eliot, framed. On the other side was a framed portrait in pencil of Ezra Pound. Pound had a great influence on TS Eliot.
And who had drawn both these... who was the artist? I can't remember at the moment, but it might come back to me.
Anyhow, there they were, and there TS Eliot was. Rather formal, perhaps not understanding the sort of thing that I was writing, and not fully wanting to. I don't know... I know nothing about that. But at least it was something to be in the great man's presence.

Faber & Faber would give a party every year, and at one of those parties came Colin Wilson. Colin Wilson had just published a book called The Outsider, and, moreover, the newspapers had found that Colin Wilson slept on Hayward's Heath... slept on Hampstead Heath. And so this was regarded as a great cachet, and Wilson's name really was everywhere.
A nice man, apparently quite modest, and the author of a second volume which, alas, did not go down at all well, and seems to have ruined Colin's reputation. It's a really terrible story that, and I suppose every author that hears it would dread to think that they might have gone down that hole. Anyhow, Colin in this case, I think, did go down the hole. I don't know what happened to him since.

So, Colin seems to have disappeared from human view. But many years later, I was down in the south of Cornwall, and someone told me that Colin Wilson lived there.
And so, I went to see him. And there was Colin Wilson, still writing books and apparently enjoying life and running about on the sand with children. That was very nice, and not only that, but thrusting upon me some of his most recent writing, including his latest book, the title of which, I am afraid, escapes me. And I took it home and tried to read it.
So, there was a man who regarded himself as a writer, and who never gave up. And actually, that book was published by an obscure American publisher. But he was apparently not humbled by it: he wanted to write, he did write, he wanted to be published and he got published – in complete contrast to another writer I knew at the time.

So there was another writer at the same time as Colin whose name was John Osborne. And John Osborne... in what year was it? His play, Look Back in Anger, was performed and was an enormous success. He had struck, as a kind of... one of these mysterious… mysterious changes that happen in society – it must be slightly to do with the generation change, but, in thinking in some way. And so, Look Back in Anger was wonderfully successful.
And he went on to do other plays that were successful, if not quite as villianously so as the first one. And he wanted to do a play of a book of mine that I'd recently had published, but he never had any luck because of censorship rules.
Anyhow, despite that, I got to know John and we became friendly. My memory suggests that he got married, but then became separated again, but certainly, at the end of his life, I went to see him. I can't think why, but we had got to know each other and so it seemed to me at the time that it was natural to go and see John. And there we were. He had a rather muddy little lake in front of his house, and one could think he was really quite successful and had had a successful career, contrasting with what I have said about Colin's career.
Anyhow, I went home after that meeting, which I had greatly enjoyed, and some days later, I had a five-page letter from Osborne, saying how wretched his life had been, and how disappointed he'd been, and really, with nothing to say for it. What does one do about this? Well, there's nothing much you can do. Of course, you can do what I did, you can write back and say, well, I'm sorry. Of course one was sorry.  Shortly after that, he died, but he's left with this kind of dilemma. Colin was not very successful, really, but nevertheless, running about on the Cornish shore he seemed very happy and was still published. And yet, John was quite different despite all his successes.
This, of course, brings into question of what one should do – or fail to do – about one's own career. But, it's always haunted me that you can have a shadow in life that, apparently, nothing can cure, and that was the case with John, as I judge it.

I married a lady called Olive Fortescue, and she and I were impoverished, and she would take my stories and type them out for me to make them presentable. She did everything she could, and so we worked together – this in a house in Kidlington. And, yes, I think we got on very well with each other. I was very much admiring of her. For one thing, she'd actually consented to marry me, and my career was then very uncertain.
Anyhow, things did improve so much so that we left Kidlington, and I bought a house in Victoria Road in North Oxford. A lovely house! Beautiful and a beautiful road where the houses had front gardens, and the front gardens were tended. In other words, I suppose, I had become middle class. It's an awful thing to say, isn't it really – I don't care for it much. But anyhow, it was better than what we had, and so there we lived and I seemed to be getting rather more successful. It's extraordinary!
And, every year, Olive had insisted that we went for our summer holiday on the Isle of Wight. I couldn't quite see the attraction. In a way, I could – there was the beaches and the swimming and everything, but it was rather dead. Anyhow, that was the Isle of Wight.
Two children had by then been born, a boy and a girl, very dear to me. And we were having a bad time with each other, and Olive's mother complicated the situation – would rush in and give us good advice. I don't know... the mother, I found out, was also living in her own kind of hell, and so she made her daughter a kind of hell.
So, I parted company with Olive. But every now and then, I would go down to see the children, and of course to see her. When I think of those times... the children seemed perfectly happy, and moreover, after a time the children were allowed to come up and stay with me. I'd bought a little house in Marston Street in Oxford, between the Cowley and the Iffley roads. A nice little house. And so they'd come up and see me and stay with me for a day or two, and then I'd take them back. And so, things were fairly equable.

What was it that drove me? What could it have... what kind of discontent could have driven me to think I can't bear this any longer? I'm going to… I'm going to go away, I'm going to drive round Yugoslavia. But that was what I did – that was what I did. I bought a second-hand Land Rover, and I went off with a girlfriend, a woman called Margaret Manson, she came with me and off we went, and we went to Yugoslavia.
Now, two things I must say for that. For one thing, I loved Yugoslavia. I knew I would, and I did, because, if anything, it was a bit like being abroad in the East. The other thing was that I had taken my lady friend, expecting… well, of course, expecting that we would have a sexual companionship. But once we were there, this lady said to me, 'No, we're not married – we can't do this'. I cannot understand it now, and I couldn't understand it then, but that was the way it was.
But, in any case, we travelled round Yugoslavia, and we had visited… we had visited the people that ran the travel in Yugoslavia, and they had opened a vast safe and had given me free petrol coupons. Free petrol coupons. There are times when free petrol coupons are better than sex because, in the whole year that we were in Yugoslavia – this was 1964 – we never, ever paid for petrol, and we just drove round all the various provinces. And, I have to say, that that period was certainly the happiest period of my life, apart possibly, from the year when I was in charge of a barn in... what was the name of the place? The island?
[Q] Sumatra.
Sumatra, yes. So, yes, we saw… we saw the most beautiful things in Yugoslavia, quite hidden from the rest of the world, including the little churches that the Serbs had built in the hills away from the invading Muslims, hoping that the Muslims wouldn't see them and wouldn't close them down, and that had been the case.
And those little churches are part of the inheritance, at least of the Western world, and are not known. I wrote a little booklet about them, which I gave to the local church, and I included them in the book I finally wrote – my one travel book which is called Cities and Stones about Yugoslavia.
Dear Yugoslavia... It broke up after President Tito died, and now the states are separate and are peaceful and have much to be said for them. And several times on holiday we have visited that wonderful coast on the Adriatic, and in particular, the town of Dubrovnik, which is so lovely as indeed it always was, but now, it's better maintained.

The year in Yugoslavia closed down. We came up along the coast and we drove back through Europe eating, possibly rather heavily – which we hadn't managed to do in Yugoslavia – back to England.
And there, we had a talk with Margaret's father, who suggested that I had had a year with his daughter and that I should marry her. Chivalric or not, I didn't like to confront him with the truth. I couldn't bring myself to do that, and I can quite see why I didn't, and that if I had it again, I probably would again fail to have protested, because I suppose the poor man – that was Jack Manson… Jack Manson, he was a good man, I liked him – I suppose he wanted to see his daughter securely married.
Well, so we got married, and she was a delightful lady there's no doubt in many respects. And, as with my first wife, Olive, I had had, or she had had should we say, a boy and a girl, so, with my second marriage, we had another boy and another girl. There's a kind of symmetry there, that might make many people to chew on their metaphysics, wouldn't you think? So it was a successful marriage in many respects. In some respects, it was not as successful and in those respects, I don't want to go into them.

My wife, Margaret, became ill. And whereas she had tended my garden on Boar's Hill. Boar's Hill was outside Oxford.
But eventually, Margaret said to me, 'You know, I'm tired of having to get into a car whenever I want to do the shopping. I want to go back to a town'. Perfectly reasonable argument. So, back to the town we came. And I then realized she was not particularly well, and so I was in haste to buy a house. And in fact, I bought this house in which we are now talking, that is to say, in Headington, one of the elegant suburbs of Oxford.
Here Margaret stayed and alas, here Margaret died.
And I wrote a book in her memory, called When the Feast is Finished. It's a quote from there and it starts, 'But when the feast is finished and the lamps expire, there falls thy shadow, Sonara. The night is thine, and I am desolate and sick of an old passion, yea, all the time, because the night is thine'.
And that was how I felt about the death of Margaret.
However, life goes on and so does storytelling. And, well, she must be dead now for some years.

I certainly was devoted to the idea of writing, and I've never ceased, despite some discouragements. I always kept on doing it as though there was something trying to stop me. Well, I suppose indifference was one of the things that would discourage one, but nevertheless I went on. I was very successful, really, in having nice publishers like Faber and then Jonathan Cape.

The situation was this at the time: that after all, the invading Japanese had laid waste all that great coastline of Asia, killing off many Chinese men and armies. The women had had to flee from all kinds of horrible adversity and had come down, for safety, to Hong Kong and elsewhere. It was full of women who had had to flee from their homes.
There was no industry worth speaking of in Hong Kong. The only way they could keep body and soul together was by use of the body, and the charges were very reasonable. We had come to an economic agreement that it was... was it four bucks... whatever a buck was, something like that. But occasionally... did I tell you this? The American fleet would come in... and moor up in Hong Kong, and instantly, the women, like a flock of birds, would go down to accommodate the American ship. And we found there they charged, and indeed got, twice as much as they got from the British. I mean, there is an example of economics working. Very, very good. Happy days!
So then I came back to England and it was a lot more boring, let me tell you, and all kinds of dreadful respectability went on.

The economic fact of the situation [marital separation] was I had to sell up this house in Victoria Road and give it to Olive for her to buy a house down in Totland Bay, Isle of Wight.
So, I was homeless. I was 40, I was homeless. After all that time in the Far East, there I was – stuck. But I knew... I knew various chaps around, who were kind of… not exactly menial, but they had odd jobs, and one of them was a big man... I've forgotten his name, unfortunately... who had recently married a woman who lived in the extremes of North Oxford, and who was no less than the daughter of Edgar Wallace.
She was broke too, but at least she was living in the house, and he inspected peoples' gas meters. I'm sorry I can't remember his name because he was very nice, and he and I used to meet in a cheap Indian restaurant quite often and have conversations together. And so I went to him, and I knew he had various rooms for rent, and so he rented me a house in Paradise Square.
Now, Paradise Square I think has possibly vanished now, or turned into a car park or one of these fates that befalls squares of an impoverished Victorian nature. But, anyhow, he rented me a room with a window looking onto the square, and there I lived and I had a bed in there, just that one room.
And every now and then, I would go down and see my children.

It was not the happiest of times, but it was mitigated by the fact that I was having some literary success. And, moreover, I worked... sorry, I've got this written down because I had forgotten... Oh yes, I worked on the Committee of Management… I used to go up to London and work for the Society of Authors. Very pleasant man in charge of it... I don't have his name... and, eventually I became the Chairman of the Committee of Management, and I enjoyed that, and so I met real authors, you know, and that was a treat in itself. They were all very pleasant, and I did that for some years, and then they retired me, of course. So that was my attempt to work for my fellow men, really.
And the number of books that I had written seemed to increase, and the science fiction community here and in the States, but particularly in the States, provided me with a lot of ready money and then… oh, yes, and another fine bit of kindness that came this way…
There was a man called Chawnley. I was in the antiquarian bit of the shop. Chawnley would come in to look after all the typewriters for the company. And so he'd stop and have a chat with me, and we were very friendly, and his offices were just down the other end of the Turl. So we knew each other quite well and eventually I went to see him, and said, 'Do you think you could lend me a typewriter? At the moment I'm so broke, I don't know that I can offer you any money, but eventually the money would come. Have you got something you could lend me?' And he said, 'Oh my dear boy, I can see that you're in trouble. Yes – look, have this'.
And he gave me a typewriter... a Hermes Swiss typewriter. Wasn't that kind? He gave me a typewriter, and so I could continue my trade. One never forgets those things.
And so that typewriter stayed with me for ages. When I'd cleared off to Yugoslavia, I took it with me and it served as a pillow, as well as typing out notes.
And things were moving on.

The chap who came round and talked to me every week and took my pittance of rent, which was possibly seven-and-six a week did I pay for that room? I can't remember, but it was not extortionate. And he had married the daughter of Edgar Wallace, and at that time a German film company came to her to buy up all the Edgar Wallace estate. And she had it, but she was pretty well down on her uppers, as they say, and so, suddenly she became enormously rich from this great spasm of money coming regularly from the German film-makers.
And so my partner, her husband, went up in the world and came and said to me, 'Oh, Brian, you don't need to pay me for this. You know, I don't… I don't need it now. You'll be okay, won't you?' I mean, the goodness of people was amazing when you were down on your uppers.
And some of the women who lived on Paradise Square would come and knock at my door and say, 'Mr Aldiss, I understand you're a writer?' 'Yes, that's right, I do write.' 'Do you think I could have a dip of your ink?' And they'd come in and I'd give them a dip of Quink. I mean it was all very homely, really, but not entirely satisfactory.

I had a great American friend, Harry Harrison – Harry was marvellous.
Harry… just to sketch you in with Harry's background. Harry came from a very poor American family in New York, and he was a cartoonist for a science fiction magazine, but then he decided he would write a novel. He wrote a novel called Deathworld, and he offered it to the editor of Astounding and in those days, Astounding was the prince of the magazines edited by a man learned in science, called John W Campbell. John W Campbell bought Deathworld, paid Harry for it, and Harry took the money to a travel agent, and he and his wife and the children came over to England to start a new life.
And Harry and I became very close because we had the same kind of difficulties with life, you appreciate.

Harry and I got on very well with the whole science fiction crowd with which I was in disagreement in many respects because they thought science fiction was fun. Now, I didn't think it was fun. I didn't think it should be fun. And in my misery, in this one room in Paradise Square, I started to write a novel that would encompass my wretchedness.
And that novel is about an England where there are no children, and so the place gradually falls apart in misery and wreckage. And while I wrote that book, I thought, oh God, this is so miserable, no-one's ever going to want to read it.
I sent it to Faber, they published it as science fiction and it became a great success... [Greybeard]. This book written in misery, it seemed as though it had echoes all over the place. And after all, I was not the only person who was miserable or whose marriage had broken down, or had lost their children. And so, Deathworld [sic – should be Greybeard] or whatever it was called, became a great science fiction success on both sides of the Atlantic. Really strange how things happen.
So, I was able to buy my way out of this little room and I bought a small house from someone who was working on the Oxford Mail, but was then leaving. And he had a house in Marston Street; it was a terraced house. And Marston Street ran between Iffley Road and the Cowley Road, and I paid him I think possibly £3000 for it. It was a nice little place.

I was also able to buy a car. I bought a Renault Dauphine – the worst car ever made! You could travel safely at 35 miles an hour, but if you tried to up it to 40, the whole car would go flaznagel, and turn around in the road and do ape-like, childish things – terrifying! So I went down to the Isle of Wight in that, and the idea was I would bring the children up to Oxford. So I sold it on the spot and bought another car and brought the children up to Oxford and… to my little house in Marston Street.
Now, here if you don't mind, I want to go back a few years to that Christmas before World War II broke out when, as I've think I've said, the family took me for a final Christmas in Peterborough, to all my dear uncles and aunts, and my grandmother. And that was very nice. He drove us back to Gallstone, and as we went down Bernard Road, we were stopping the car and I could see our house, and on the door, attached were presents – obviously Christmas presents that they couldn't properly deliver, and so they'd tied them to the outside of the house. And one was wrapped more or less oblong and the other one was sort of like a short pole. And so I shouted from the back of the car, 'Oh, it's Buccaneer!' And my father, from the driving seat said, 'Well, don't be so stupid. How do you know what it is?'
But I did bloody well know what it was, because my sister and I had seen Buccaneer, a Waddington game, and maybe we had played it once or twice with friends. And so it naturally consisted of a box that contained the ships and cars and things, and, rolled up, the map of Treasure Island and the seas around it and the ports around the seas.
So, I was perfectly correct. And so, when we went into the house, I said, 'Oh good, yes, well here's Buccaneer'. And that's all I ever said, and my father said nothing.

Okay, so that's a shot of family life. But now for a much happier shot. When I had this little house in Marston Street, I started to – I still had the set of Buccaneer – and I started to decorate it for when the kids came so that the kids would like it. And up in the Cowley Road there was a place that sold all kinds of plastic soldiers, Arabs and I don't know what. And so I went there and I used to buy various figures that could stand in some of the ports of Buccaneer, and various other things, oh and palm trees and so on and so on. And so the children would come and they would love to play Buccaneer.
Here we are in 2014. This year, we have played Buccaneer all those years after. My dear daughter, Wendy, now possesses the Buccaneer board and all that therein is. It's now a much bigger board – well it's on a cloth, actually – and a much bigger Treasure Island and more industrious ports.
And then they would come up regularly and always say, could we play Buccaneer?
And, as they were maturing, it was necessary to complicate this further, and so slavery came in. And for slavery – yes, it was very profitable to slave – but you had to go to London to get a pardon or you couldn't win. And so, of course, when you were going to London, all the other ships would be against you. And that was part of the fun of playing Buccaneer that throughout the years, as my dear children have developed... and now Wendy's boys, who are not of a generation of playing board games, nevertheless play Buccaneer.
So, that was one of the linkages that I had to keep in touch with my children.

Margaret and I got married. She had a boy and a girl and they got on well with the earlier boy and girl. And by a miracle, the daughter, Charlotte, was born on the very day of the 10th birthday of Wendy, the older daughter. And this was regarded in the family as... well, I don't know, not exactly a blessing on high, but miraculous, as a sign of unity as I believe it was. And Margaret was very good about observing that unity.
By this time, I was affluent enough to look for a nice place on Boar's Hill. And on Boar's Hill, it happened there was a house and gardens called Woodlands for sale. I was then living in Charlbury Road in Oxford and was very friendly with the people next door, and in particular, the people next door included Charlie, who was an architect.
Charlie and I were thick as thieves, really, and so I said to Charlie, 'Look, there's a terrible hurry, because my daughter's going to have a reception in a fortnight. I must buy a decent place where we've got lots of grounds. Could you come up with me and tell me what you think of Woodlands?' And so we went round and we saw the couple that lived there; they were very pleasant. And then we went round the outside... beautiful grounds... and he caught me by the throat, and he said, 'Look, Brian, you've got to buy this bloody place!' So, we went in... I mean, it's the way these things turn out... we said to the owner, 'Yes, I want to buy this house. I can pay you immediately. The only thing is, you've got to be out by Monday'. And he said, 'Oh thank God!' He said, 'Actually, I've bought a house somewhere out at Southmoor – Kingston Bagpuize. I'm longing to get out of this house into the house in Kingston Bagpuize. Yes, I'll do it by Monday. Dora, bring in a bottle of whiskey!' So, in came Dora with a bottle of whiskey, and we all had a good drink, and well, as amiable as two people could be doing a business transaction.
And back home I went and said to Margaret, 'I've just bought a house, darling'.
So, we moved in on the Monday and on the Monday, I think it was on the next week, Wendy got married and had a reception in the garden. And she was marrying Mark – of course, the name is Mark! She was marrying Mark.
Mark had been in charge of the book shop in Hamleys [sic – should be Harrods]. I'd seen him there and liked him, and we've always got on well. Mark is a dear figure in our lives, and he was going to marry Wendy in style and was going to have a helicopter coming to land and carry them away. And that was part of the reason why we bought this particular house, so that there was room for the helicopter. However, things never work out as you expect, and the helicopter scanned the ground and decided the trees were too near and they couldn't do it.

The difficulty was that… I found... I couldn't settle in England after the time in the Far East.  And so Harry and I used to go and be the English version – although Harry was an American – the English version of people who supported the Trieste Film Festival. And the film festival often included science fiction movies not necessarily from America, but sometimes from the Soviet Union, and so you saw films there that you would never have seen elsewhere. And we went every year to Trieste, and we made friends with many people that we wouldn't otherwise have met.
For instance, with a Hungarian couple – unfortunately I don't remember his name, but then I don't remember anyone's name from that period. But, they were charming, they were marvellous, and they took us into the hills beyond Trieste to a grand house where a number of aging women lived in grand costumes. And it turned out that these ladies were all that remained of the dual monarchy of the Austro-Hungary monarchy. And what had they been? Well, it had turned out, or so I was told, that they had always had that house, because in the summer they went down to an island in the Adriatic, which the Yugoslavs then owned and called Mali Losinj, i.e. the small lozenge, and there the women served as mistresses for the grand dukes of Austria-Hungary. That was a romantic story, and one really loves it and adheres to it, whether or not it's true.
So, that was another side of life. And on one occasion... I mean, in World War II, Trieste was a subject of debate. If you remember, Winston Churchill talked about an Iron Curtain that is descending from somewhere in the north to Trieste in the south. And Trieste had been saved from communist rule, but, if you walked down the main street, there was the dividing line and on the other side it was Tito's Yugoslavia. And on both sides there were piles of melons for sale, and on this side the melons were five bucks, on the other side they were only four kropotniks. The difference in the two regimes.
And so Harry and Joan Harrison took me up into the mountains of Yugoslavia, and it was dusty and deserted and overgrown, and we stopped at a place that offered lunches. And there we sat. It was a house run by an old woman, the old woman came out smiling and, 'Oh yes, yes, yes. What can I get you?' 'Well, we'll have some wine'. 'There's chicken for lunch. Would you like some chicken?' 'Well, why not, yes, come on. Yes, thank you, we would like some chicken'.
So, she brought us the wine and we sat there chatting, and I just felt I belonged there, somehow. And then, there were terrible cries from the back of the house. The cries, no less, of a chicken being strangled! So, she'd obviously strangled her one and only chicken and plucked it and then had to go through the whole business of cooking. So we were there for a couple of hours, I suppose, until finally, she served up a cooked chicken. By then, of course, we were well-oiled with the wine, and I was resolved, I was resolved that I would go to Yugoslavia.
And for one thing, Harry produced, or perhaps Joan produced it, a dish full of wonderful black olives. And I thought any country that can produce olives like this can't be all bad.

We had our chicken and eventually we went back to Trieste, and then back to England. And I had in my mind those black olives, and I thought, oh, I would love to be in Yugoslavia.
The political situation there was such that, although it was a communist state under President Tito, he had evidently had some difference with... who was… who was the boss of the Soviet Union?
[Q] Khrushchev?
Khrushchev, was it Khrushchev? Well, whoever it was, they had fallen out. But nevertheless, the Soviet Union would, to a certain extent, finance Yugoslavia because otherwise, they were afraid it would turn capitalist. However, the capitalists decided that if they weren't careful, Tito might become more communist, so they also supplied money to Tito. And so it was actually, cash-wise, quite a sensible place. And Tito, I think... well, I had an affection for Tito probably totally misguided, but such is life. And, I bought myself a second-hand Land Rover, and I was off to Yugoslavia.

We had to report first of all to Belgrade in Serbia, where all the action actually took place. Despite the fact that Tito was not a Serb, he was a Croat, and that was always a quarrel under the surface which eventually contributed to the breaking up, alas, of Yugoslavia.
Anyhow, there we went and we went and saw some very nice people who were in charge of turisticcki savez, of tourism. And we got on well with the elegant woman who ran that. We had a meal with her and we then went back to the offices where she opened a gigantic safe and took out a big wodge of oil-stained petrol coupons, and she gave them to me. And as a result, in all the travelling round we did in Yugoslavia we never had to pay for petrol. Now, somehow, £70 comes into this. I think I'd got £70 on me for all emergencies, and by the time the year was over and we had to head back through Austria and Europe, I still had that £70. I can't quite think of how the logic of that worked out, but certainly at any garage we stopped at, we could pay out these wonderful free coupons. It was an immense help and, yes, and… one felt very grateful.

We gradually went through all the various states of Yugoslavia and saw wonderful things. I mean, up in the hills of Serbia, through a forest which is described in a book that I've always held dear called Eothen by a man called Kinglake. Kinglake knew… he at least knew Belgrade. I took that book with me, it was one of the permanent books in my life – I've still got it although it's some time since I've read it. But there, up in the mountains, an earlier generation of Serbs had built little chapels, hidden away so that the invading Muslim might not find them.
And when you entered one of those little churches, it was full of pictures, pictures from the Bible – every pillar would have a picture illustrating something or other. Why? Because the population, of course, was a peasantry and they were illiterate, but when they went into one of these churches, all could be told to them. And I've never understood why it was that these places are not a famous pilgrim site. I wrote a book about them, a little book which was published locally, about the Serbian churches. It made, of course, not a bean of difference.
But there we were, travelling around and becoming more and more gypsy-like as time went by so that up in the mountains, we would drink from one of the streams, lie down and drink from the stream. We would sleep outside the Land Rover on the ground and became a kind of native. It was a wonderful experience and all the way, of course, I was making notes for the book which Faber had promised they would publish. And so the year went by... 1964.

In the harbour of Montenegro [sic], there was a little church. I visited the church and in the church there was something that looked very much like a space helmet which enclosed the head of a saint, well preserved in this glass case. And also there, to one side, there were two valued items. What one was, I've forgotten, what the other one was, I remember. It was a silver spoon, and by the spoon was a card, which said in English, 'Lord Byron used this spoon to stir his coffee with'. Wasn't that lovely? Good old Lord Byron, I say! Worth the loss of a silver spoon.
Anyhow, we then found it actually rather disappointing, because on that coast we were not exactly home, but we were accosted by British people on holiday, or German people, or all kinds… French people, yes, and we didn't like that quite as much. But, we'd served the term and so eventually, we drove out through… through the mountains and through that very gate by which we had entered so long ago.
And Margaret said, 'Oh goodness me, now we can get some nice little cakes to eat'. And so we did in Austria, driving through Austria.

And so we came back to England and I wrote my book. Cities and Stones, it was called. And I'd written rather a lot, and the chap at Faber – a very nice chap – he said, 'There's far too much here. We can't accommodate all this'. And so, I dropped a chapter – a chapter that I prized – about the island of Mljet.
And the island of Mljet was in the Adriatic and it was an island that actually had a little island in it because the sea could break in, and it had broken in and had surrounded this slightly higher ground so that it was unusual in that respect. And there, on the side of this island within the island, was a Byzantine monastery that had been turned into a hotel. And we stayed a night in the hotel. It was run by a half-naked hunchback. He seemed to be the only person there. And he would run around and do whatever it is that half-naked hunchbacks do, and he was looking after a gang of Swiss tourists. And we were trying to sleep, and the Swiss tourists spent the night in character – yodelling! Well, we knew that Swiss people yodelled, but what we didn't know was that they yodelled all night.
But that was an interesting chapter that I had to drop, and eventually Faber & Faber published Cities and Stones and really, I think that's one of my favourite books... my one travel book. I loved Yugoslavia – I just thought it was great.

Before we… before we ever went, I found, here in Oxford, a woman called Myrta. And Myrta was a Croat and she taught me to speak Croatian. And actually, while we were in Yugoslavia, we went to see her parents; they were very pleasant, too. But it was such a help to be able to speak the language because… well, because no one spoke English. And also, Myrta was good at teaching us the swear words such as Jebem te sunce! Which meant ah, fuck the sun! Jebem te sunce!  Wonderful Serbian swear word.
So there we were. So then, of course, I married Margaret and things went well enough for quite a while. And what did we do? Well, we slowly grew less insubstantial financially, and things seemed to be going okay. My book seemed to be reasonably liked, but I always found there was a difficulty in this country, because I wrote science fiction and there was a prejudice against it, and I believe there still is. But what should one say about that? If one went to the USA, as I did regularly, there the atmosphere was much pleasanter. But, you see, the USA had been a jumble of states and then the time had come when the engineers got together and built a railroad from the west and from the east and eventually the day came when they joined and it became the United States and that was a great difference, and a film was made of that moment. I can't remember what the film was now, but certainly it was a big movie. OK. And so the engineers were greatly regarded.
Now in England, when engineers tried to build the railways, they, in many cases, interfered with the men who owned the landscape and who wouldn't have their landscape spoiled by the railroad. We've seen that this very year with this railroad that went strictly along the cliff edge... where was that? Down in Cornwall? There was no secret about this – they were forced to run there because they weren't allowed to ruin some blighter's landscape. And so, I think there's a degree of aversion to engineering and to science, I don't know. Anyhow, I think I suffer from that a bit. But, you know, you go on doing what you can do… what you can do, or indeed, in many cases, what you think you can't do.

You might think, with all this struggle of writing that I became a kind of...
[Q] Ian Fleming?
Ian Fleming, yes.
[Q] Bond.
Bond, that's right.  Ian Fleming with Bond had an enormous success and so eventually, he said to his publishers, 'I can't do this anymore. Do you mind if I don't write another Bond book?' And they said, 'Oh, you've got to write another Bond book – they're so popular'. And so he became a slave to it.
Now, I've never become a slave to it. I've always… I've never asked permission from a publisher to write a book. I've written the book, and one of those books that I wrote was called – a facetious title – Billion Year Spree. And this was to settle the hash of an American contestant who thought that science fiction had been invented by X... I've forgotten his name, happily... as though there had been nothing beforehand. Now I knew that there had been a lot beforehand, and back in the 1870s there had been two enormous successes. One was about a world underground... I can't remember its title exactly... but there, the people underground were determined to come up. They had no electricity, but they had another power called Vyrl, V-y-r-l, Vyrl [sic] and this so took off. It was by a man who also wrote The Last Days of Pompeii – can you remember what his name was? No. Well, one could easily look it up.
Anyhow, Vyrl was so popular that I can think of two products... as England was expanding, there was room for Bovril. They used Vyrl as the title of this particular sweetmeat – Bovril – clever V-y-r-l, just B-o-v-r-i-l. And also, as a small boy, I had some very delicious kind of toffee medicine called Viril that also came from that same science fiction novel. Viril.
So that the snobs may be very superior about science fiction, but the fact is, it's had long-lasting effects. It is a way of thinking about one's incapacities. Most of my science fiction is about people's incapacities.

I wrote Billion Year Spree, and that was to talk about the earlier things, including of course, Mary Shelley's Frankenstein. Mary Shelley had the misfortune, when she was a baby, to have her mother die almost directly after birth. Now, I've always thought that the doctor had dirty, unwashed hands, and that was what killed the mother. And so, Mary lived under that spell and wrote Frankenstein about a creature that has no father. It was her way of dealing with her own misfortune. That I understand, that seems to be a very sensible use of fiction. So, of course, I included that.
And, when it came to the American version... I did get an American version published... but no science fiction magazine would publish it, because it disputed the fact that science fiction had begun with the United States. And so, Harry was the guy who wrote to the editor and said, 'What are you doing? Why aren't you reviewing Brian's book? Can't you see how much better it is than anything so far published on the subject? I insist that you publish this book'. Good old Harry. And so, eventually, they did review it.
But, I mean, that was a case of my staunch independence. And since then... I went … I used to go every year to the Conference of the Fantastic... and they all forgave me. They all understood the situation. A bit of a mistake had been made, OK. And so, one hopes to go on like that, correcting mistakes – other people's mistakes, not one's own mistakes, of course.
And so, I suppose, we really get to the end of our tether except to tell you that I'm now writing two things at once. You might think that at my age, I'd be taking it easy. This is not the case. I'm writing a very long and difficult novel about a man who walks a thousand miles from Moscow to the River Lena. This I've started three times... each time I've not liked it and I've started again, and I haven't got very far with it, and one reason is, that I've been interrupted by my wonderful publishers, who are known as the Friday Project, and are run by Scott Pack, who is funded, actually, by an old publisher of mine called... what are they called? They've got a hyphen name – Harper-Collins, Harper-Collins, yes.
He is getting me to write about – well, you'll find this rather similar – writing about people I've known. Just sort of a page or two maybe, maybe three. And this collection will eventually be published not as a maze of stories, but something vaguely similar... just the people that I've worked with over the years which are many.

Supertoys Last All Summer Long. When you think about that pretty title, it's not so nice.
Summer doesn't last forever, and that, in a way, is the essence of the story. And people liked that story wherein a small boy is programmed to think of himself as a small boy, but he's not actually, he's a machine. But, he is made in a world where the population has grown so much that you have to get some form of permission to have a child so that his 'mother' has this boy and the boy thinks he's real. There was something touching about that story – oh, and this little artificial boy has a little artificial teddy bear that keeps him company. And this story touched a lot of people... well, it touched me. I thought it was a charming story. And eventually I heard through my agent, that Stanley Kubrick wanted to make a film of it. Would I go and work with him?
At that time, we were living rather comfortably on Boar's Hill, and a limousine would come every morning and collect me and take me north of St Albans to where Stanley Kubrick and his wife and daughters lived. And the funny thing was that I knew something about that house. I knew that it had been built – or I thought I knew, let's put it that way – I thought I knew that it had been built by a millionaire known as Solly Joel. How did I know of Solly Joel? Because my father, after World War I, was not in the best of health and the doctor had said to him, 'Look, Stanley, if you want to survive the winter, you better go somewhere warm'. And so Stanley had got on a liner that was going to South Africa for the winter, and on that liner was Solly Joel. And somehow my father got to know him and be friendly with him.
That's the end of the story, but it was curious to go to that house and to know that about it. And it was full of vast rooms, many of which were full of antiquated machinery: cameras, etc. which, of course, was part of Kubrick's hobby, and one of which he developed to use in a movie without overhead lighting.

I… I was delivered daily, or possibly it was weekly – I forget now – into Stanley's clutches and we would go through the motions of writing… of writing this screenplay. It was rather hard to work with Stanley – he… he wouldn't take yes for an answer. So… it was very difficult to put a proposition to him. He didn't readily listen to other people's propositions.
And this little boy, we established rather early, if this little boy drank water, then it would gum up his interior and he wouldn't be able to function. So that was going to be a kind of plot device that we might or might not use to get rid of the little boy.
I worked with him... I can't think for how long... but for a long time. And did I enjoy it? Well, my wife said to me, 'Why are you putting yourself through this?' And my response was, 'Well, I've always wanted to work with a genius'. But, I think that Kubrick certainly was a genius or had been a genius and had created some quite extraordinary movies, not least 2001. But by now, I think he wasn't too well, or was in decay. So, eventually, he turned to me and said, 'Brian, this isn't working. Alright, we're finished...' or whatever he said, and he then turned his back on me. Well, fuck that. I thought that was just plain rude, and so I left.
But that wasn't the end of his troubles. It may have been the end of mine, but it wasn't the end of his troubles.

Then... well, I knew three people that followed me on that film. First of all, there was a woman. I can't remember her name, she was a very nice woman. And, whether Kubrick wasn't good at what he was doing, I don't know. Anyhow, she would phone me and ask me for ideas, and I would do the best I could, but she also got the old heave-ho.
So, who did he employ then? Bob Shaw. Bob Shaw was a science fiction writer, and a merrier and wittier guy than Bob, you never had met. I knew Bob well. He was a friend of mine. Bob lived in Manchester and so, whereas I had a limousine come to collect me every day and to return me home, poor old Bob had to make his own way by train, which entailed two changes of train to get to Stanley's. And in no time, he was in trouble. And so he'd phone me in the evening and said, 'Brian, what can I do now? What ideas can I possibly give Stanley?' And I would say to him, 'I can only tell you what my ideas were. I've run out of any other ideas. I can tell you what mine were and you can put your own slant on them, and maybe that would work'. And so, I believe he did that; but of course, it didn't work and Kubrick kicked him out, too.
And so then... should I be telling you this? Stanley phoned his old partner who had worked on 2001, and that was Arthur C Clarke. And Arthur C Clarke then lived in what was known as Ceylon, and was still writing and associating with the great. And so, Stanley gave him the name of an English writer whom he knew. I knew this chap and I didn't like him much. At one time he'd lived in Oxford. Anyhow, he was the guy that eventually made it with Stanley.
And you see, if you see the film, there's a contradiction that Stanley would never have… never have borne. You know that if liquid goes down this chap's throat, he goes… he's out of the contest, he goes, urgh. But nevertheless, in the film, at one time he does, yes, he falls in the swimming pool, but he doesn't go, urgh. And so, that's a contradiction in terms. Anyhow, whatever the scene was there, I had no part of it, I can hardly discuss it.

Steven [Spielberg] was such a nice guy. Steven was terrific. And Steven took over the making of the film and he wrote to me and asked me what I thought. And I wrote him a letter back, one page. It said, well, my idea was that this little boy was making out okay, but then he goes to a factory and in the factory he sees a production line of himself, duplicated and duplicated, and that… the shock kills him. That was what I proposed in this one letter. So, Spielberg wrote back and said, 'Brian, I would like to buy this letter from you'. And he offered me something that was the equivalent of the sort of down-payment I would get for a novel from one of the publishers. Very generous.
So that was it. That is, more or less, how the film ends with the little boy finding this production line. And Spielberg finished off the film to the best of his ability because of his friendship with Stanley.
It's curious, isn't it? I don't think it's a very good film, but the necessity to flood New York seems to me a lot of water too far, but then I am naturally prejudiced. So there we are.
So then Stanley died. His wife, who was artistic, and often when we were stuck, we would go and see her, sitting in a vast ballroom in the corner, painting. She was a sweet woman, I really loved her and it would cheer us when we went to see her. So she invited me over to some parties there. That was very nice. But now, the link has been broken. I know nothing more. Well, I wouldn't expect to know anything more. But it was rather a harrowing time of life, I have to say.

She [Margaret] said to me, you know, I'm tired of having to get into a car whenever I go shopping. Quite understandable. And she said, and I'm tired of doing this garden. Yes, okay, I understand. Well, let's go and live in Oxford.
And so, I then found she was going to someone at the JR [John Radcliffe], consulting someone about her eyes. So we were in rather a hurry to find somewhere to live, and this house was coming up, and so I bought this house. And it was very scruffy, and I had in a very good company of builders, who now build only for the university, they've gone up in the world – deservedly.
And what they did was, they pulled out every inch of old wiring, every inch of it was pulled out through the front door, and every inch of rotten old piping was pulled out and thrown out the front door. And new cables and new piping were reinstated. And all this time Margaret was becoming more ill, more unwell, and was very gallant about the great upheaval. But nevertheless, it was done – oh, and this room was built on, of course, this room didn't exist. And it's become the room in which I chiefly live. So.
But Margaret became more and more ill, and eventually she went into Sobell House. I would go and see her every evening. I cannot tell you... I cannot tell you. I knew she was going to die, and I said farewell to her and went out into the car, and could not stop crying. And it was a night of terrible storm, rainstorm, lightening. And there I was going to lose my wife. And indeed, I did, and I was very shattered, despite the difficulties that we had had all along. And she was buried in the cemetery down the road, and every day I would go and see her and stand by the grave.
But then, there came the time when I decided I ought to sort out her clothing drawers. And in her clothing drawer I found, wrapped in blue tissue paper, something almost as large as a novel, in manuscript... her objections to me, her finding fault with me that she had carefully preserved every one of these objections. Now, meanwhile, I had written my book about Margaret, which is called When the Feast is Finished. It was serialised in the Daily Mail… and then I found this, waiting for me there, like a man-trap.
I didn't go to her grave anymore.

I continued to write. Whatever has happened, I have always continued to write. Short stories, poems, novels and of course, I've painted – we haven't gone into the painting bit. But the paintings that I did I called isolées, and they were abstracts. And at the moment, it happens there's an exhibition of them at the grand galleries of Goldmark in Rutland.
Alison and I went up and saw it and opened the whole business. Terribly nice people, the Goldmarks. Yes, so, that's the artistic side.
[Q] What do you find in painting that you probably don't find in writing?
Well, there's certainly something that I don't... there's something… something that eludes us, I believe... and I'm talking, not about people exceptionally, but people of moderate sensibility, who find, if they write, if they talk, if they paint, if they act... whatever you do, there is some little corner beyond speech or anything. And it's something that I think that many people mistake for God. I believe it's just an affliction of the human species, and we can't resolve it, not with the best medicine. I think there is something there, and I believe that it's possibly that something... I've often written about it in various diverse ways. It's that that keeps me writing, as though, one day, I might fumble across it.

I thought that I was going to die, I suppose it's getting on for some months now – I was in a very, very bad way – very poor way, indeed. So much so… well I could hardly walk up to Alison's gateway. And I did think then I was dying, and I was resigned to it. You know, next year I shall be 90, it's a fairly good age or, at one time of course, it was an almost impossible age! But I don't think I'd do anything particularly reckless. Once, Professor Doll said that smoking killed you. I stopped smoking and I begged all the family to stop smoking and they all did, and they've remained healthier ever since. I've done what I can. Yes, you know, there's only so much you can do.
However, I do regret to think that Alison will miss me, and will perhaps be lonely. She too, I suppose, is past her first youth. But for the rest well, I'm fortunate, you know. I don't have to go into a home – I have my home here. It's full of my books, I can go on writing, I can go on painting. But one day, the day will come when I will wake... I think it may come when I sit up in bed and I think, my God, I'm going to die! Well, I may as well stay in bed. And I will die without any grand gestures. I would probably like a cup of tea, but that would be all. And of course, I leave my brain and my spine to the scientific researchers, so they'll come in and muck me about. My contribution to science, really.
But I don't have any great fear of being dead. I can't quite see how one might have fear unless, of course, you're religious and I don't think I'm religious. I'd like the Church of England to go on, because it seems so much better than all the horrid, ragged alternatives, now fighting it out elsewhere.

Let me give you an example of the durability of love, which I've always felt. My ex-wife, Olive, living in the Isle of Wight, became ill. She was quite old, she was lying in bed and she was being cared for by my son Clive's wife, a Greek lady whose name was Youla. And Youla noticed that Olive had, on her right hand, on one of her fingers, she had a silver ring, and Youla thought it might be cutting into her flesh, and so she said, 'Would you like me to take this ring off?' And Olive said, 'Oh no, that never comes off. Brian gave it to me. I still love him'.
That was a very durable kind of love, and well, you know, it was our first marriage. And indeed, it did work very well. It was... always the shadow of her mother was there. But there we are...
So that was a good example of the durability of love.
What can I talk about love, in general? Well, I don't know. I suppose... yes, round here, I see old couples who clearly love each other out of habit, but habit's not a bad thing, either.
I don't know what I can say about it. It's a mysterious force, isn't it? I mean, my mother... certainly to begin with... didn't love me. I was born in a shower of tears, but gradually, she saw sense, particularly when she and my father left Dereham. She became a happier person, and she did love me. It evolved slowly, but I was always grateful for that.
But then, I was loved, and I loved my grandfather's second wife. Grandfather had died, and Dorothy, Dorothy Aldiss, born Dorothy Royou lived here in Oxford. I saw a lot of her and I loved that woman. And so that didn't have any particular connotation of sex. It was just loving another person because it seemed to me they were such a good... she was such a good and valuable person. And so those are things that promote love. Had she been wicked or sly or any number of off-putting things, it would have been different. I think of her quite frequently... it's funny that that should be my grandfather's surviving second wife. And when she died, we all jumped into my car and drove to Dereham because she wanted to be buried next to him. She obviously still carried love for HH Aldiss.

And love itself, it has to be generated by... does it have to be generated by both sides? I don't know. I loved my father, although I've mentioned times when my father fell a long way short of the caring father. Let me give you another example.
That the time came when my first book, The Brightfount Diaries, had been published, and I went to see my parents. They were then living opposite the cemetery at the top of the Brockley Road [sic – should be Banbury], and I said to him, 'Dad, I've decided I'm going to be a writer'. And he said to me, 'Why don't you become a postman? Just think, you'll get fresh air all the time and a pension at the end of it'. Come on, this is not the sort of thing you say to a guy who's maybe 24. Who cares about a pension when you're 24? But that was his way. He had to cross me... he had to cross me. Dear, dear.
Still, I loved him and I would go and see him, and he would be pottering around after yet another heart attack... he'd be pottering round his little garden, pruning a little bit of rose tree. And he'd kept a little bonfire going – you could have put the bonfire on that cushion – and he said to me, proudly, 'Do you know, that's been going for a fortnight. I've kept it going'. As though it were his own life, a metaphor for his own life. And I said, 'Well, Dad, what do you do when it rains?' 'Ah', he said, going to bewilder me by his cleverness, 'I've got this'. And what he'd got was a big metal tin... what's that metal called? Kind of not polished, or anything...
[Q] Aluminium?
Not quite aluminium, but something rather like that. Anyhow, anyhow it was a large tin tank, and he said, 'I put it over the bonfire, so that it doesn't get wet', looking at me as though saying: There, what do you think of that? And so we stood there, watching the smoke going up into the sky.
And then, he slept in a little room on the ground floor with a small window, little stained-glass window, that looked out across the road to the cemetery where soon he would be at rest. And he was lying in bed, and I was sitting by him, and he muttered something about being tired, and then no more. And so then I got up and spoke to him and touched him, and I realised he'd died very, very quietly, without any fuss. And so I called to my mother, who was in the next room, and said, 'Mum, I'm afraid Dad's died'. And so she came to see him, and apparently it often happens although we didn't know that at the time, he slowly changed... his features changed, and he looked again like the handsome young man he must have been when soldiering in World War I. So it was quite a peaceful ending, for what had been, I think, a very uncomfortable life. The failure of the business in Dereham, etc.
But, I did love him, although I had many reasons to dislike him, I think.
So that love can be a very... well it's a bit like playing cricket, you know, where you have to guard your middle wicket. You've got to guard your feelings. I think it's very important that you should love someone.
You see, this phone just rang because she loves me. It's marvellous, isn't it? It's marvellous.

I've certainly been mad with love, and I would think, possibly quite a lot of times. For instance, I was checking up with this little book, which I hope, will eventually go to my dear friend, Alison. And, I found in here… I'm sure I can find it again, a photograph of a charming lady. She was French, oh God! And I was crazed about her. And this must have been after Margaret died, when I was free to be crazy about anyone.
But in a way, there are all kinds of love, really. I mean, I love my dear children, my amazing children. Two by my first wife, and two by my second – those who play Buccaneer, I love them.
But then, I could say: I love this house. In a sense, I love the house, but that's a different kind of love, isn't it?
Perhaps they're all loves that require a certain amount of possession. Without possession, perhaps love fails or dwindles. It has to be fed.

Quite frequently, one has to research something, to make it sensible. And, for instance... what was the title of my book? The Finches of Mars, all right? The Finches of Mars. There, I thought, that if women went to Mars, and that itself was slightly a contradiction to all the American stories I'd written... I'd read stories set on Mars, where chaps go tramping over it, etc., never a woman, never a woman! And so, Finches of Mars, was going to be about the colonisation of Mars and mainly featuring women. But then the thought occurred to me that if women were on a lighter planet, they might have difficulty generating children when they were pregnant.
And so I found the address of a man – his name is in the book – who was in charge of… perhaps it was called Women's Problems. No, it wasn't. Anyhow, it was in a hospital in New York, and he did specialise in women's problems. So I wrote to him and asked him if he didn't think that if women went to Mars and were pregnant, if they mightn't have stillborn children. And he wrote back quite fully, saying he thought that would be the case. Do you see where that idea came from? From my mother, who had, first of all, given birth to a stillborn baby.
So, with that information, I was able to start and write the novel, and with other bits of stuff that one throws in, or indeed, throws out.
But, when I came to write the Helliconia Trilogy, for two years I did research on that and this is one of the advantages of living in Oxford: if you want to know anything, you only have to go to an aging professor and knock on his door, and he comes out and he will tell you all that you want to know, and more. Certainly, and more. But there were some who were vastly helpful. For instance... oh, he's retired now... he used to live quite near here... and what was his name? Oh, it's so infuriating that I don't remember names. He told me about breathable air and certain qualities that were needed that were not often referred to. And that was very useful, too.
And I went on gathering these facts so that Margaret, my wife, said to me, 'Are you ever going to write this book?' So I said, 'Well, I hope to, but I just need… I just need a few more facts'. And I did need a few more facts. One of the things... I'd got the whole geography of the place, and also its role in the cosmos and where it was and the cosmic accident that made it the kind of planet that it was.
And… but I couldn't… couldn't see how the vegetation was going to be. And then one evening, I was going by train from Oxford up to London, passing through Didcot and as it happened, Didcot Power Station was letting off steam. The six chimneys were letting off steam and the sun was behind them so that the steam was black; it was quite unmistakably black. And, looking at it, I could say to myself, my God – it's a Helliconian tree! And that was the key that enabled me to start because the trees did look like that, but, when winter came, instead of shedding leaves, everything was withdrawn into this vast trunk and sealed over with a kind of exudation of wax. That's the way it could all work.

This is the recent re-print of the third volume of Helliconia – Helliconia Winter and this is published in the United States. Now, that's the crucial thing, and you see what the publisher, called E Reeves, he says, 'Brian Aldiss's NASA telescopes in 2011 detected a planet with two suns: a lesser sun and a bigger sun. Some astronomers thought this was impossible, but of course, it's precisely what Helliconia is all about. As yet, it seems that the newly-discovered planet is called Kepler 16B. I think they should call it Helliconia, in acknowledgement of the way in which science fiction writers can be totally perceptive about something, without necessarily making predictions'.
Several fans and readers wrote to me, pointing to this discovery in deep space.

So here's the catalogue of the latest exhibition from the Goldmark Galleries in Rutland, and these are on display, and are now up for sale. And some of them, of course, I'm very pleased with. And I think this one is particularly good, and it's called Philosophy Forming Its Own Universe. And that's the way it goes; it's a triptych. And so these things continue throughout this little booklet. And I went and opened the proceedings a week ago, and everyone there was very nice, and these are all hung in a beautiful room.
Some of them have titles, like, for instance, this one is called Structures Against Chaos. That one understands.  And here, in memory of the past, I suppose, are two paintings said to represent the Brahmaputra and the Irrawaddy, both of which are mighty rivers streaming through Burma. Oh, and this is my nice novel, Walcot, which the same studio, Goldmark, published. Very fine, substantial volume they made of it, too. 
So there we are, so I'm an artist, you see. Well, a sort of an artist.
