carl.djerassi

Austrian-American Carl Djerassi (1923-2015) was best known for his work on the synthesis of the steroid cortisone and then of a progesterone derivative that was the basis of the first contraceptive pill.  He wrote a number of books, plays and poems, in the process inventing a new genre, 'science-in-fiction', illustrated by the novel 'Cantor's Dilemma' which explores ethics in science.

If anyone wants to know anything about me... and I don’t mean just in a formal filming, but in a conversation, I’d like to assume that I’m talking to a woman that I meet, or perhaps even try to avoid, on an airplane, on a long airplane flight, where usually I refuse to talk to the people next to me, because I do an awful lot of flying and it’s long distance flying, ten, twelve hours, and if you’re stuck next to a loquacious person, it’s terrible. So I don’t even establish eye contact with them, but of course in a way I do want to know who’s sitting next to me, so every once in a while, perhaps when I get up to go to the toilet, I quickly look at them. And sometimes... usually if it’s a woman and it’s an interesting looking woman, I may in fact at some later stage while we’re eating and so on, start a conversation. And sometimes you have extremely interesting conversations because this... I say, conversations, not the sort of monologue that I'll presumably be having today, because you’re sometimes prepared if you’re meeting the right person and it’s the right chemistry... and you have to look them in the eye for that, and you’re suddenly prepared to talk about things with a stranger where you know you will never meet that stranger again but is an interesting one, about things that you would not talk through with your family, with your closest intimates, and vice versa. And you sometimes can have conversations which you simply cannot have with someone who is intimate. And that’s probably the sort of conversation I’d like to start with and assume that I’m in an airplane and we’ve somehow broken through this barrier and I am looking at you and I say, well, this is a woman I would be interested in having a conversation. Now, unfortunately, we’re not having a conversation. It will be, sort of, a monologue, but whatever it is, I clearly would not start with saying, well my name is Carl Djerassi and I was born in Vienna and my father was a Bulgarian Sephardic Jew and my mother was a typical Viennese Ashkenazi Jew, and both of them were totally secular, and religion played no role in my life, etc, etc. I wouldn’t start that way. You see, I have already given you some biographical detail, but I would not have started that way because the rules of the games in this would be that you don’t even ask the other person for a name because you’re not going to meet them again. And you have an unfair advantage in that you know who I am and you’ve read something about me. And I really want to start with that unfair advantage, which not only you have, but most people who would be interested in me... which may not be that many, but in fact I have already disclosed as much about my life as I’m ever prepared to disclose, because I’ve not just written one autobiography, I’ve not just written two autobiographies, I’ve in fact written three autobiographies. And you’re saying, my God, is this man either a total exhibitionist because an autobiography has to be an exhibitionist. You have to undress... you have to prepare to undress, but of course I am not willing to strip naked. So that’s all been written already, and in a way, I don’t really know why I should make it easier for the lazy person. If they are interested in me, go to the library and read it all, since these books are still in print. Go buy it and read it at your leisure, but of course that’s not the purpose of this. I may nevertheless every once in a while refer to them here, not only as a book selling offer, but rather to sort of... not even refresh my memory, but to see something in terms of organisation or perhaps even make a point.

Why have I written three autobiographies? I really ought to start with them. Because related to whatever this interview is going to be, or end up as, the first one, chronologically, was written in '89 or '90 at a request of the American Chemical Society that had a series of autobiographies that were more or less commissioned of organic chemists, and that of course is what most people would call me if they just want to categorise me. I would not call myself as what other people would. And that I show you here, is called, Steroids Made It Possible, and even as... and even they’re all stylised in that every one of them... there are 22 volumes of 22 autobiographies. They always have the silhouette of that particular person in there, so that itself is very unusual. If you look, for instance, at the German translation of another autobiography which is completely different, that is of course really sort of a made up thing with ceramic hands, or if you turn it around... or the spine, and you see me as a pregnant man. Now that tells you an awful lot. There’s something very different. Or then you look at the typical autobiography... the artistic autobiography. This is my real autobiography. This is the German version of it, but there you see with the... you know, it’s supposedly looking dramatic or I don’t know what you want to call it, quizzical or imperious, etc, etc. And then... and that’s more interesting, so that was written in 1990 and is addressed to chemists only. And this is not going to be the dial... the monologue that you’ll get from me, even though you probably would like it. You’re not going to get it from me, because I’ve moved beyond this. I’ve only spent 50 years in that field and I’m only 80 now, so I’ve got at least another 10, 15 years to go and they will be very busy ones, and they’re not going to be in chemistry. And that’s what interests me now.
So I then brought it up to date. So this was then written a couple of years later and it covers my life, and I was then in my early 60s, and that’s really where you might say, there’s still the research through my 70s, but that really covers the important scientific part of my life. So the other one is interesting in size. You see, it’s much smaller. And yet, to that extent, actually more distilled and more concentrated. It’s interesting... I digress right away because my literary writing style is poetry. The German word for poetry is Dichter and you wonder where this comes from, and Dichter is to concentrate and to, you know, condense and you can see right here the last ten years of my life and the image, of course, was picked by the publisher, but you can see now the focus just on the eye. And I think this is not a bad metaphor because by now you don’t even know what the rest of the person looks like. And you either find that gaze engaging or threatening or whatever you want to call that, but you now have to look at the personality of the person. And I think that’s an interesting range. The impersonal silhouette tells you nothing about the person, typical scientific autobiography or biography, the facts but not really the person behind it. And image... I mean, this is a... this you can interpret it in many different ways, whatever that means. These hands and the pregnant man which I think is particularly relevant in my scientific work and my transition to the non-scientific area. And then these over here.

The fact of the matter is that the most interesting chapter in the... so there are really two autobiographies, The Pill, Pygmy Chimps, and Degas' Horse, and you can see right away it covers an awful lot of territory. Particularly if you want to know about the pygmy chimps. What would they do between art and science? And that’s relevant and if I forget to come to... that’s why I keep the book here, I may come back to it because it’s probably the pygmy chimps which are the interesting transition between the two. But I would say at least science and art, and art in the broader sense, are really the two worlds in which... in the way I’ve always lived. But now I particularly live in the art world, art in the very broadest sense, literature being part of that of course and drama but also art... at least it’s an art corrective. But that last chapter in this one, which is a short one, and has a good title because originally that was going to be the title of the autobiography, and that was, Mind the Gaps. But since that autobiography was published in the United States, Mind the Gaps means something totally different in the United States than it does in England, where of course here you hear it all the time in the underground even, and you would not hear that in any subway in the United States, and particularly not in the place where I live, San Francisco, which doesn’t even have a subway. But it’s the gaps that are really important one, and as I say in there... in fact, what I’ll do which I may do every once in a while, I’m going to read something from there, because I’m not really plagiarising or anything else, because these are my own words. And these... when I quote myself, something that I’ve written 15 years ago, then presumably... and I’m still finding it relevant, then this has sort of, you know, passed the test of time.
Let’s see... 'Everything that can be said about the self-indulgence, the deviousness, the deliberate or subliminal image massaging of autobiographical writing.' And I’ll interrupt here... this of course applies to what I’m going to do now, because that’s also what it is, except he won’t be writing, he’ll be speaking, so you can really see everything that can be said about the self-indulgent, the deviousness, the deliberate or subliminal image massaging of autobiographical speaking... 'I thought it had been said many times, nor is it original I suspect to compare autobiography with Swiss cheese. The holes in a life account may be planned or inadvertent, but they are there. Self-reflection and disclosure must pass through one’s particular psychic filters. Depending on the filter's mesh all kinds of facts and interpretations are withheld, microscopic or macroscopic, blemishes, tragedies, infirmities, faux pas, or worse sins, hidden lies, treachery. When the Swiss cheese analogy for autobiography first occurred to me, I considered it apt, though a bit corny. But now, as I see closure of my own account, and a title, all I see are the holes, the innumerable little incidents kept out. Though often mundane, they tell something unexpected.'
To give an example: I refused to learn my social security number. I think I’m probably the only person in America who doesn’t... has to look it up, deliberately. I mean, it’s ridiculous. I do remember my telephone number and so on, but I refuse to do that. It’s... these are certain personal minutiae that I simply... and there must be a reason why a social security number which you really do need as your one... you know, it’s like your concentration camp number. You carry it on your arm. You do remember that one. Or want to refuse to remember it.

'Filling the gaps in an autobiography serves no more purpose than filling the holes in Swiss cheese. My memory, my sense of shame, and whatever residual discretion is left me,' and I say residual discretion because any autobiographer has lost a certain element of discretion, or else it wouldn’t be an autobiography, it would so dull that no-one would want to read it. So '...whatever residual discretion is left me guarantees that the fillers I provide are false. To paraphrase a line of Anne Sexton’s,' a well-known American poet... and I picked her because my wife has written a brilliant autobiography of her that actually was one of the very few... in fact the only autobiography of a poet, any poet, that became a New York Times bestseller. That is certainly very unusual. And my wife’s name is Diane Middlebrook and not Diane Djerassi... and now I'll digress right away. And I’m her third husband and she is my third wife. And I always say that that's statistically significant with three you're already really sure you have made a selection. If you have been married four times, it’s longer than your Playboy, but three I think is significant, particularly if it’s spread over many years. And then I learned... and I’ve been married to her now for 20 years, this is literally our twentieth year. And then I learnt something very surprising that shows again what sort of autobiographical details that you'd think you would know from an intimate person you suddenly discover years later... and you’ll find this recurring in my story or autobiography.  One day she actually said, it was this year or maybe last year, that you know you are really my first husband. I said... 'Come on!' And she said, because my first two marriages were annulled. Now I knew a bit about the annulment of her second marriage... though it was a quasi-annulment, legally it was annulled. But twice? How many people get twice annulled? I mean, that would think there’s either something very peculiar about it... I would be suspicious of getting involved with someone who already had two relationships legally annulled. It’s bad enough if you get divorced twice, but legally. Well, she was and it’s actually an amusing story, and nothing sinister about it. And I won’t tell you about it because you’d have to interview her for her to volunteer this. But that’s rather amusing and I therefore said, 'Well, would you do me a favour?' And instead of saying, yes, she said, 'It depends,' because she knew it's a tricky question. I said, 'Would you put this into the next time you revise your Who’s Who entry?' Because, you know, you are asked every year to revise this, and usually it says... you know, if you look at mine, it says, Carl Djerassi, married, Virginia Jeremiah (d), divorced. Next one, Norma Lundholm... married, divorced, and then married Diane Middlebrook. So put in parentheses, instead of divorced, put down, annulled for the first one, and the second one, annulled... it sounds really terrific. People usually are not that interested in reading juicy things in a Who’s Who statement, so that would be an amusing one. And I think she did part of it already. She annulled already one marriage. I don’t know... remember yet, whether she already annulled the second one as well.
And that brings me right away to another digression because the entire presentation will be one really series of digressions which eventually will lead back to historical antecedents in my life, and move back, rather than forward to talk about the present. If you looked at Who's Who entries of mine over the years... and I have done this for other people. Very few people do this and look at early issues of Who's Who which you can, of course, get in any library, although they usually just have the last one on the shelf. The changes in a person... and not the changes that deal with always new entries which, of course, is natural. This is one reason... the only reason, why Who's Who ask you to essentially bring them up to date. But when people start changing earlier things... and that’s a form of Stalinist Who's Who, a form of Stalinist history, where you erase certain things, or the more unusual things which I will confess to, revisionist ones in which you add things to your past history which you were reluctant to disclose before. These of course are filling certain holes, gaps... filling a Swiss cheese hole here and there. And that refers to my first wife. And that is a digression that I think I will start with.
But I will just finish this sentence here... because I talked about Anne Sexton, and that started reminding me of this here... 'To paraphrase a line of Anne Sexton’s, I am likely to construct a tree out of used furniture'. That, I think, is a damn good metaphor, incidentally, even though I reversed what she said. 'The gaps, large though they may be, are thus more honest, a truer reflection of my nature. Freud's...' Sigmund Freud's '... insight applies with full force. The unconscious speaks through the gaps in ordinary language. Readers...' or in this case listeners or viewers, '... will gather from my prose intelligence about me of which I remain unaware.' Well, I wrote that in 1990... or 1989, the year in which my first novel, Cantor’s Dilemma, was published. And I realise I was going to talk about my first wife, but I’m going to put it aside for a moment, because this is an even more important digression.

The name Cantor’s Dilemma, I had not realised until the book already came out in Penguin paperback... and the book has now been reprinted some seventeen or eighteen times, that the initials of the book are my initials. I literally did not know this. All kinds of people think that that was why I picked it... CD, Carl Djerassi. I did not, yet unconsciously it clearly means something. If CD means anything to me, these initials, they mean circular dichroism and this is one of the scientific areas in which I did an awful lot, so there are lots of people who would associate my name with circular dichroism, and that is a CD... and the abbreviation in science is CD, not because of Carl Djerassi but because of circular dichroism. So, I was unaware of that. But then I wrote another four novels. I’ve written altogether five. And already by the time I got to the second one, The Bourbaki Gambit, which also happens to be my favourite of the novels that I’ve written, I realized that that is why I am writing two autobiographies in my fiction, because that fiction is a form of auto-psychoanalysis, and I think that's what it probably is for most intellectual fiction writers... although some of them would not admit it or don’t recognize it, but there are others... and I’ve forgot who said it, some famous writer said, every novelist is an autobiographer wearing a mask. In my case, there’s no question that that is the case and that is why I eventually continue writing fiction, and why I am writing plays now. They are really my ongoing auto-psychoanalysis. Now, most psychoanalysts will tell you that’s impossible. You need an analyst and an analysand, but I can only say these psychoanalysts have never written fiction or plays, or they wouldn’t say that. Or maybe it’s their naïveté of Carl Djerassi who’s never been in therapy, so therefore this is my view of therapy. But I would say it is an extremely interesting process because I learn a hell of a lot about myself, and in the process, correct my Who's Who even though it’s not the real Who's Who... I mean the limited Who's Who and the compendium, but the Who's Who, the ongoing... because Who's Who is just a record of a person’s life, in a completely reduced, abstracted, staccato fashion, but nevertheless that’s what it is, and usually you don’t correct that. I correct it all the time, because I learn more about it. And I’ve also corrected, therefore, my own Who's Who entry.

I was married at an ungodly age, I mean one that people simply would not believe, because I look like a reasonably intelligent person and one who has... you know, had a good education and generally the educational process, the active student educational process, doesn’t lend itself very much to marriage. But I was married at 19½. Now that’s really, right now, I would say is a child, but then you forget that was in the early 1940s, which is very different from what it would be now, even what sexual mores were like. I mean, I find it rather amusing, but when I got married, I was a virgin. Well, you know, that’s even statistically hardly possible these days with a 19½ year young man. It wouldn't be with me if I lived all over again, but I was. That may even have had something to do with it, but I was also convinced that I was really an adult. And in some respects I was, because I’d graduated already from college. And because I didn’t have any money, I had to go out to work. I couldn’t afford to go to graduate school, so I was... had been working for a year as a research chemist... a junior research chemist in a large pharmaceutical company, CIBA, which is now Novartis... in New Jersey. It’s a Swiss company and its American headquarters are in New Jersey. So I was already a chemist and I’d even made a very important discovery, one of the first antihistamines, Pyribenzamine, my first publication, my first patent. So that’s pretty heady stuff for a 19 year old one, who never really thought, you know, I’m really the cat’s meow. And then I decided I would go to graduate school because I got a very good fellowship at the University of Wisconsin, and therefore, you know, I could get married. I got married to a woman who was four years older than I. In fact, the interesting thing is my first two wives were four and six or seven years older than I was. In fact, any other woman with whom I was romantically involved in one way or another, until my early to middle thirties, were always older than I, and then it dramatically changed from then on, which is rather typical of the impending male climacteric, but that was the case. And she was a very kind and nice and easy to live with woman. Her name was Virginia Jeremiah, and she came from Ohio, and I’d met her initially on a blind date when I was an undergraduate. I was an undergraduate in Ohio at Kenyon College, and she went to a nearby college, Otterbein... we met then that way.
So I married her in her home town of Dayton, Ohio, where I just went for the marriage and then our wedding night, you might say, was spent in a Pullman Car from Dayton to Madison, Wisconsin, via Chicago. Not very romantic, but charming. And she was a typical... she played the typical female role at that time of the wives of graduate students. Many more graduate students were married at that time than they would be now for various reasons, to support their husbands. It always was that the students were all male, the medical students were male, their wives were the nurses who put them through that, and then frequently afterwards, they were ditched for a newer different model. I mean, this is the sort of thing which is certainly neither appropriate now, nor practised as much as it was at that time. And I’m not saying this at all proudly. I say it as a collective male mea culpa of the culture of that time, but it was a fact. And in that case my wife didn’t feel exploited and I didn’t think at that time that it was exploiting her. And she was a school teacher, high school teacher, and I was a graduate student, and it was... we both enjoyed that graduate work, which was short and very compressed. It was only two and a half years, and then got my PhD at the University of Wisconsin. And then we moved back to New Jersey and I went back to the same company where I worked for another four years. We had no children because we didn’t want to have any children. We practised birth control. That, of course, was before the pill. That was again the traditional method of birth control, because birth control obviously will come up in what I will have to say, so I might as well talk about it even at this stage. So what was the traditional relationship in an essentially monogamous marriage, namely the wife practised it with a diaphragm, rather than the man using a condom. Not that people didn’t use condoms, but obviously it was more enjoyable in a way, you might say, for both parties. But again, the burden of contraception was on the woman, and it’s interesting that the invention with which I had something to do with, the contraceptive pill... perhaps the greatest disadvantage of the pill with many of the other advantages, social, cultural, hedonistic, that it had, the greatest disadvantage is that it again put, and to a much greater extent, the burden of contraception again right back on the woman. We have no male pill to take that place. And the pill is even more convenient for the pleasure of sexual intercourse than condoms. And there isn’t any other alternative the man has for a chance of reversible birth control.

I moved to Mexico in 1949, which was an extremely important move for me, as research chemist for Syntex, a very small pharmaceutical company, and I’ll probably get back to that later, because that’s where, even though I was only two years initially, two of the most important things that I’d done essentially within a year and a half, occurred... the first synthesis of cortisone from a plant raw material, and the first synthesis of an oral contraceptive. But the last year before we moved, for the first time that I had an extra marital affair, and again I’m confessing nothing here that any person can read between the lines in my autobiography, or in fact it doesn’t take much imagination if you just read...  well, not if you read Who's Who, because there doesn’t give the correct data, but if you calculate the birth of my daughter and my marriage... my divorce date and my marriage date, you will find there is something that doesn’t match... the marriage date to my second wife. It was an affair... this was not a trivial... it was not a one night stand, it was not a trivial extra marital affair and I dare say that I probably thought at that time that I had truly fallen in love with a second woman, without really having fallen out of love with the first one who was an extremely kind of very nice woman, I mean, really just a princess of a person. But, you know, these things do happen and it wasn’t that I was philandering and looking for someone. I had met my second wife, Norma, at a party where... at a social gathering, where my first wife was not present. I’ve forgotten why not. We just happened to be dinner partners and hit it off as it were. Well, the ironic thing is that she got pregnant, ironic that it should happen with me. It isn’t that we didn’t practice birth control. We actually used the condom, but I suspect that what happened at that time the condom sort of slipped or something. Anyway, she got pregnant and you remember what that is at that time for a woman to become pregnant, out of wedlock, a woman who was very much a professional woman. She was six years older than I, so she was in her early thirties, and did not expect of course to be pregnant. She was working and literally... abortion was illegal and I don’t even know whether she considered an abortion, but it was totally illegal. She lived on the East Coast... at that time, she was in New York and I was in New Jersey. Her home was in Boston. It was not a Catholic family, but it was a very traditional WASP, New England WASPish family, and she literally felt she had to leave her home and go to another place to be quite anonymous... not that I mean starving, I don’t mean that, but in a place where no-one would know her and she would give birth to the bastard child. She didn’t call it that of course, but that is what illegitimacy looked like, this is within my lifetime if you think about this. I mean, it was really the question of shame, of everything else. But it is ironic, which I learned only later, that that had happened to her mother earlier at some stage. She... I felt very bad about this, needless to say. But I was already in Mexico and I did come back to the United States, every once in a while professionally and we saw each other. But I then really felt... and I have to probably say it was that... it was noblesse oblige rather than anything else, that I’d have to marry her. Now, that was not horrible, it was not a shotgun marriage, because I thought I was also in love with her, so there was a difference, but I felt awful about what it would do to my first wife whom I had to confront with this in Mexico and say, you know, I want to get a divorce because I want to marry another woman who is going to bear a child of mine. And my first wife that could have been an absolute bitch and she could have been outraged and so on... and I could have understood this, was really understanding. And she said, okay, so much so that we got the same divorce lawyer. Now in Mexico at that time you could get divorced in one day in the state of Morelos, so we decided to do just this one day Mexican divorce which sometimes rich people from the United States had in Mexico. We were living in Mexico, so that was perfectly legal. There was nothing monkey business about it, and secondly it was a mutually consenting divorce. It was not something that would be questioned afterwards. And we literally got divorced in one day and I remember driving with a lawyer from Mexico City to Cuernavaca and having lunch first, and as we sat at lunch, he looked at us and said, you know, it’s none of my business, but are you really sure you want to get divorced? You see to be so simpatico. This was, of course, all in Spanish. And we said, yeah, unfortunately, so we got divorced. And a week later I flew to the United States and got married just in time. My wife had a child three weeks later. But it was legitimate on the birth certificate. I was listed as father, although why is my daughter born in Hartford, Connecticut, when my wife was really otherwise in New York, and I in Mexico City? And it was Hartford, Connecticut, because that is the place where she knew someone had gone there to have a child as a single mother, which of course she didn’t. And then came to Mexico City when my daughter was maybe a month, or two months old. So then we were married there.

It was an inauspicious start of the marriage which 25 years later collapsed completely. But probably it collapsed in an emotional way many, many years before. But why do I tell you this long story? Because the story that one has to know about me, but it has something to do with this Who's Who business. My second wife, with whom I then had another child, my son Dale, three years later... and that was not an accidental child... felt very guilty about this, because for her it was adultery that I’d committed and where she was the third party in this. And I understand this. And she never met my first wife, but she wasn’t proud of what we did, so to speak. And she didn’t want to have anyone know that I’d married before, and particularly not this position that I married her really only, you know, a couple of weeks before she gave birth to a child. Now the fact that we moved to Mexico and did it in Mexico and then two years later moved back to the States, was of course very simple because the people that we knew... first of all, we didn’t have any common friends before and then we moved to another place and moved then to Michigan, so it was all very simple. So she didn’t... and I very early in my life was asked to present my biography for Who's Who, and she asked me not to mention... in fact she really basically asked me in so many words, just be Stalinist about it, erase it from my history, and I understood this although I was reluctant to do it, because my first wife did not deserve to be removed from... you know, like Trotsky was from Soviet history, because Trotsky played a big role... this is a bad metaphor because there is nothing Trotskyite about my wife. Trotsky I only picked because he got murdered in Mexico by Stalin... but I agreed to it. So when you look at my Who's Who in terms of dates, I moved the marriage back one year, so my daughter was born in 1950 and I moved the marriage to 1949 although it was really just a couple of weeks later.
So once having done this, you don’t correct this very easily and it is rather funny that where some people met me in the middle '40s when I had been married to my first wife for six years, and then they met the second wife eight years later, because it was this transition in Mexico and so on, and they knew her very little and they thought it was the same woman but she looked somewhat different and I, of course, never let on... and I remember there was an Englishmen who was so very puzzled because he kept telling my... 'You know, we met before,' and my wife said, 'No, we have not met before.' It was another wife. And I didn’t clarify this, not for a long time.
So she was not in my Who's Who, but then when I got divorced 25 years later, there was no reason to sanitise this. Furthermore she never wanted me to have any contact with my first wife, and I didn’t because I just... I  went along with that because I understood that this was not maliciousness. It was a much more complex feeling on the part of my second wife not to want to deal with that subject. And I could understand that.

What is ironic is that my first wife while she was still in Mexico, having gotten divorced and was still there, had a relationship with a Mexican man whom I never met to this day, and I think she fell in love with him and got pregnant, did the whole thing all over again. So she was... there again got pregnant in an affair with a man while she was still in Mexico before she decided to move back, and then as a result of it, married him. And also had eventually two children and to my knowledge stayed married with him, and they moved eventually back to Ohio where she came from. So he moved from Mexico, where he had lived, to Ohio, and I do not know what his occupation was and he is, I think, probably still alive because my second wife, who is now in her late eighties... my first wife, is still alive since I heard from her literally this year.
But while we’re talking about wives, she saw me on TV some 25 years later and so... or maybe she heard me first on the radio, and she said, 'I immediately recognised this voice,' and wrote to me. In California it was very easy to find out... I was then a Professor at Stanford, maybe I was even identified in that broadcast, but she could have looked it up. Anyway... and said, 'I’m coming to California on some trip. I’d like to see you.' Well that was... of course, it was a surprise. You can’t say, no, I don’t want to see you. Besides, I wasn’t married any more. So it had nothing to do with that. But it was a hesitation of opening a book which really has been closed for such a long time that you just don’t... you don’t want to open it and you wonder what... what you do when you do that. Remember, personally I hadn’t seen her for 25 years so my image of her was still a woman in her late 20s/early 30s and, you know, by now it’s a woman that’s in her late 50s, or something like that. And I wanted to have a neutral chaperone present to be absolutely sure that... by that time I was divorced from my second wife. I was a bachelor living in my ranch house. I was living both alone and not alone, in that I did have relationships with other women, because I was between marriages for some eight years or so, but at that time I had an extremely important relationship with a woman that I really thought was the great love of my life and so I asked her to be present when my first wife appeared, just so that it could be completely neutral and, of course, that woman, about whom I will talk some more... the chaperone that I brought along was curious to meet, of course, my first wife and it was all very civilized.
Now, what do you talk about with a first wife whom you haven’t seen for 25 years? And where I had already committed enormous faux pas that she was unaware of, but which I described in this autobiography, and I will mention again because it is psychologically significant.

Three years after we were divorced... that’s only three years, so I can’t ascribe any Alzheimer’s symptoms to this, I was just in my very early thirties. I was back in Michigan, my first academic job at Wayne State University. I’d retained an intimate consulting relationship with Syntex and I travelled back and forth between Mexico City and Detroit half a dozen times or more a year, which at that time was a fairly long voyage. There were no non-stop flights. You changed planes in Texas. And as I was on the plane... maybe a DC4, I mean, planes that are minute by present comparisons, and I remember sitting in there reading and at that point the lounges were in the back in the plane. There was no such thing as first class or second class then I think, and I sort of looked up as a shadow passed, and it was a woman passing and so I said,'My God, it’s my wife...' my first wife who I hadn’t seen for three years. And I thought it was not implausible because of course I knew she had married someone in Mexico and for all I knew, she may be living in Mexico and therefore could have been travelling there. And, of course, I was about to jump up and talk to her. She didn’t see me, but she walked to the end and then started talking with a Mexican man. I thought, well, maybe it’s her husband, God knows how he feels about this first husband, so maybe I will wait until we get to land in Mexico City. And then I can do this. It was only within an hour of arrival.
So I went back to my book and sometime during that time she must have come back to her seat and then we landed, and then I stood up and didn’t leave the plane. I was waiting for her... she was sat in front of me, to pass by me so I would then catch her eye. And there she was, going very slowly as people emptied the plane, passed by me and she was within a couple of metres of me, and as she sort of looks around, her eyes suddenly rested on me, and I of course was staring at her and I wanted to sort of capture her like a magnet. And she, sort of, looked puzzled because, you know, one doesn’t normally stare. And I said... 'Virginia,' and she just said, 'I beg your pardon?' And suddenly I realised it was not my wife, and to think that I had confused my wife of just three years ago with another one, really tells you something, both about preoccupation, estrangement, focus... you name it, maybe even memory.
So, therefore, that was only the second time... the second time I met her and told her that story in fact. Of course, it was only the first time since our divorce that I had met her, but in my mind, a second time. But then what do you do? How do you recapitulate 25 years? It either takes you 25 years to talk about this, or if you’re just talking a couple of hours, you’re finished. You talk about the facts of your life, sort of in a way that I do it now, although I’ll probably do it now more insightfully than I did with her, certainly because I think I understand much more about myself now, the last 10 or 15 years, than I did at that time. And, secondly, you know there are obviously some things you’re not prepared to tell to the first wife that you would tell perfectly well to a perfect stranger, so that was a fundamental difference. So then we were finished basically and then it sort of became a little bit awkward. What else do you talk about? And we had tea or something, and she left.

She sent me a gift and that was really quite moving. Why would she send me a gift? Appreciation of... visit the ranch and so on. And it was a box that came through, at that time, the railway express, rather than Fedex.  And the box when I opened it, said, yogurt maker. Now even that I could sort of understand because at that time I was making my own yogurt and I probably served her that, fruit salad with yogurt and nuts and honey, which I like to eat very much there, and a lot of fruit and so on. And I’m not a cook, but I can feed myself well, and that’s the sort of way I fed myself. And maybe that was it. But the last thing I needed was a yogurt maker, because I am... you know, yogurt is the Bulgarian national dish. That’s why Bulgarian peasants supposedly have more centenarians than anyone else because it’s Lactobacillus bulgaricus that is supposed to be the real... yogurt aficionados use that and not some crappy pasteurised stuff from Denmark or England or Wisconsin. And I used that and I did it the standard way, the way you did it in Bulgaria you heat milk to boiling. You let it cool until you just can stick your finger into it, and then you put a couple of tablespoonsful of the preceding yogurt in there, put it in a wide mouthed Thermos, close it overnight, and the following day you can hardly pour it out. It’s set and it’s wonderful tough, Bulgarian yogurt. That’s how I made it and I was not going to use some electric crap, even though that’s exactly what I would be using as a chemist in the lab. But there was this mixture of being a primitive Bulgarian on the one side, and a sophisticated American scientist on the other side. And so I said, that’s not what I need, and I put it away.
And then a few months later my stepmother, my father’s second wife, who was also Bulgarian whom he married in the States... and I'll perhaps get to my father later, why he was then in the States... had a birthday and I really didn’t know what to give her. You know, she already had everything. What can you still give her, probably the same sort of things. But I said, ah Bulgarian, I’ll give her a yogurt maker. She doesn’t know really that this is... that someone else gave it to me. So I thought I’d better unpack it first and as I lifted it off, it was rattling and I thought, oh my God, maybe it even broke. And I opened it and it turned out not to be at all a yogurt maker. It was just the box. And there were daffodil bulbs in there which she had sent to me to plant in my... on my ranch, which was really a very nice gesture, a much more appropriate one, which is, of course, what I did. Thank God I had thanked her before and I thanked her in general without saying, thanks for the yogurt maker, which would have been just terrible. So I planted them, and they flowered the following year, and they’re still in front of my house. I mean, there are lots of them now, because they kind of multiply.
Now, I described that in the autobiography, and I lied in the way I described it in the autobiography, but I think it’s a charming lie, and it is the sort of lie that one should indulge in. Lies are here not to be committed, but some lies should in fact be told if you can really justify them appropriately, and I can justify this one. Because in this autobiography, I described the scene and I said I saw her for the first time after 30 years of marriage and what she had sent to me was 30 daffodil bulbs and I planted them and all 30 bloomed the following year. Now, that’s a lie because I don’t know how many she sent to me and I don’t think that all of them would have bloomed, but the fact that I lied and said it was one for each year, so that she'd remembered and I’d remembered how many years we’d not seen each other, and that they all bloomed, does tell something about how I really felt and about her, and that was a discreet tribute I was paying to her in the novel. It was the first correction I made, and that was a lie. But the second correction was not a lie and if you now look at Who’s Who, it says, married first Virginia Jeremiah, then divorced, and so I’ve corrected that record.

I have only one grandson. We are a very small family. I have now only one son. My daughter is dead, she committed suicide, and she had no children. So I have only one grandson who also has obviously another grandfather, who is dead. That grandfather was very well known and here in England particularly also a notorious person, namely Robert Maxwell, and many people still remember him although it’s been now a while gone. There’ve been all kinds of biographies and books about him and scandals and so on. Robert Maxwell is a person who, of course, I have known well over the years, because my son married one of his daughters. They got divorced and they got divorced in a very bitter divorce, before he died, so I have no inside knowledge of how he died... his famous death... whether he committed suicide, fell over his yacht or was murdered as some people want to claim, which is a pretty absurd story... murdered by the Israeli secret service, when in fact at that stage he was a major supporter of Israel. But these were various tales and, of course, they can never be answered. But I used to look at Who’s Who in England at the entry under Maxwell when I first met him, in the early 1960s, and I remember looking at it again once more 10 or 15 years later, and noticing such substantial differences that I then really made it sort of a job of looking at it all the way through. And if you look at his Who’s Who entry here, under Robert Maxwell in the 80s... that’s a year before he died, and look at the one in 1960s when he ran for a Member of Parliament, and was in fact a Member of Parliament for one or two terms in the Labour Government, you would not think that it is the same person, including birth, original name... Maxwell is not his name, the fact that his family was wiped out during the Nazi time, and so on. So it was a completely sanitised, very British, Who’s Who in the 1960s, and he was always called Captain Maxwell at that time, and had won the Military Cross and that was made very plain, whereas in the 1980s he flaunted his Jewishness, flaunted it into the face of a British establishment that had not accepted him for either good or bad reasons, that makes no difference, but you can see how you can learn something extraordinarily interesting in the context of Who’s Who.
And since then, I’ve done it in quite a number of cases, and discovered it in another very interesting place, that has some similarities to Maxwell and some differences. And that is a man, also an industrial tycoon... although not one who died under mysterious circumstances or committed apparently fairly flagrant financial misdeeds... Cyrus Eaton who was a huge Canadian industrialist living then partly also in the United States, running one of the railroads and mines, etc, etc, whom I got to know because he really was the first funder of the Pugwash Conferences. And the Pugwash Conferences, which was a major chapter in my novel... in my novel! That’s a good faux pas, because in some respects that’s what an autobiography is. It’s auto-mythology and it’s a form of fiction. I mention that because Pugwash was an important movement... is an... well, was. I don’t think it is that much now. But was a very important movement and I was involved in it for about 20 years. And it was founded here in the UK. He was the first one... it’s called Pugwash because the first two meetings were in his summer home in Pugwash, Nova Scotia, and he funded it. And then they separated from that funder because he carried with him a lot of baggage. He was the favourite capitalist of the Stalinist and post-Stalinist communists. He won... got the Lenin Award. He had honorary degrees from Russian and Eastern European universities and academies and Khrushchev gave him a troika and horses for his ranch in Canada and etc, etc. At the time, during McCarthy days and so on... and the only reason that he was even able to get away with it, he was a Canadian citizen, even though he was living partly in the United States, but practically McCarthy wanted to just ban him from the country and something like that. And if you read his Who’s Who, Cyrus Eaton’s, which I did because I got to know him... he was an interesting man at that time, and he would have like any Who’s Who, his honorary degrees and there were the University of Moscow and Sofia and stuff like this, and, as I said, the Lenin Peace Prize, which of course was a terrible one to get during the McCarthy days, and all this sort of thing. And then you read it 10 years later, and suddenly he didn’t get any honorary degrees... he got honorary degrees, I don’t know, from the Dalhousie University or the University of Toronto and he was the president of the Shorthorn Cattle Association of Canada, which was how I met him because I once also had a shorthorn cattle ranch, both where I lived in California and in Canada, and so we actually met. I think he once bought one of my shorthorn things at an auction. So suddenly he was a Canadian capitalist tycoon who had his ranches and railroads and stuff like this, and there was not a whiff of any connection to the Eastern European socialist countries.
But it’s an interesting... and he had no particular reason I think in my opinion to even massage it that way. But it shows. It’s very interesting to read these nuances of Who’s Who but then you have to be well into looking back... and this has been my advice to biographers, the professional biographers, who... that is one thing that most biographers, in fact, don’t do, never think about it, that it’s worthwhile... they usually check the latest Who’s Who and then they go to the other sources. But the real intimate personal thoughts... because remember the Who’s Who entries are written by the person himself or herself is whether in fact they retroactively change them. And in what way... retroactively. Prospective one you expect them to change it, but not retroactively.

That woman who was present as chaperone there, the woman that I really deeply had fallen in love with at a time when I led a fairly promiscuous life... this was remember the 1970s which was certainly, all over the world and particularly in California... and people credit or blame the pill for this which I think is a gross over simplification, but I don’t accept the blame part anyway. If anything I would call it credit. I think it’s just overcrediting it, but I was certainly one of the beneficiaries of this, although I practised a certain element of chivalry, sexual chivalry if you wish, by having had maybe 10 years earlier a vasectomy because I felt very strongly that men should also take responsibility and I certainly didn’t want to have any children any more at age 50 something which was when I had a vasectomy. So I was very much in love with this woman and we more or less lived together. We didn’t live together all the time in the same house... she had lived at the ranch, but she was also a professor at Stanford and she lived in San Francisco Peninsula and we spent a lot of time together. And then she went on sabbatical to Harvard for a year and we saw quite a bit of each other, because I travelled often to the east coast and then we met in New York. Once, and I’ll never forget it, it was May 8, 1983. This is not the sort of date I usually... I have no recollection of any other dates... no, a recollection of one other date in June of that year. And there was a sad touch at that dinner that I was very much surprised about, and as we walked back to our hotel said... 'You know, I have fallen in love with someone else and we're through.' Now she was said it very kindly and politely, but it was a thunderbolt because I didn’t expect any of this. I felt very secure in this relationship and, you know, I tried to convince her a thing like this... I went so far, which was rather amazing, to say I was willing to accept a ménage à trois... not à trois in the same place, but if she wanted to have, you know, an affair with a man somewhere else or a relationship, that’s fine with me. Fine with me is wrong... but acceptable. But the answer was, no, absolutely no. We’re finished.
Well, gradually I felt... you know, then I went back home. In the end I felt... it was a typical male response, I felt outraged, revengeful, insulted, self-pitying, etc. And amazingly enough she was a Professor of Literature and a poet, and I started writing poems. I had never written a single poem in my life and there was an explosion of poetry... but explosion. I probably wrote 40 poems in a period of three or four months of bitter, nasty, revengeful, self-confessional... the sort of thing that poetry is for in part I suppose, but it’s certainly not publishable poetry. But as a typical scientist who always thinks that anything worth doing is worth publishing, the next thing I said, I was going to go and publish this poetry and sent it to... discovered that there are oodles of poetry magazines. The United States are flooded with them. And I sent them to them and I, as a scientist, was not accustomed... scientists of my calibre are not accustomed to rejections. And I just collected one rejection after another, which was very sobering, but then I actually learned a little bit. I’m a fast learner and I learned really how one deals in a poetry [unclear] and I learned how to... and I even became a better poet, and even elements of humour.

But here is a poem, that was the first poem that was ever accepted for publication, so that was my first published poem in a reputable good poetry magazine and it tells you the entire story of this love affair, and it’s called, Lingonberries Are Not Sufficient... is the title. And that already shows, you know, it’s a bit more subtle because reading this title doesn’t tell you anything about what it’s all about.
When we met I spoke and you laughed. Just laughed.  ‘Come live with me And write. I’ll feed and launder you.’ You laughed and came.  For a man to feed his lover, To do her laundry, To really give her Virginia Woolf’s Room of One’s Own  Is a serious gift Not a laughing matter.  He - the tea drinker - learned to make coffee. Her type of coffee. The coffee grinder’s machine-gun rattle  Was morning music to her ears. Dark French Roast, the only acceptable ammunition. The first cup brought to her to her shower, The next while she dried herself, The third, fourth and fifth at breakfast.   The heated bagel. The carefully segmented grapefruit Coloured with his personal touch: Lingonberries from Sweden.   You stopped laughing. You wrote poems. Like Scheherazade. As long as she spun tales She lived. As long as you wrote, Your pasha supported you In a style to which you were not accustomed. The ambiance became so oriental, Your poems even sang lines like
And I'm quoting
   ‘Sunday morning: Fog drifts like steam     Across the windows of this room, lit like a jewel.    “Like a Turkish bordello!"’     How good is your new lover’s coffee? Does he make you cut your own grapefruit? Does he add lingonberries from Sweden? Should I be generous? Should I send him lingonberries? Well, that showed I was moving forward.

But here is a poem, that was the first poem that was ever accepted for publication, so that was my first published poem in a reputable good poetry magazine and it tells you the entire story of this love affair, and it’s called, Lingonberries Are Not Sufficient, is the title. And that already shows, you know, it’s a bit more subtle because reading this title doesn’t tell you anything about what it’s all about.
When we met
I spoke and you laughed.
Just laughed.
 
"Come live with me
And write.
I’ll feed and launder you."
You laughed and came.
 
For a man to feed his lover,
To do her laundry,
To really give her Virginia Woolf’s
Room of One’s Own 
Is a serious gift
Not a laughing matter.
 
He-the tea drinker-learned to make coffee.
Her type of coffee.
The coffee grinder’s machine-gun rattle 
Was morning music to her ears.
Dark French Roast, the only acceptable ammunition.
 
The first cup brought to her to her shower,
The next while she dried herself,
The third, fourth and fifth at breakfast.
 
The heated bagel.
The carefully segmented grapefruit
Coloured with his personal touch:
Lingonberries from Sweden.
 
You stopped laughing.
You wrote poems.
Like Scheherazade.
As long as she spun tales
She lived.
As long as you wrote,
Your pasha supported you
In a style to which you were not accustomed.
The ambiance became so oriental,
Your poems even sang lines like
 
And I'm quoting
 
   "Sunday morning: Fog drifts like steam
    Across the windows of this room, lit like a jewel.
   'Like a Turkish bordello!'"
   
How good is your new lover’s coffee?
Does he make you cut your own grapefruit?
Does he add lingonberries from Sweden?
Should I be generous?
Should I send him lingonberries?
Well, that showed I was moving forward.
 
 

And then I decided to write an autobiography in poetry form, long before I ever thought I would write an autobiography in this form. That was 1983, for my 60th birthday. And I attended a 60th birthday celebration here in London, at Oxford which was probably the biggest thing that I ever attended and it was the 60th birthday celebration of someone else who became 60 just a few months before me. So I anticipated it. And that was Robert Maxwell’s 60th birthday party and it was so large that there had to be two successive days, and each time there were 800 people at Oxford, and I of course was a house guest at their estate at Headington Hill. That was written right there in the white heat of that particular birthday. And that was called The Clock Runs Backward, and that became the title of the entire collection. And I will read it to you, and then we’ll take a break because that is probably the way you wanted to hold this interview. Because that is a chronological account of my life, but told backwards. And that’s why it’s called The Clock Runs Backwards, but nevertheless all you have to do is play it back the other way and you’ve got it.
So I’ll read it to you, and the only thing you have to know is that the first line is, at his 60th birthday party... that’s Robert Maxwell. Now, of course, it doesn’t say that here, but there’s no reason to hide it. I give away no trade secrets, so to speak... or personal secrets.

At his sixtieth birthday party, Surrounded by wife, children and friends, The man who has everything Opens his gifts.  Among paperweights, cigars, Books, silver cases, Cut glass vases, Appears a clock Made by Kool Designs In a limited edition. A clock running backward. A clock called Look.  Amusing Just the gift For the man who has everything.  How Faustian, thought the friend, Soon to turn sixty himself. What if it really measured time?  As the hands reach fifty, He stopped them. Books, hundreds of papers, dozens of honours. Not bad, he thought: I like this clock.  But fifty was also the time His marriage had turned sour. He let the clock run on:  Forty-eight years, forty-five years, Then forty-one. Ah yes, the years of collecting: Painting, sculptures, and women Especially women.  But wasn’t that the time his loneliness had first begun? Or was it earlier? Why else would one collect, Except to fill a void?  Don’t hold the hands. The thirties were best: Bursts of work, success, recognition, Professor in a first-rank university, Birth of his son - now his only survivor.  What about twenty-eight? Ah yes - he nearly forgot; The year of THE PILL. The pill that changed the world No - too pretentious, too self-important. But he did change the life of millions, Millions of women taking his pill, he thought.  The clock still regresses. Twenty-seven years: first time father, of a daughter, In time his only confessor. Now dead. Killed herself. The beginning of his second marriage. The first undone.  Early stigmata of success to come: The doctorate not yet twenty-two, The Bachelor of Arts, not yet nineteen, And the fallacy of presumed maturity. First time groom, not yet twenty Backward: Europe. War. Hitler. Vienna. Childhood. Stop. Stop. Stop.  The pater familias, Surrounded by wife, children, friends, The man who has everything Is still opening presents. More paperweights, more silver, More books, ten pounds of Stilton cheese, And one more clock.  Thank God he’s moving forward, Thought the friend, The lonely one, Who will soon turn sixty himself.  And smiled at the woman at his side, The one he had met yesterday. Who yesterday had said, ‘Yes, I’ll come with you to Oslo.’ And come she did, But not for long.
Now these last two lines are added. They’re not in here. Well, that tells you actually more than you can finish then stop the entire interview. And that shows, of course, the great virtue of poetry because it condenses, it thickens. Which is what the dichter in German and the gedicht means. And anything else that I would tell you from now, if you still want to continue this interview, will be just baggage. Perhaps not garbage, but baggage.

Well, why did I read you all this? Because... I got to writing poetry out of revenge, self pity and revenge for a woman... an otherwise intelligent woman who had this fantastic lover, well, companion and partner, and just ditching him for someone else, a man I never met. Except that I had learned from her... maybe she told me at that time, that he was basically a literati. I don’t know whether he was a journalist or a literature professor, but he had nothing to do with science. And I said, well, I’m going to show her, if that’s what’s bothering her, then I can do that too. The arrogance, of course, as I said of a typical scientist. Who thinks that science is tough everything else is easy, and, well I’ll just write some poems. But the poems really were only a release mechanism for my really, very deep wound. There was no question whatsoever about this. I was just very much in love with the woman, and obviously... so the revenge, the therapy one does at that time, finds other female company. And that certainly occurred, but it was not really very satisfactory from an emotional standpoint for a very obvious reason. Because the women that interest me are intelligent women, and that is absolutely indispensable. Everything else comes afterwards. And they could tell very soon that I’m really thinking of some else. The worst thing would be to make love to a person and call her by another name. Now that I didn’t do. At least I don’t think I did. But it was otherwise, that sort of thing and that always hung over it. And I was a very eligible bachelor from every standpoint. I lived in a beautiful house, on a ranch, and was affluent. I was a well-known scientist, a professor at a great university, blah, blah, blah. But still... and, of course, she didn’t leave my mind. We had no contact whatsoever... she was still on the East Coast. So I started writing a novel... and started writing a novel the title of which I called Middles, based on a novel Nora Ephron, who at that time herself had written a novel of revenge when her husband... I’ve forgotten whether it’s Bernstein or Woodward, which one she was married to, left her for a newer model, a younger model. But that was... Heartburn was her novel, but she had a wonderful sentence in there. It was something like, all beginnings are happy and we wish for happy endings, but middles are the problem. Middles are the problems of, I don’t know, society, something like that. So I called it Middles. And I wrote that novel... if you think about it, in some respects, under unbelievable conditions because I was a full-time professor with probably the largest research group in our chemistry department, and I had teaching... I was having graduate students, post docs, travelling and in addition, I had a horrible accident.
That’s why I remember June 1983. So May '83 she left me, June '83 I was hiking on my ranch with, fortunately, a group of my graduate students and post docs, maybe 20 people. And it’s very rough land there, and I have a fused knee from a skiing accident, but it doesn’t otherwise bother me, but so I have no knee and my leg is like this, and I came crashing through a rotten piece of timber somewhere on the bottom of a gulch, fell backwards, and completely my leg just exploded because you fall backwards on a stiff leg. So I was just screaming... I would have been... undoubtedly would have died because this was out in nowhere... if I hadn’t been surrounded by lots of young men and a few women. Well, it took one of the young men an hour to get to the first telephone, even though it was at my ranch. And then they called the Forestry Service and the emergency... there were about 20 people eventually came. Had to get with four wheeled trucks and then winch me up, of course, try and give me morphine. I was 30 minutes distance from Stanford University and Stanford Hospital. It took seven hours to evacuate me from that place. It was like having an accident on the North mound of the Eiger and had to be just moved up a steep canyon, wrapped into a form of sled. And I was just screaming. And I ended up in hospital for a few weeks and had to have a major operation, and I carry a lot of metal still in my leg. And then I was in a cast for eight months.
All this living alone, and in a beautiful house which has 75 steps, which was, of course, impossible with crutches and everything else. And then I moved into the artists' colony, about which I’ll tell you later, which was on my ranch, and I lived therefore with the artists. Because there [unclear] it was an artists' colony I’d established, but it was all on one level, and of course there was a cook there and I could drive, and so I then drove to work with crutches and my cast, but still the job of day to day living was sometimes really very complicated. And during all that time, I wrote that novel in addition to everything else. And I finished it after one year. And it was three hundred and some pages. And I was very impressed. And I said, by God, now that I’ll get published. Again, publish or perish. And it was entitled Middles.

Out of the blue, on May 8, 1984, exactly one year later, I got a letter from my former lover, with flowers, telling me that it’s been a year since we separated. Well, this was not news to me. I was going to correct her and say, when you left, not when we separated, but it was a letter that she wrote to me and not a telephone conversation. And she said, would you like to meet and talk about what happened? Well, I had wanted to do that for the last 365 days, so of course my answer was yes. And I wrote her back. But instead of sending flowers back, which would probably have been the gentlemanly thing to do, I sent her the manuscript of that novel. Well, she was like a bomb, so when we met, the first question... I mean, she was impressed. She didn’t know that I wrote anything except scientific papers. And then she saw a 330 page novel. But then she said, 'What are you going to do with this?' I said, 'Well, Publish it. I'll find a publisher.' And she said, 'You are mad.' I said, 'Why?' 'Well,' she said, 'first of all, you’re undressing us completely...' because this was a novel which was supposed to be a roman à clef, but, you know, the clef there is c-l-e-f. The key was lying right here in front of everyone. I mean, it was about a professor, a male professor scientist and I was not an organic chemist. I made him a physical chemist, and he was in an unnamed university in the San Francisco Bay area. But all the other universities were named in the novel, the University of California, San Francisco, Berkeley, San Jose, Santa Cruz and so on. The only one that was not named was Stanford, which was perfectly obvious. It went along like this. And this lover of his was this elegant... but she was not a literature professor, she was a law professor, and I think he had a stiff right leg. I have a stiff left leg, something like that. And he was, of course, absolutely the paragon of an ideal lover, intelligent, charming, etc, etc.
'Well,' I said, 'come on. No-one will know...' But then the coup de grâce was... she said, 'But it’s not even good.' And she was right on this. You know, now I know this. At that time, of course, I said, 'Well, it’s just sour grapes.' But there’s no question that it, sort of, got us together again, and we started seeing each other more and more, and then I asked her to go with me to Brazil. That was really our great, sort of, rapprochement, and I think somewhere around that time... Strangely enough, neither one of us remembers who brought up the subject first, 'Let’s get married.' Because... and that’s my present wife that I’m talking about. That’s why I didn’t mention her name, Diane Middlebrook, and you think about it, I didn’t even think about it in Middles, the title of that novel. The Middlebrook, same way as CD, Cantor’s Dilemma, I didn’t even think of it, Carl Djerassi. I mean, the subliminal things are just unbelievable. But whatever it was, she said, 'Let’s get married, but under only one set of circumstances. You promise never to publish this novel.' I said to her, 'It’s a deal.' And I didn’t. But I didn’t promise not to cannibalise it.

And I’ve cannibalised it in what is probably psychologically autobiographical-psychologically the most important novel I’ve published and it’s a very good one, and had excellent reviews. Although strangely enough, it’s the only novel that has not been published in paperback, because it was the only non-scientific novel. And it’s called, Marx, Deceased. Marx like Karl Marx, but it’s not about Karl Marx, it’s about a writer named Stephen Marx. And I think to this day, I’m not sure why I picked Marx, except that I wanted to use a word... a name that was not overtly Jewish, but nevertheless should be a Jew. I mean, it could have been a non-Jew. And that was very important. And years later, I converted the topic of that novel into a play of mine, which was my first non-scientific play, my fourth play. It’s called, Ego. And, in fact, I realised that the novel, Marx, Deceased... the much better title of it would be, Ego.

So here’s a novel, Marx, Deceased. Even the word deceased in red, in blood red, is really very meaningful in this case here. And that image of that Magritte is a very important one. Magritte is an artist that I like very much and you’ll find him in the cover of another novel of mine. But the more interesting is on the reverse, which is a photo taken by Michael Birt, a well-known British photographer, whose brother was a former head of BBC. It was done for a women’s magazine, and you see the resemblance between that photograph and this one. Now, this came first and it was this photographer who saw this, and of course made it up, because these are ceramic hands and I had a sculpture of this, while these are real hands. And if you look at this... and I don’t know how well you can see that here, but if you look at that image, and you see the hands are on my cheeks which I am holding, these were a young woman’s hands and I think you can see that if you really look at it. And that was his assistant, and he had that idea and he had her crouch behind me... and he just suddenly had that idea and asked me to do it. And he caught an expression on my face that my wife does not like, and I think it’s probably the best photograph that has been taken of me because it’s a very complex expression. You know, it’s not affectionate, it is not totally arrogant, which are two features of me, for instance, but I think the real ambiguity to me was, it’s not clear what I do with her hands. Am I trying to rip them off my face, or am I trying to hold them there? And that is a very important mixed message in there, and it’s a very important one also in respect to relationship with a person, whether you want to reject complete, or a release from complete intimacy, or whether you want to maintain it where she wants to go away from it.
Anyway, reading for the moment, the introduction to it will tell you all about why it is so important to me, this novel. But here is the German version and you see suddenly I was able to change the title, because the republished one in Germany originally was also called Marx... Marx, Verschieden, but that long ago went out of preference with the new publisher, and here I renamed the novel, Ego, and what is much more important, you also have a play at the end, because I’ve written a play. So this is a novel and a play. The novel was written ten years before the play. How the same theme was addressed in a theatrical and in a prose manner in very different plots, but the theme is an extremely important one to me and the German introduction to this one here, is a very... unfortunately, I don’t have it in English here and I want to read you something else, but the German introduction simply starts and says... I’ll translate it from the German: Ego is in English as well as in German a very complicated word. If you look it up in the Oxford English Dictionary or in the Duden and then compare it with another important three letter word, namely sex, you will find how much more complicated ego is as compared to sex. And then, of course, I go through the Freudian analogy and so on.
And I should have called the novel originally Ego but it’s a short preface, the novel, and I will read that to you because just like with that poem there before, it tells you more in that form than I would in a long speech, and every once in a while something that’s written in reasonable English sounds better than in this... a talkish outpouring that you get from me just now.

Why would a scientist author choose a novelist for his principal character? Marx is a novelist in here. My avowed purpose in writing fiction is to interpret the tribal culture of science to the general public. I have chosen for this task the genre of science-in-fiction... (science hyphen in hyphen fiction), certainly not science fiction, but not quite either the realistic fiction that knows so little about science. Readers might think that in my work I will stay close to the scientific world and people that world with figures in long white coats. This time I do not, a decision that raises a question. Is Marx, Deceased just my transparent attempt to avoid being typed as a narrow science-in-fiction writer? Actually, there’s more to it. A recurrent theme in my fiction is a compulsive drive of research scientist for peer approval, namely recognition. The struggle to carve out a reputation that is so important to the essential skill of contemporary science is also related to grantsmanship. While this drive to make a name for oneself has many effects in the culture of science, one effect is that has attracted little notice in the way that most such omissions escape notice is this. Scientists never publish anonymously. Here’s where I find a point of contact between two groups who do not often associate, the creative artist and the researcher in hard science, but areas of intersection are not necessarily areas of agreement. This point of contact between the two cultures while it reveals some convergences, exposes important differences as well. Most writers also display a need for approbation by their peers. Novelist Stephen Marx's... the character in my novel, preoccupation with his own image is not very different from describing a scientist’s hunger for peer validation. In each instance, that urge is both a nourishment and a poison of a creative mind. But writers also lust for recognition beyond the community of their peers. Unlike scientists who live and die by peer review, a writer requires above all else the approbation of the general public. Bestsellers are created by the book buying public, not by the writer’s peers. Even the favourable opinions of book reviewers and critics, though craved by authors, are not essential for elevation to the bestseller list. Here scientists have an advantage. They need not concern themselves with professional critics because such a breed does not exist in their intellectual world, which incidentally also excludes the general public. But the final difference between these two groups in this regard, is the one that concerns me most for it is the one that cuts, I believe, to the heart of the matter. It has to do with individual identity, with ego, the ultimate source of all this hunger for success. Scientists, I have said, never publish anonymously. To do so would seem to rob the entire exercise of its point as I’ve tried to demonstrate in my preceding novel, entitled The Bourbaki Gambit. (Which, incidentally, is my favourite novel.) But a writer if one’s central purpose is to win general acclaim, the kind of celebrity in which one’s individual identity is as irrelevant as the actual deeds or personalities of any of the celebrities whose faces grace the supermarket tabloids, it hardly matters if one writes under one’s own name or not. This question of celebrity is not an idle one, because it ultimately goes beyond ego to the quality of the work itself. What kind of celebrity we pick has everything to do with what we write. If a novelist had to choose between bestseller status on the one hand, and critic’s choice on the other, to sell thousands of books for a couple of years, followed by the oblivion of the remainder bins or to be neglected by the general public now, but still be read half a century later... in other words, as Flaubert put it, truce between audience and readers, which would it be? Such a choice is a formidable test of a writer’s self-esteem, a test to which my fictional author eventually subjects himself. But does he pass it?
And that, in fact, is really me.

When I told my wife, after I’d written my second novel, that I now will interrupt my tetralogy of science-in-fiction by writing this one which has its main character not a scientist but a writer, she said, 'You’re mad. Because while you are writing about scientists from a perspective which though not unique is very rare, because there are not many novelists who are also scientists, and you write about scientific behaviour and culture rather than writing science fiction or something like that, here you are writing about a writer. Well, there are thousands of books that have been written about writers by writers who know a hell of a lot more about it than you do, even though you’ve written two novels. So my advice to you is not to do it.'
Well, I ignored that advice, not because I usually ignore her critical literary advice which is usually very good and very sophisticated, but because of my emotional need to write this. And I didn’t quite realise what that emotional need was until I started writing it. And I’d really worked quite well when I wrote this, namely that I found myself cannibalising my first novel, Middles, which I promised not to publish. But I didn’t promise not to cannibalise it subtly and it is cannibalised in quite a number of places here. So I did something that I didn’t usually do. I did not show the manuscript... the work in progress to my wife. Usually we do show each other that... not every page necessarily or even every chapter, but periodically. And comment on it... each other's. I didn’t in this case, because I thought if she doesn’t approve, I don’t need that sort of crap. I’ll get it from the reviewers and others anyway. I don’t need to get it at home as well. And I said, 'All right, you'll get it only when it gets published or, if I get a publisher, when it gets published.' And it was accepted quite... fairly quickly. So then I got the bound galleys, so they already look like a paperback. They even have a cover. And I thought that I would give it to her, because that was already... the book would appear very shortly thereafter. And I gave it to her on one of our trips from San Francisco to London for airplane reading, because there, you know, you are not interrupted and there’s plenty of time. And I still remember what I had. I brought with me a Trollope novel, which was, sort of, 700 pages. You know, it was fine print. It was this thick and you could see mine, let’s say, which was a paperback and was even thinner than this. So she was reading this and I was reading Trollope. I was reading Trollope, not only because I want to read Trollope, but in preparation for my next novel because I wanted to read something about the stylistic manner of Trollope who at times addresses the reader and suddenly says, 'Dear reader'. And I want to use something like that in my next novel. But I read... for here's Trollope and I read it like this, but I read like this, always looking sideways at my wife who was reading this way. I mean, severe... and I thought, oh my God. You know, not a crack of a smile whenever I looked. Completely no expression, just reading a book.
Well, you know, you can read this in probably three hours and she’s a fast reader anyway, so maybe like this... There... it's now my wife I'm playing... I ought to tell you what she always calls me. She does not call me Carl. If she would ever call me Carl, I would shake in my boots because then it's very serious.  She always calls me 'Chemist'. Now that’s a very funny thing to do, because I’m the only chemist she’d ever met at that time. And then she does it... can do it very affectionately, but she always calls me 'Chemist'. So when you’d be on the street, she’d say, 'Chemist', you know as I would say, 'Diane', or something. Although I don’t call her usually Diane either. I have another name for her. But... said, 'Chemist', so you need to know this. So here she is now on the last page, she does it this way... 'Chemist, this is good.'
That was the greatest compliment I ever had in my life, because it was reluctant and it was an admission of a very sophisticated critic which I knew who was against the thing, and yet I overcame that barrier, and that pleased me more than any other statement I think I’ve ever gotten about anything I’ve written before or since. So that was a very important thing for me to get out of my system.

What the novel is about and what the play is about, is about the preoccupation... well, it’s first of all, I now know what the subject matter is. In my play, I say... one of the characters says it. The term is productive insecurity. And what productive insecurity means... and I certainly suffer from that disease without any question. And I think it is one that the vast majority of scientists, of really good or important scientists, or who think they’re important, which I think is the important point, suffer from... which the general rest of the public... and I don’t mean just non-scientific public or non-professional public, the rest of them who really doesn’t quite recognise or think about. Let’s say there’s a guy who’s won two Nobel prizes... let’s say Linus Pauling. He’s a very good example actually. You’d say, my God, one of the greatest chemists and Nobel Laureate and everything else. He’s got everything. And in fact, he doesn’t. Unless he’s finished doing whatever he’s doing, but if he’s doing more work, he needs the approbation of someone else. And that is probably a very good example, because late in life he did not get it. Another man like Szent-Györgyi, won the Nobel Prize for vitamin C, and he had a hell of a time with the public... the scientific public, at the end.
But even if you’re not taking these extremes, you can take... the character Stephen Marx is based... is in my mind a composite of three writers, and these writers are world famous, Norman Mailer, Philip Roth and Gore Vidal. And I... this novel is dedicated to a woman named Brett Millier who was a graduate student of my wife’s in English at Stanford whom I hired as a research assistant and asked, would you please collect the hundreds of reviews of novels of Roth, Mailer and Gore Vidal which I would like to read. But collect them for me. Obviously not trivial ones, but the major ones. And also ones where colleagues wrote about them. And here you have three writers that, to me as a writer, they're the pinnacles of success. I would like nothing more than... particularly Philip Roth whom I just think is, you know, probably... if another American in my lifetime will win the Nobel Prize in Literature, it should probably be Philip Roth. And yet, they are extremely insecure. Their response to reviewers has been passionate. In the case of Norman Mailer, he responds to reviews... let's say in The New York Times, where his response is longer than the review, and of course The New York Times does publish it because it’s amusing, entertaining and everything else, and he’s had fisticuffs with... literally physical fights with reviewers. Philip Roth was so resentful of reviews that he got for his first great novel, Portnoy’s Complaint, that he wrote another novel about it. One of his Zuckerman trilogy novels is nothing but a revenge against one of the reviewers. I mean, they carry it to that extreme. Gore Vidal stopped writing fiction in the 1950s for a number of years because of the scathing reviews he got by The New York Times of his fiction.
So here you have examples of people who seem to be highly... James Joyce was preoccupied with reviews. I mean, taking people whom we all consider that they’re crème de la crème and yet they need that approbation from... a continuing one, and that in fact drives them to excel, and that’s what I mean by productive insecurity. So it’s both a poison and a nourishment of that place, and that’s what I want to write about. And this man, Stephen Marx, who's in this... falls in this category, this American writer has won the Pulitzer Prize, the national book awards, blah, blah, blah, but he still feels, what do they really think of me? And he feels that the only way he can tell that, is if he read his own obituaries. Now, not the obituaries in the newspapers which, of course, are canned things that have already been written, but the critical obituaries that colleagues and other people write sometimes weeks or months later, and that are long and reflective and usually are the last things people write about him, because there isn’t anything more to do. And remove some of the more personal aggravations and things. So he stages his own death in a very plausible way in a sailing accident where the body was not found in New York. He’s a New Yorker, like Philip Roth and Mailer, and flees to San Francisco, and holds out there and writes in the meanwhile anonymously in San Francisco while he’s reading these things. And that, of course, is the person you see. You see now the two faces. He is already writing in another name and so on. And he eventually decides that he will not come back. Originally, he thought, of course, he would return. He was married. He had no children. But he was about to get divorced and he felt his wife would not be devastated in the long term, and it might even be a relief. And he didn’t screw her in any other way in terms of financials, and so on. In fact, she would end up with continuing royalties and everything else. Money was of no interest or anything. It was the work and the self-image and such. And he decided he would just actually, in fact, continue all over again. Well, that’s what this novel is about. Of course, he couldn’t consummate this. As usual, some things go wrong. But you will have to read the novel to find out what it is.

I myself have often fantasised about... it would be amusing to read one’s obituary. But we can’t do that. And then eventually I decided to write a play about this. And I think that it’s a very good play. It’s a play that I’ve enjoyed very much and it has, as I said, already come out in book form in German, not yet in English, and there will be the German premiere... this was only... Ego only was performed in London. It opened only last year. I wrote it a year and a half ago... less than two years ago. And it has only three characters. They were wonderful actors, particularly the woman actor, Leigh Zimmerman, a spectacular actress, and it did so well that my German agent... I don’t have an agent in English, but I have one in German, managed to get not only a very good Austrian premiere which will be next month... a month and a half... and I’m very much looking forward to it. And much more importantly, a huge German tour of 60 performances which will start in January of next year... January, February... all over Germany with a real German theatrical star. So I’m looking forward to it. And the German radio has already broadcast a radio version which I also prepared for it. So it’s a play that’s moving in the right direction. It has not been performed yet in the United States. It’s a very recent one.
But in the play I do that... or the actors have managed to get across the emotional things even better, and I learned a lot about myself in writing both the novel and the play. And there are hidden autobiographical things in there that I will never disclose which are the sort of gaps that I talked about, because the gaps in an autobiography are only of two kinds. And that is why I think autobiographies, or even what you’re doing right now, this type of interview, people had better realise that future viewers... and I want to say for the record, and I don’t want you to cut this. Whatever else you cut, don’t cut this... don’t believe everything you hear in this interview, not because I am necessarily deliberately lying, but most likely inadvertently.  That autobiography and therefore this type of oral history is automythology. It is automythology because you are presenting yourself, and unless you are an utter masochist, you’re trying to do it in some sort of favourable way, or at least semi-favourable way. I mean, even the worst autobiography... not the worst written... one that is brilliantly written, but a painful one is Erwin Chargaff’s... and there’s a man if he were alive, you should have interviewed him. He died at age 99 just a couple of years ago... called, [Of] Heraclitean Fire, a very pretentious title, but an extremely complex and sophisticated autobiography. A very bitter one. Usually autobiographies are not that bitter, but still there is some. There’s a great deal of ego that’s also presented, and you either have the unconscious filters that prevent you from saying certain things, and they are also the ones that convince you that certain things way back have happened a certain way, because you hoped they happened that way. But, in fact, they did not. And this will be my next digression. I will give you a striking example in my own life of this, and I am sure there are oodles of other examples. So, therefore, it may not necessarily be true, although you think it is true whoever is speaking, and 'you' in this case even being 'I'.
So autobiographies, automythology, any form of fiction... and I believe that the only real true place, where you can write a real autobiography, is unconsciously in the guise of fiction. Because it’s when you write fiction that you are God. Everything is possible to you. You can write anything you want to and you can pretend to the public and to yourself that you made it up. And, of course, in a way you made up many of the things, but in another way, you can say you cannot have made up anything if it comes out of your own mind. It’s there the moment I’ve created it. And where did it come from? Well, it comes not just from neural connections, it comes from my past experience, and that is coloured by whatever... whoever I am. But, in addition, in autobiography... so these are the omissions which are unconscious ones you can’t help. They’re inherent in the genre, but then the second kind of omission, these are the ones out of discretion or shame. Particularly when you talk about other living people, you do not feel entitled or shouldn’t feel entitled to write about them. I feel that way about women in my life, for instance. That is, no-one’s business but that woman and mine. So, therefore, there is already a huge area that we wouldn’t address. In fiction you can do that, and I find that I’m doing that all the time. But I don’t provide anyone with a Rosetta Stone to Carl Djerassi because I put myself... I mean segments of me or certain events and so on, in so many different persons and events, and sometimes in certain female characters... in fact, perhaps even more in female than in male characters, deliberately so, to mislead the reader or the nosy person who wants to find out something about Carl Djerassi that he is not disclosing and thinks correctly that it’s somewhere in the novel. But it’s one thing to think so. It’s another thing to find it. And I will not provide you with that key obviously and never have before, and I’m sure will not otherwise.

I want to give you an example of imagination, how autobiography... it just can be total automythology. And it came out... as usual, I publish everything in the end one way or another, sometimes years later. In my first published short story... actually the first book I published... prose book in the collection of short stories, which was published in England and is long out of print. It is called, The Futurist and Other Stories. And one of the stories has a long title. Usually I have short titles. What’s Tatiana Troyanos doing in Spartacus’ Tent? Well, Spartacus, you know... gladiator in Roman times. Tatiana Troyanos was one of my favourite opera singers, who unfortunately died young, maybe 10 years ago now. A fabulous opera singer and I just absolutely adored her and I go to the opera all the time. Of course, I didn't know her at that time. I actually literally met her subsequently and there is a photograph of Tatiana Troyanos and me, I think, in here, and if it is I will actually turn to it... I have a feeling, yes, well, I don’t know whether you can see this in... well, no, it’s not a very good photograph. It’s the bottom photograph here. Can one see that at all?
[Q] We will be able to.
Well, you can see she’s taller than I. She’s really, sort of, a majestic woman and that was after a concert that she gave in the Bay area, where I presented her with my short story, which is entitled, What’s Tatiana Troyanos doing in Spartacus’ Tent?. Which was a polite way of telling her, I would like to sleep with you, as you will see, but of course she hadn’t read it yet when I gave it to her and signed, and then she took it home. And we’ve never met since. And then she died a few years later. But what did... it's about... obviously it was not initially about Tatiana Troyanos. It was about a book that influenced me very much. I was a great reader as a kid, as a teenager, particularly in Vienna, and then just as a teenage refugee in the United States, and two of my favourite writers at that time were Aldous Huxley and Arthur Koestler, and they were authors that I continued reading as they... you know, they’re not my contemporaries, but they’re only 10, 20 years or 30 years older than I. So, I kept reading them. I read that time the first novel of Arthur Koestler which hardly anyone at all remembers. I mean, everyone thinks his first novel was Darkness at Noon, for which he became very famous when he was still a communist or just a disillusioned communist. But, in fact, he’d written one before. The first one, that’s called Spartacus [sic], and that was a fictionalised account of this Spartacus, the uprising of the gladiators and the campaign that Spartacus led against the Romans, where they eventually took a beating. And Spartacus was, of course, was an unbelievably macho male character, wonderfully described in that novel of Arthur Koestler.

You can see what I’m doing. I am so much more interested in how I use literature to talk about myself that the way to do is to demonstrate and not just talk about it. Now, this was the very first fiction book that I wrote and it has again an artistic cover that I picked because it’s one of the famous Italian futurist paintings by Balla. And I also had this wonderful blurb... 'Brilliant elegant stories sparkling with wit and wordplay, exploring human nature, the nature of literature, and the nature of thought. Cleverness at its humane best', Iris Murdoch. So that was a good... I’ve never been able to improve on that, except one by... once by Cynthia Ozick of my autobiography, and these are two women that influenced me very much in my writing. I mean writers that I admired very much and liked very much. Yeah. And you see very soon what their relationship to this... to what I’ve just been talking about in the short stories.  And this short story... actually, not only did it eventually appear in the short story collection, but also with my first commercially published one in Cosmopolitan... here in Cosmopolitan in the UK.

Through years of sexual reality, I dreamed every so often of a woman lover who would sing while coupling with a man. Once, a husky-voiced woman who brought her guitar, started to sing in a stunning contralto. Lying on my bed exhausted and content, gazing at the naked woman strumming her instrument, I was about to ask her whether she could, but then I chickened out. I was afraid she would just laugh.
Years after, I happened to go to a performance of Monteverdi's L'Incoronazione Di Poppea, set in the time of emperor Nero before he went mad, with Tatiana Troyanos singing the lead role. About halfway through a love scene on the couch between the young Nero and Poppea, the performance assumed such an erotic overtone that I began to squirm in my seat. I don’t go to operas for sexual titillation except for an occasional Salome [unclear]. It’s the music that excites me. But this was different. Suddenly I realised that Troyanos was the woman of my fantasies, who’d walked into Spartacus’ tent over 2000 years ago. I was a relative late bloomer, a virgin till nearly 20. But as an otherwise precocious teenager I made up for it soaking in the delicious warmth of a full bath. Not one of those modern tubs where even I, only 5 foot 6 [inches], can’t stretch out, so shallow that the water barely reaches one’s navel, where either shoulders or feet project into the cold. No. My passion flowed in a real tub. One of those huge pre-war jobs where it flowed the water up to the chin, with soapy hands between my thighs incandescently copulating with Veronica Thwale.
When I met that cool, severely-dressed, sexual androgen perfumed in civet and flowers, walking down a church aisle, the Decameron camouflaged inside the covers of her prayer book to prove the pleasures of blasphemy, I was smitten for weeks and months. Veronica, in her 20s, was the deftly cunning courtesan I’d been waiting for and had finally found in Aldous Huxley's Time Must have a Stop. God, she was something. Once our passion slipped me forward in that 6 foot tub so that I choked on soapy water.
But the spur  to my longest and most lucid dream along those lines was The Gladiators, Arthur Koestler’s version of the slave uprising led by Spartacus. Don’t get me wrong - as time passed, as I became a man, there were months, even whole years when Spartacus did not exist. But the vision never departed totally from my memory. When I had a lover whose climax always ended in such long... long drawn out cries that we could never meet in a hotel I wondered more than once how Spartacus handled this in his tent on the plains of Campaña. And when I saw Spartacus at the Bolshoi in Moscow 35 years after I had read Koestler’s novel, I felt the pleasure reawakening. I still remember where the scene appeared. On the left-hand page, fairly high up, three or four lines from the top. Koestler had sketched Spartacus’ portrait with just a few deft strokes. The tall, slightly hunched body draped with fur skin, his wondering eyes and cleverness, his freckles, his words that seared your ears as he spoke, and the women who had come to his tent to satisfy his sexual urges, the camp followers, the impedimenta. But one evening on that left-hand page a woman of a different breed came in. I, the teenage version, saw it clearly. The tent flap swaying as she slid in barefoot, a whiff of music and ointment and female sweat entering with her, the chocolate skin gleaming as she passed a flickering candle, her firm breasts bearing nipples like diamonds on a ring. She kneeled beside Spartacus’ reclining figure, peeled off his fur skin, and wordlessly started to caress him. For once Spartacus took no initiative. He let the woman pleasure him, and when she saw him aroused she proceeded to sing in a low voice, mounting him. The first time Spartacus had ever been mounted and with his phallus deep in her she thrust faster and faster, singing more loudly in full voice to her climax.
I know what you’re thinking, but remember I’d read Koestler’s novel nearly 40 years ago as an innocent youth who wanted to have his fur skin removed. Since Poppea, I’ve seen Troyanos in many roles from a very male Julius Caesar in Handel’s opera..., incidentally an opera I just saw last week here in Glyndebourne, or a flighty Dorabella in Cosi fan tutti, to a recent concert performance in Berlioz's Les Nuits d’Été. At the end of the Berlioz, I met one of the musicians whom I knew quite well and told him how touched I’d been by Troyanos’ singing. On the spur of the moment I spilled out the Koestler story... he’s the only person who’s heard it... and confessed that in Troyanos’ Poppea I’d finally seen the woman of my bathtub days. I even alluded to my most recent Troyanos fantasy: listening to her while we’re both soaking in a hot tub. That’s where he caught me by surprise. Did I want to meet Troyanos? Yeah. He could arrange an introduction. 'Absolutely not', I replied. He seemed taken aback. So I tried to explain that a lifelong illusion might be destroyed. What if, screwing up my courage, I blurted out my Spartacus tale to Troyanos and asked, 'Do you sing when you make love?' She’d probably fix me with those huge dark eyes, this time full of impishness and irony and murmur: 'Of course I do, always.' What then? Would I have dared to mention my choice of the song I wanted to hear as she...?
Instead I went home and decided to re-read The Gladiators, which I hadn’t looked at for 38 years. But I couldn’t even find the book. I must have lost my copy during one of my many moves. The local library didn’t have it. Finally, I located a worn copy at Stanford University dated 1950, third printing by Macmillan. I took the volume home and skimmed the upper portions of the left-hand page. That probably took half an hour because every once in a while I stopped to read a paragraph or two, but I was so impatient to find my scene that I kept turning the pages. I found nothing. Well, I figured maybe this edition is printed in a different format. Back I went to page one and flipped through the right-hand pages. Again nothing. It was preposterous. I had seen Troyanos in Poppea and everything in me, memories of untold and untellable fantasies embellished by the wishful invention of late middle age, told me that she had been in Spartacus’ tent. I was prepared to conceive minor imperfection in my memory, but the fact that she had mounted Spartacus and sung, that simply had to be there. So I took the book to bed and read it slowly, starting with the prologue. Quote, "It is night still. Still no cock had crowed." It’s a great beginning and I savoured every page. That is every page until I got to number 84, a left-hand page. There in lines 12 to 14 from the bottom Koestler has Spartacus say these words to Crixus, his fellow gladiator, 'I’ve never been to Alexandria. It must be a very beautiful place. Once I laid with a girl and she sang. That is what Alexandria must be like.' That’s a total quote. I’ve never been to Alexandria, of course, and I’ve never lain with an Egyptian woman. But if anybody ever again offers an introduction to Tatiana Troyanos, I’ll accept.

You see that imagine... I could have bet anyone... I would’ve given you odds 100 to one not only that story was a scene in Koestler, but where it was. I remember it was up here, and you see it was a complete figment of my imagination. A complete figment. And that I think when I really realised... I really realised what horrendous mistakes one can make in that context and be absolutely convinced. And my wife who is a professional biographer and told me this as a biographer, which is totally different from autobiographers where you can check sources and crosscheck them, and she did this. In each case she wrote about people where most of the people... the... the actual people were dead. Anne Sexton, or Ted Hughes, or Sylvia Plath, and so on. But survivors are all still around and check and crosscheck and check their writings, and you find out what goes on there. And that’s... So that is a danger. This is now the caveat for the... for this entire interview and for everything that I’ve written. And if you’re really interested in me you’d have to read my fiction, or go to my plays, and that’s another topic that we’re not going to be discussing here.

Since I had started at some stage with poetry, there are two things that are still relevant to it and then I’ll put it away. And I promise not to return to poetry or short stories, although I’m not promising not to return some other writing. I said my wife always calls me 'Chemist'. The question is, what do I call her? And I call her a name that I’m sure no other woman has ever been called, which is a pretty rash statement to make because you think almost anything in love or affection... it must have happened anywhere between a billion times, at least a few thousand times, and yet I don’t think so. And it’s based on a poem... and it’s based on a poem by Wallace Stevens. One of the, you know, many people will think one of perhaps the three greatest 20th century poets of America. And strangely enough in two days we’re going to a Wallace Stevens conference at Oxford, which is about something like 50 years of Wallace Stevens, the anniversary of 50 years of his arrival. I don’t mean physical arrival, but sort of real arrival in... over in Europe because a complicated poet in terms of being translated, and so on, here... And I am undoubtedly the only organic chemist in the world... you see I make all these promotional automythological statements that have really no statistical basis, but probably the only organic chemist who has published not once but five times in The Wallace Stevens Journal. And now why did I do that? Because Diane Middlebrook, my wife, that was her first book... was on Wallace Stevens.  Her PhD thesis at Yale was on Stevens and... and Whitman. So, I started reading. I audited courses of hers during our sort of pre-marriage relationship, which my father a Balkanese... intelligent man but Balkanese always referred to as concubinage. That’s what he thought our relationship was before we got married before his death.
And he had two poems, Wallace Stevens poems, that I wrote during this emotional catharsis when my now wife had left me before we were wife. And there are four poems here. I’ve written more of these about Wallace Stevens, which are always based on a Wallace Stevens epigraph. Now, here is... this is a poem... it was probably the first revenge poem I wrote based on Wallace Stevens. I wrote others earlier. Revenge against my wife’s abandonment of me, but this was from a poem called Good Man, Bad Woman. That’s what the title... no wonder I picked that. And the line of Wallace Stevens that I then selected, which was both a quote and the title of my poem, is Pure scientist. You look with nice aplomb. A-P-L-O-M-B. So Pure scientist. You look with nice aplomb and it’s typical Stevensian title where his titles seemingly have very little to do with the subject matter. The Emperor of Ice-Cream or Peter Quince at the Clavier deals with Susanna and the elders, and you think what has Peter Quince playing the clavier have to do with Susanna and the elders... a biblical story. So, things like that. So, that’s related to this. So, what I wrote is just a short four stanza poem.

I, the scientist, Who read these words And snort Without aplomb.  Today Is any scientist Pure? Especially to poets?  Is aplomb Ever nice To the spectator Hiding envy?  Poet – don't you know There's as few scientists With aplomb As there are poets?
So that was the first one. But here comes to what I now call my wife... I've called my wife since that time, and that's the only... I use it the same way as when she calls me 'Chemist'. If she... if I call her Diane then she would be startled and think I have some mean agenda on the mind. And that is from the shortest poem that Wallace Stevens has ever written. It's called To the Roaring Wind and the entire poem Wallace Stevens says:
What syllable are you seeking, Vocalissimus, In the distances of sleep?Speak it.
That's it. So my poem is called Vocalissima instead of Vocalissimus:
Vocalissimus Stevens! Or is it Wallace Vocalissimus? What familiarity do you permit? You wrote about women: Sweet smelling virgins; trembling ladies; Peached and ivory wenches;     beautiful bareness in sinewy nakedness;You called them: Liebchen, mon bijou, mon extase; Even a pearly poetess.You named them: Carlotta, Eulalia and Flora;Mariana, Bawda and Susanna; Bonnie and Vincentine (lean, heavenly Vincentine).More formally: Mrs Anderson, Mrs Dooley, Mrs Papadopoulos.    Was there a Vocalissima? I knew one:After your death, she lived with you Three long years. In 1095 days She learned by heart each word you wrote. She knew your rose rabbi, Your dark rabbi, Your doctor of Geneva, Even your uncle with a monocle.
... these are all titles of Wallace Stevens poems, and then I wrote in French...
  (Monsieur excusez la traduction anglaise,     Mais elle ne parle pas comme une Française.) 
In time she collected some men, Then many, Then one: a modern alchemist. But he, Master of chemical mutations; Whose alchemy touched millions, Could not transform her, Nor transform himself.  Vocalissima! Speak it! How does a modern alchemist Transmute himself into a Vocalissimus?
Well, that was during the revenge phase but ever since then I call her 'Vocalissima'. And that is... so that's certainly how I got my... my wounds and emotional hurt, particularly revenge out of my mind. And the interesting part is revenge is a motive that occurs in many of my plays and novels as an example, because I use it again autobiographically, as an example of... It's probably the most powerful motive we have, and also a very bad one. And, again, that juxtaposition of poison and nourishment, or poison and stimulus.  It stimulates to do things which you might not either want or even be able to do under ordinary circumstances. At the same time, it's bad and it... it affects you negatively in many, many different ways. So that was just another example of it.

There are two women left that I do have to address and these I can talk about in... They have nothing to do with shame, or embarrassment, or for that matter discretion because they’re dead. That is my mother and my daughter and because each in their own way played an important role in my life. My mother, the historical role in that almost any mother, except I guess a mother who would abandon her child in early life, and that’s certainly not the case with me. If anything it was the other way around. My problem with my mother was that she was in the end unbelievably possessive and could not really give up her son, which led to a total break-up between us when I was in my 20s.
I was basically brought up by a single mother, and I mean this not in a sad way or anything like that. In fact, a rather positive way and it probably made me without my knowing it already very early on a male feminist in that I always accepted the fact that a woman could be... play many roles. That she did not have to be sentenced to the typical German... in Germany it’s called the three K’s: kirche, küche und kinder. Church, kitchen and children because, of course, she worked. My mother and father met in medical school. They both got MDs in Vienna, and she’s Viennese Jewish from a Jewish family. My father Bulgarian. So, they married in Vienna and, of course, the language that they spoke was German. My father spoke fluent German but his mother... other language was Bulgarian and Ladino, a language that really is not spoken anymore hardly except by the older generation and it’s, in a way it’s an interesting pity. A language that clearly is going to disappear and has not much of a written record as some, but it’s a language that... It’s a rather beautiful one. That may be one of the reasons why when my daughter died at her scattering of her ashes the music that played, and it had to be on a battery-operated radio because it was out in the woods, were some Sephardic 16th century songs.
But we return to my mother because I was... People always ask me when they hear my accent, where are you from? And then I always... since I get sort of pissed off by this persistent question because sometimes it’s irritating I just say San Francisco, and then of course they don’t mean that, we know that, and then some of the persistent ones, you know, just... some of the ones just sort of look puzzling but let it go at that, or they understand that I don’t want to pursue it, and others keep asking. Then I said, well do you want to know where I was conceived, where I was born, where I was raised, and so on? And each of them is a different one. But you really want to know what sort of accent I have and it’s a melange. It’s a total mixture reflecting where I learned English and where I then spoke it and where I now live. So, I was undoubtedly conceived, not that I was told that, but I have figured it out, was in Bulgaria. And that after the... when my parents got married it was, that was probably around 1921 or something like that, '20, '21. Then went to Bulgaria. That was expected place for the wife to follow the husband. In fact it was much more brutal than that. You automatically lost your citizenship and had to accept that of your husband, whether you liked it or not. So my mother overnight became a Bulgarian and I’ll tell you the end of that story in just a moment. She never learned Bulgarian. She had a typical attitude towards Bulgaria like any central European, particularly of that time and particularly Viennese of that time who thought this was the centre of the cultural universe even though it had pretty well passed already. It sort of had a Jugendstil 100 year earlier view of this but nevertheless not perhaps totally unjustified. And to them Bulgaria was the pits of the Europe. Somewhere in the right lower-hand corner not too far from Albania, which was probably sort of the other place, and had that attitude. And my mother wasn’t any different from most of the central Europeans who felt that way about the Balkans... tried to practice there and it really didn’t work very well because... I mean practice. She then became a dentist, but practised medicine, dentistry because of her language... refusal basically to learn Bulgarian. But when she was then pregnant and felt a child can only be born in a Viennese hospital and not in Bulgaria... she must have been seven months pregnant, something like that, went back to Vienna to have me born in Vienna. So I’m born in Vienna in a Viennese hospital, and then when I was a couple of months old – I was born in October – in December and in one of the apparently bitterest colds that ever hit Sofia we returned there and the pipes froze and stuff like this. And then a year later it was one of the huge earthquakes and... of which there are plenty in the Balkans and in Turkey... and they had to rush out and spend the night in the garden. The house... something that she never, sort of, forgave the Bulgarians.

In any event when... by the time I was four or five it was clear that this marriage wouldn’t last, and they got divorced. They didn’t tell this to me or perhaps anyone else. That was really a very taboo subject, particularly in the sort of families in which we lived and particularly the Balkans where it was... I mean, that traditional Bulgarian extended family. My father had four brothers and a sister and they had children, and my grandmother and all the people were still alive. It would have been very shameful thing.
Anyway the official story was, of course, the child would have to be educated in Vienna. So we go back to Vienna and also my mother’s practice was much more feasible in Vienna. And we moved back into my grandmother’s home, which I’m going to illustrate in perhaps two ways for you. One is a rather nice picture here which shows... well, here is actually a glorious picture of my mother, which I found when I wrote the autobiography which really is a very elegant picture. Yet I’ve never found a single picture of her where she smiled, and that is perhaps also interesting. But this is a very good expression that the person caught here when she was a medical student. But here is where I lived. Now, you see again, Vienna is a beautiful city and my house where I was born exactly it's here, right on the water. This is a branch of the Danube and here is the famous first district of Vienna, Ringstrasse and all the famous things here. So we moved into that house where my grandmother lived and I think I even in a German translation... Yeah. Which is different pictures they used. They took a picture actually of my grandmother, me as a small child in Vienna, and then below you see my father in medical school in Vienna in the anatomy dissection classes. You see how he formally dressed that way, and he was a good-looking man. Very good-looking. And then I have... well I thought I had a picture. It depends on which biography the... ah here. This is with me, and my father is the one with the bow tie and we’re in Sofia. So when... I must have been maybe three years old or something like that. So you still see what I... what he looked like, and here I was even in a Bulgarian national costume as a... as a kid of maybe... what was I? A year? 18 months old. But... is there another picture of him? I don’t think so.
They never told me that... that they had got divorced and of course a four or five, or five or six year old child wouldn’t necessarily pay attention whether people sleep in the same bed or not. Maybe not even now, but certainly not at that time. And I saw him often enough because I spent my vacations always in Bulgaria with this very extended family of cousins, uncles, aunts, and he came to Vienna fairly frequently to visit although this was not a simple thing. It was a...  travel the Orient Express, which at that time was a very glamorous train, from Sofia through Belgrade and Budapest to Vienna, or vice versa. And it was a... about a 20-hour trip or 15-hour trip. A long trip because you had very long border crossings where the train stopped for quite a while.
Anyway, I led a very happy childhood. As far as I remember I had a lot of friends. It’s a typical urban childhood, which is much better than a rural one because then you sometimes have very few friends. Whereas you go to a city school, grammar school, high school, and you have lots of friends and I was very much interested in sports and... it was... I seemed to have no problems and I certainly... I was an only child and had all the benefits of an only child with the full concentration of all your parents, your grandmother, and, etc.

There was one interesting thing, which was called to my attention again this year. And that is that I went to a grammar school, which was within five minutes' walk of where we lived there, called Czerningasse Volksschule. And as all the schools at that time, they were all totally segregated. The girls went to one. Boys in the other, but they were next to each other. Two adjacent buildings. I arrived from Sofia for the school year in my first grade something like two or three days after the school year had started, and the boys' school was full. And so I was put into the girls school where there were, I think, three or four boys and whatever... I don’t know... a couple of hundred or how many girls. And I ended up in this girls school for four years. So, I was imprinted with women, I’m quite convinced, at that early stage. Namely not only were my classmates girls, but of course the teachers were women whereas in the other one they were men. And that school celebrated it’s... I don’t know... 150th anniversary or something just now and they started looking for some of their well-known graduates, and had an exhibition on three of them. And they tracked me down as making me one of them and, unfortunately, I couldn’t go to that event. But I’ll go there on... in October when I’ll be back there. But to my utter amazement and pleasure I discovered that the other woman, unfortunately she’s not a contemporary of mine, was Lise Meitner. So the famous... that’s one of the most famous women scientists and I would say really of the Marie Curie calibre although not, at that time, not quite recognised like Marie Curie... was in the same school, Lise Meitner.
I then went to the Realgymnasium... in the neighbourhood Sperlgasse. The Realgymnasium, the gymnasium high school, but in Vienna they were called Realschule, Realgymnasium or Gymnasium depending on which track you had. Gymnasium you had to take Latin and Greek.  In the Realgymnasium you had to take only Latin and otherwise foreign languages, and in the Realschule you had to take neither Greek nor Latin. Otherwise they were very rigorous and they were all in preparation for university. But one would be more technical, one would be totally humanistic, and one in between. So, I went to a Realgymnasium and I had lots of Latin, but no Greek and, you know, which you don’t have in American education. By the time I was 14 I already had had four years of a lot of Latin and, you know, pretty competent with Ovid and so on.
The other interesting story I learned only much later is Sigmund Freud went to the same school. So this is a good... this was, sort of, a good place.

That is, you know, a sort of spectacular architectural coffee book that you... and you can see right here called UNIQA Tower. UNIQA is a big... the biggest insurance company in Vienna and this is their new office building. And that was built exactly on the place of the house where I was born. So that house was only destroyed two years ago, or three years ago and this went up. But they did a lot of research on who lived there in this area, and actually produced something that’s quite interesting because they showed here the historical part of that section and there are some quite striking things there, which I’d really like to show you. They show, first of all, a very old-fashioned map of Vienna of 19th century, and it shows that area around here where there is that branch of the Danube that I showed you and the house would be right here. And then they showed some pictures... historical pictures, that they found and there of course I see... this, in fact, is a picture that looked exactly like the place where I lived because this was only four years before the Nazis came there... or three years. So, I lived right there. So here is the house in which I lived, which is this corner house here, and here is where the... you’ll remember where the Nazi SA troops went across the bridge because this was the more Jewish quarter. Not in a ghetto context, but... and this was let’s say the non-Jewish quarter.  And the picture is very striking because it looks so very threatening. You know, you see the famous Riesenrad, which is the equivalent of Vienna’s Eiffel Tower and now really the... the Millennium wheel let’s say here in London... this Millennial wheel. But you can see it. It really looks very, very threatening and then you see that same scene... same house of mine. Actually, it was interesting. This was a synagogue where I got my Bar Mitzvah. The only Sephardic synagogue in Vienna, which was called the Turkish synagogue and got burned down during the Nazi days. But then they show again my house. I mean our house. So, this is this house here, sort of, another 50 or 60 years earlier in the 19th century and this is still a bridge, which still exists there, the Aspenbrucke. You’ll see in a moment why I show you these historical pictures, and then they show here who are some of the people who lived in that area in the very... and some of them are very... extremely famous people. I want to show you only three because they are really interesting. Alfred Adler, one of the great figures in... psychoanalysis. But here Elias Canetti and I’ll have to return to Canetti in just a moment because it was a very important similarity to me. And then Arthur Schnitzler. So now he’s a playwright and there was Hans Moser... Arthur Schnitzler, you know, one of the greatest playwrights and again you see a physician playwright. So, it’s really a scientist, quasi scientist playwright. Lived all in that area, and then they have me there. They have... the only reason I think they have a bigger picture is for two reasons. One, that I’m the only person that is alive in this... in this whole group of historical relics. But more important and this is why I want to show it to you... So, the preceding year, this was 2004 when this came out, the Austrian government that finally sort of remembered that I was born in Vienna and so on and offered me citizenship, which I then accepted. That itself is an amusing story. Maybe I’ll remember that too.

But then they put out a stamp of me and that is here. Now, I thought you had to be dead to appear on a stamp but the reason I’m showing you this stamp is an important... two nuances. It’s a very big stamp and it is... this actually is life-size so it doesn’t fit on a postcard. It would fit on an envelope and of course mostly stamp collectors have been buying because they only... I remember the... I went to the vernisage of this at the post office and they only printed 400,000 copies, which is little for a stamp for collectors. So, if it’s too big you can tear it out here perforated because the actual franking, the Euro value is given on that part of the stamp. But I want to show you something. Here you see a steroid structure. So you see the first and maybe the only chemical structure you’ll see in this interview. Even though I think originally you thought this entire interview would focus on my scientific work, which of course is literally all concentrated on this since the oral contraceptives are also based on this chemical structure. What is interesting... and according to the post office the first stamp in the history of stamp manufacture and that’s saying something because obviously, I don’t know, if not millions of stamps, then certainly hundreds of thousands would have been made... is that my face, there... sort of subtle background face of mine is made up out of thousands, perhaps ten thousand of small steroid structures. And if you have a magnifying glass you’ll see that these are all steroids. Now, which is already ironic because I’m a steroid chemist who synthesised a lot of steroids, and now in my mature years find my face synthesised out of steroids. Why did they do that? Because it again turns out to be that the head of the printing operation of the Austrian post office, an industrialist, was at one time an organic chemist. And he’d read some of my papers and he was so tickled when he discovered that they’re making a stamp of... of a chemist that he came up with this idea, and of course asked me whether it was okay with me. And I said, of course it’s okay with me.
The other thing that pleased me was that it identified me here not just as a chemist but it says, Chemiker/Romancier. In other words, chemist and novelist, and I like that part. And then they had an interesting three dates here where the centre one shows a degree of honesty, which I didn’t expect and I liked. Then it said 1923 born in Vienna. So birth date and the last one 2003, which was my 80th birthday, said reconciled. But in between it said 1938. Instead of saying exiled, which I thought it would say, it said driven away and that is a much more honest way of putting it, vertrieben. So, they have these three dates here, but this is a long story to this picture here. Here you see my real photograph of me and what you’re seeing is a view of Vienna, which in a way is identical to the view that I showed you in the postcard. Namely it’s the section where I was born, and my hand rests exactly on the spot where this building is now and where the other building is there. But when they first showed me design of this picture it had some mountains there and I said, 'Why did you put mountains behind me?' They said, 'Well we read your autobiography and discovered that you did a lot a skiing when you were a child in Vienna and these are the two mountains you mention, Rax and Schneeberg'. I said, 'Well okay, but that's an element of geographic esoterica that no one will ever catch and not even I unless you would write it down, and it is of no interest to anyone except maybe to me and the person who designed this. Let me make a suggestion. There’s a very famous drawing of 1901 or 1902 by one of the greatest Austrian architects, steel architect Otto Wagner and that is his design of the rebuilding of the... of the quay and the bridge, which was never consummated. But his design worked. Why not use that?' And that, actually, is a famous drawing. So they used that and they were very pleased because they also knew that this company would build it on there and they would be tickled, and in fact they made a lot of... there’s no other reason why they would have put all this in if it weren’t for this.

There you have a famous literary figure... a European literary figure of the last century and there are some very interesting similarities. I don’t mean in a context of quality of writing. That would be illusion but otherwise. He was born in Bulgaria and went,,, ended up in Vienna. So exactly the reverse of... of me. He was born... he also spoke Ladino first, and what is much more amazing he went with his mother first to England, but then to Switzerland and Austria and then Vienna when his father died early. And she left him in a school for two years in Switzerland while she went to Vienna, in a girls' school. So he spent two years as the only boy in a girls' school at roughly the age, maybe a little bit older, that I spent in a girls' school in Vienna. He then decided to get a PhD in chemistry and actually got a PhD in chemistry at the University of Vienna. Only became a writer afterwards, but he really was in a way a born writer, or a pissed off chemist, or a turned off chemist because he dropped chemistry properly when... by the time he was 30 or maybe even late 20s, which was certainly not the case with me. But we can go further than that, as I discovered. He lives... he lived probably 150 metres away from where I lived, and that during the time when I went to this girls' school I must have passed his place every day as I went to school. Twice as I went to school, walked to school and walked back. That is a very... very, very striking thing and I liked Canetti’s writings long before I knew this. And I had read most of his things, particularly his... certainly Auto da Fé and his... his three autobiographies.
I was in Zurich this year and while this seems to be a seeming non sequitur and I have all kinds of non sequiturs in this table of mine... it’s not really as non sequitor as it would appear. It was for a very special event up in Switzerland many, many times, but this was for the premiere of a play of mine, Calculus, which is my third play which had been converted by a Viennese composer last year into a chamber opera. And, lo and behold, the Zurich opera had its premiere and it was four performances on four successive days, which, of course, was spectacular for me, an opera go-er. And the programme at the Zurich opera... Now, the reason why they were able to do it at the Zurich opera is that they have two stages. They have the huge one and they have a smaller one. This was in the smaller one and, therefore, ran at the same time as standard opera did on the same evening. And the Zurich opera programme, which is posted all over the city everywhere for the month has, of course, a performance for each month... each day. May 1, 2, 3, 4, 5... mine was May... I forgot... 5, 6, 7, 8. And they always do it in the same shape and form. Namely it just gives the title of the opera in big letters and below in smaller letters the composer, then the director and then the names of the stars. So, this could be things like... what shall I say? Zauberflöte, Mozart, Ozawa, Pavarotti. I mean that would be, sort of, the... the order they do this here. So, there it was. Literally played Zauberflöte on that day. It said Zauberflöte, Mozart. Below that Kalkül, Djerassi. Next one Puccini, Tosca, Kalkül, Djerassi. The next one Donizetti, L'elisir d'amore, Kalkül, Djerassi, and finally Alban Berg, Djerassi because they, of course, did a different opera each day on the main stage. They had the same one on the smaller one, but because you couldn’t see the identification of smaller or bigger it literally looked that there I was just overpowering my heroes, Mozart and Donizetti and Puccini and so on. It was quite fantastic.
So I had this marvellous few days in Zurich and I met a friend and we started talking old chemistry. And we started talking about James Joyce in Zurich, and of course I knew all, perfectly well. But, in fact, it came up because I was talking about playwriting and one of my favourite plays is Tom Stoppard’s Travesties, which deals with James Joyce in Zurich, and Tristan Tzara, and Lenin and so on. And he said, 'Do you know that Joyce is buried in... in Zurich and it’s a very beautiful grave?' Well, I’m at an age where I like to look at graves so I said, 'Let’s go to the cemetery'. It was a day like today. It was grey and drizzly and wet, but not cold. And we went to the cemetery, which was up on a hill just above Zurich. It was a private cemetery. No people there at all. Very well-kept. Relatively small and it was not difficult to find Joyce’s tomb, which was very nice. And it had a superb sculpture that had been done subsequently of him, sort of, sitting and writing. So, I... since I like Joyce and I was interested... and then I happened to look at the grave next to it and what did I find there? It was the grave of Canetti who had also died in Zurich.

Now, first of all I was surprised to find a Jew, Canetti, next to a Catholic, James Joyce. But it turns out it was a typically ecumenical... a Swiss cemetery and it made no difference, sort of, like Highgate here or something like that. Now, Canetti’s was a very simple... more, there was no sculpture there, but, of course, I read the inscription and discovered that he had... that he was born in the year 1905. So that was his 100th anniversary, which I did not know. And at my opera performance I met lots of people that I knew and one of them a very well read German said, 'Do you know that you are... Canetti was... this is the 100th anniversary of Canetti?' And I said... fortunately I was able to admit it... I said, 'Yes I know it'. I knew it only as of three hours before having been there. But I said... and he said, 'There’s a superb exhibition of Canetti here. You should see that. A sort of a literary one. A small place'. I went there and that was one of the most amazing experiences for me because that... the man is about 20 years, 18 years older than I, so we could be, you know, quasi contemporaries in this case here. The description... the way it was presented is a way that I wouldn’t mind seeing my obituary presented, so to speak, because it focused on his writings, obviously, on interesting documentation, on lots of photographs, on some videos, because of course that is during this time already, records, and a lot of really personal esoterica that people had dug up that I did not know about. Including, you know, for instance, they showed the title page of his chemical PhD thesis and what he worked on, and I could see now why that was dull. It would have been dull for me too to work on that particular chemistry that he worked on. But then about his personal life, the relationship with women, which was very striking and had some very striking similarities to mine, including that his last wife... the age difference between the last wife and him was about the same one as between him and my wife. And that she died before him from cancer and considering that my wife right now suffers very much from cancer I was unbelievably struck by... by that... I cannot explain how much it was.  And seeing also he lived in the places that... places that I knew well, particularly the Vienna, Bulgaria, and, of course, also Zurich because these were really the three places... spent the most time in England but that was the least important one of the places where he really lived. I then discovered something which I did know... did not know about Canetti that he’d also written some plays. So I bought his plays to bring them with me. They have not been performed very much. And the final thing that he very much liked to read at public readings from his writings. And that probably is where it becomes obvious right now for me as well. So, that was an interesting connection with my past.

So my parents got divorced. I led a happy childhood in Vienna and at age 12 or 13, something around that time, I was spending the summer with my father as usual in Sofia. My father was a specialist in venereal diseases, which was a sort of occupation where... since his patients were people from, I’d say, the society and not prostitutes don’t want to be seen in his waiting room because at that time if you were syphilitic, for instance, you were easily a patient for three years getting... going through arsenical therapy. So, his waiting room was, sort of, like a waiting room of psychoanalysts or therapists where patients don’t see each other as they come and go. And... but that was in his apartment... in his flat where he also lived in Sofia where I, of course, stayed with him. And one day I was staying there and bumped into, strangely enough, in the waiting room a very attractive young woman. Young... for me at that time she was really old but she was probably somewhere in her 30s or something like that, and she... my father probably in late 40s and then he came out. He was the first time so slightly tongue-tied. He introduced me to her and said, 'Look she’s coming with us on the...' We went hiking every Sunday in the mountains outside of Sofia. 'She’ll come with us.' And then started to explain to me that really that he and my mother were divorced and so it’s, so he had some female company and she was his... his companion, so to speak. And, thinking that I would be either outraged or surprised or shocked. I was none of these. I was just interested. The first, you know, touch of testosterone had hit me, and I was interested in a potential first girlfriend of my own and not my father's, and I, sort of, sort of shrugged it off. But that’s how I learned about that my parents really had been divorced. It was not a shock at all.  But it's so ironic this... because the same thing happened to me all over again and this repetition is... is actually quite striking. Namely, I already mentioned earlier that in deference to the wishes of my second wife I not... did not acknowledge the existence of my first wife and most certainly not to my children because that’s really where the entire crux of the matter was. Namely they questioned that my second wife was already highly pregnant before we got married.
So, I did not tell my children that I’d been married earlier. First of all, how do you tell it to a three year old kid anyway and explain it to them? But the longer you postpone it the more difficult it becomes to suddenly bring it up because then there comes a point when you have no reason to bring it up. What are you going to say... out of the blue one day I say, oh by the way you know I was married before. So that just rested and as far as I could see that probably would... would never have been disclosed. And then one day my daughter was at that age was... at that time was almost exactly the age that I was when my father... around 12 or 13... came home one day from school and somehow started talking to me about what happened in school that day by saying, you know, one of her friends [unclear]... that was now California. In a way all these complicated family relations. Stepbrother, half-sister, my mother has a second or third husband and so on. Sort of jokingly, she wasn’t complaining, and then she said... and she looked at me and she said, 'Look you have this completely simple... you have one father, one mother, you know, one brother and a Dachshund', you know. Just completely... apparently standard family but, in fact, an exceptional family in that type of northern California’s social setting of that time. Well, I realised here was an opportunity that I would never get again, and I said... 'Pammy, I have to tell you something. That isn’t completely true. I was married once before.' Again, wondering, as my father probably wondered, what her response would be and she just jumped up excited and said, 'What did she look like?' That was her first question. There was no why or when. She said, 'What did she look like?' So I, who had carefully hidden all pictures of my first wife because of the fact that I wouldn’t acknowledge her, I was not going to destroy them, but I was not going to... I had to go through these hidden files, which were among my chemical files that I’d put my wife’s pictures in, and showed them to her and she was fascinated by this biographical detail of her father. And then said, 'How are you going to tell it to Dale?' Dale is my son and, you know, I chickened out. I said, 'You tell him', which she did. And that is really how my son learned about the fact that I’d been married before.

My mother, after the divorce... I learned that only much, much later, but... asked back for her Austrian citizenship, which she lost when she married my father, and during the divorce procedure asked for it. That now she’s not a Bulgarian anymore she wants to have her own citizenship back and got it back. And what I did not know and the Austrian government only informed me of this a few years ago when they then offered me Austrian citizenship is that she asked that I also become an Austrian citizen, and that was refused on the simple argument that there was no legal ground to do that because at that time the children had the citizenship of the father. It did not go by birthplace, but my mother had been an Austrian before so that was legitimate enough. She had broken off her relationship with a man. In my case he is still my father and, you know, there was joint custody and so on. Yeah. So, he’s a Bulgarian so why should we give him Austrian citizenship? So I never was an Austrian.
I didn’t know that until three or four years ago and then the Austrian government decided to offer me Austrian citizenship, which I accepted after some consideration primarily because of my partial residency in England. I really ought to say that because it’s an unadulterated pain in the neck to enter Heathrow and any other UK airport as an American where you stand in line. Sometimes in a very long line, in a very inefficient passport line, whereas people with a European passport breeze through this. And I’ve sometimes come from Frankfurt or... or Rome or Vienna just having gone for one or two days there and I arrive in London just after a plane from Nigeria had arrived. And there would be sort of 300 people from Africa and then the driblets of Americans behind them and you can spend more time in that slowly moving line when you have so many passengers from Africa who are really scrutinised very toughly here by the immigration people. Always have been. That you can spend more time and some time in that line than you can spend on the flight. And I thought, ha I will now break that. So, it was a very pragmatic reason for me to accept that, and it was even funnier that then at the same time the Austrians asked, does your wife want to become an Austrian? My wife wasn’t even there with me. I said, 'I have no idea. I’d have to ask her. She doesn’t speak a word of German'. They said, 'Oh she’s your wife'. That’s like the same reason my... my mother became a Bulgarian. So I asked her and she said, 'Why not?. So my wife is an Austrian now born in Pocatello, Idaho. There’s not enough room on the passport to spell Pocatello, Idaho and there’s probably no other Austrian born in Pocatello, but that’s our Austrian connection.

So my mother was again an Austrian so when the Nazis came and there was a question of an emigration... of course immediately there is a question of emigration to the United States, but American visa under the Austrian quota, which was a quota that she then would go with. And since I was a minor, I would go with her and I was born in Vienna also. And the immigration quotas to the United States are based on birthplace and not citizenship. So the Austrian quota at that time, because there were of course thousands of... of refugees who wanted to emigrate it took about a year and a half to get in line to get into that, and that was pretty tough to spend that time in... in... after the Anschluss would have been brutal. In fact, Kristallnacht was just a few months after that. So my father came to Vienna a couple of months later just at the end of the school year in July and married my mother again so she would get a Bulgarian passport, and then divorced her the day after when they left. But she had then the Bulgarian passport. So we were then travelling on a Bulgarian passport and were able to leave Vienna without difficulty because then we were... instead of having to wear the Star of David, the yellow Star of David, it was the emblem of the Bulgarian flag. That’s what all foreigners did at that time in... during Anschluss... and left. So, my mother, however, was not going to stay in Bulgaria and she went to London, and stayed in Belsize Park for a year waiting for the visa while I was in Bulgaria. For the first time in my life became my father’s son rather than my mother’s son, and spent that year – it was a wonderful year – in Bulgaria. Went to an American school and learned English in Bulgaria.
Now, here is the source of some of my accents. My original language was German. I went to an American school where half of the teachers were British. So they said 'either' and 'tomato' or something like this rather than 'either' and 'neither', and 'tomato', and so on. Most of the students were Bulgarian so it was a Slavic... a Slavic accent. So, this mixture, and we had to speak English all the time... it was a boarding school. So, it was really an immersion into English for over a year, which was extremely useful because I was, therefore, one of these central European refugees who arrived in the States speaking really very good English. Accented, but very good English. And, of course, I’d taken all my various subjects in English and was accustomed to English as a... as a means of education, and that simplified life enormously.

My father decided not to emigrate because he saw no reason for it. Bulgaria was no problem. Of course, they were all very optimistic because, of course, Bulgaria was... then became part of the Axis. But a point that I always emphasise that very few people know, is the history of Bulgarian Jews.  That is one of the great stories of... of 1930s... 1940s, so the Nazi days. It was the only country in Europe, with the exception of Denmark, and Denmark did it differently because in Denmark they, sort of, kept the small Danish-Jewish population, sort of, hidden you might say by not wearing... I forgot whether they didn’t wear the Star of David or everyone wore them, but the fact of the matter you couldn’t very easily find them. In Bulgaria it was a small, 50,000 or so, Jews which had lived there for centuries. These were the... people came there after the Spanish Inquisition. The Canetti’s and people like that here who spoke Ladino as well as Bulgarian, but were always part of a minority... oppressed minority like the Bulgarians because they under the Ottomans until relatively recently. They were not discriminated against. So if there was an anti-Semitism it was of a totally different one from certainly Germany or totally from the pogroms of Russia or Poland, which just didn’t exist in Bulgaria. And there was even a certain amount of intermarriage.  And not a single Bulgarian Jew died, or was sent to... abroad to a concentration camp. Whereas all around the Balkans the Romanian Jews, the Greek Jews, Yugoslav, particularly Hungarians, you know, died by the tens or hundreds of thousands. And that was a very extraordinary story, which is totally ignored, and that is only possible when you have a decent population. You cannot do this... you can neither blame nor credit one person. Like blaming Hitler for everything that went on in Germany or crediting King Boris in Bulgaria for everything that went well in... in the country. You can’t do that sort of thing unless the population culturally can accept that, or is accustomed to it. And that I think is a point that I feel very strongly about and always was very pleased about with... and proud about Bulgaria.
So what then happened in Bulgaria is that after the war, that is when the Communists moved in... the Russians moved in and therefore Bulgaria always had a wonderful relation historically with the Russians in contrast to all the other countries around there because: (A) they spoke a very similar language, Bulgarian and Russian. But the Russians originally liberated the Bulgarians from the Turks so they were always considered the liberators of Bulgaria, and therefore when the Russians moved in they didn’t move in the way they did in other countries. They were sort of a benign... they just moved in as Communists taking over, but otherwise it was a very benign relationship between Bulgaria and Russia. And even though it was one of the most Stalinist regimes of communist Eastern Europe it was an indigenous Stalinist regime. Zhivkov and people like that rather than imposed on them by... by the Russians. So, in 1947 I think, plus or minus a year, the Bulgarian by that time Communist government permitted all Bulgarian Jews to emigrate if they wanted to, but only to Israel. And there were some ships that literally left there and about 80% of the Jewish population of Bulgaria emigrated. The other 20 stayed there... 20% stayed there and was totally integrated. For instance, until very recently let’s say the foreign minister of Bulgaria until the recent election was Jewish and many other important ones. It’s interesting that in that country even though these Jewish families lived there for hundreds of years you always could tell whether they’re Jewish or not from their name because all the Bulgarian Slavic names of course ended like Popov or Dimitrov or endings of -ov or -ef. The others were always Spanish... Alkalei, Meshoulam, Canetti and so on.

So my father who, of course, wanted to see me again... we had had no contact for 10 years except for Red Cross letters because there was no communication between Bulgaria and the United States... who had not seen me since my 16th birthday came to the... to... went to Israel and almost immediately got drafted into the army in Israel. He had by that time been in the first two Bulgarian... the Balkan wars. The first and second one.  Then he was in the World War, then he was in the Second World War. Then thinking he would get out of wars ended up, of course, in... in the Israeli Arab [unclear] in the 1940s and was an officer in the... in the Israeli army. And then lots of Bulgarians, they all settled in Jaffa and Jaffa became Little Bulgaria or Little Sofia. And mostly Djerassi’s moved there as well, and one... my first cousin became a government official in Israel and like many of the immigrants at that time changed their name to a Hebrew name. So he changed Djerassi to Dvir. D-V-I-R.
And in my first, sort of, call it Jewish novel, Menachem’s Seed, which was my third science novel, which focused in part on the Pugwash movement, which I want to explain to general public and where I particular wrote about how Pugwash was a forum where scientists from countries could speak who diplomatically had no relation at all. This was, of course, the purpose of Pugwash, particularly the atomic bomb or nuclear bomb countries; Russia, England, France, and the United States. That was also the first place where the Israelis and PLO met without ever openly admitting it, and I was present at one of these first meetings and that strangely enough was in Austria at a Pugwash conference in the 1970s. And I sat in a room this size here. Maybe 15 people. A smoke-filled room. Everyone was smoking except for myself probably and it was a very bitter debate, but it was a debate. And what is even more striking in the evening quite separately you suddenly saw an Israeli and PLO guy sitting alone somewhere talking to each other, which, of course, was what Pugwash was all about. And I described that in fictionalist form in Menachem’s Seed... in that novel, which for me was a very important novel. So, I described that Israeli business at that time.
Well, my father was part and parcel of that and then he came to the United States, and lo and behold came to the United States exactly the year that I moved from the States to Mexico. So I barely just saw... said hello and goodbye to him. And he met me as a married man. You know, married to my first wife and later visited me in Mexico and already saw me with my second wife. I mean this is how the transition went on and yet my father... and eventually he practised medicine and he married again my stepmother who was a Bulgarian who he met in the States, and he was married to her for 30 years. And they moved to San Francisco. And I... so I saw a great deal of them at that point here.

And he died at age 96 in an accident. He undoubtedly would have lived well over 100, and my grandmother on his side was... died at 101. And when he was lying on his deathbed, already unconscious, and I knew that he would die within a few hours. That’s why I was there. I just sat by his bed holding his hand. My son sitting next to me. My stepmother somewhere behind just... I don’t know whether she was reading or thinking, and a Bulgarian cousin who was the age of my son more or less was sitting next to him and these two were whispering, talking, and I was looking at my father just thinking. And suddenly my son turns to me and he says, 'Papa did you know that grandpa was married before?' And I looked at him and I said, 'Well of course. I mean my mother'. He said, 'No, no, no'. He meant before because of his... the only one that he knew was my stepmother, of course. That was already for 30 years. I said... so I said, 'My mother?' 'No, no, no, another wife.' I said, 'What?' I mean there on his deathbed, I said, 'Where does this come from?' He said, 'I just spoke to Ilan', the cousin sitting there on the side, 'he told me'. I said, 'What did he tell you?' He said, 'Well that when he was in Bulgaria before he came here, of course, after he was divorced'. So, during the time that I didn’t really see him he was married. And I said, 'But he’s never told me that'. And I looked at my father and said, 'You can’t die now. Wake up. Tell me. Who was she?'
That was it, you know. I couldn’t hear and then I turned to my... after I turned to my stepmother... was completely flabbergasted and she knew it. So there was the story all over again. I mean this business, these mysterious marriages that are hidden for various reason and I said, 'Now why the hell didn’t he tell me?' 'He said he was embarrassed, you know.' I mean again this, sort of, thing to tell me. It was, sort of, as if I didn’t... I didn’t... I, you know, I walked away from some family situation where, of course, all I want to know is what was she like. Who was she? Same attitude as my daughter had, that I had with his... with his girlfriend or whatever she was at that time. It’s an ironic thing with my father.

My father really adapted to the United States very readily even though he had to learn English and practise again medicine and so on and liked the country. My mother never did. She was a typical Viennese refugee for whom, like thousands of others, most of them staying in New York, going to Viennese Konditorei and things like that... replicating Vienna in Manhattan, which of course you can do. There were so many others there who always thought everything was better in Vienna and an illusion of Vienna, which may never have existed, but certainly didn’t exist at that time. And had no use really for the United States and was very unhappy for the rest of her life there, and really stuck to me. I mean was with me because she wanted to basically own me, and she was not very happy with my first wife that I was married. The only time she didn’t live with us was when we were in Wisconsin, but then she wanted to move in with us. And my first wife tolerated it all, which I think was absolutely amazing, and then she came to Mexico with us. And then when I got divorced and came up with my new wife and baby she wanted to take over again. And my second wife, within a week or two there, she was still fairly vulnerable from just having a child... and this divorce, and I mean it was just last minute marriage and so on, and she said she couldn’t take it. Either... I’m going to have to choose between two women, either her or or my mother. By that time she had driven me to extreme because she blackmailed me in part through suicide threats, which she probably... I don’t know whether she ever meant them really and she certainly had, she had access to pills and so on. But she a couple of times took extra sleeping pills, but it was something she would kill. And I can’t take it any longer and we literally broke off. I said, you have to return to the United States. I’ll certainly support you, but I can’t... we can’t do that, and it essentially broke off.
And in some respects it was the best thing for her because she then decided to get a physician’s licence again and then practice medicine in a... in a hospital. So she was really self-supporting but we had no relations until late in her life when she probably had Alzheimer’s. And when I then visited her in New York she didn’t recognise me anymore and died a couple of years after that. So that was a very, you know, very complicated relationship. I mean she certainly was an extremely effective and I could say even good mother during my teenage things when we were still in Vienna when she, you know, she... There were no other men there anymore. We lived in a large apartment. My grandmother was there and then she died, but she... she had a good practice and everything else. So but that post-emigration thing was just horrible.

And that brings me to the other woman. My daughter who... my older child. She was three years older than my... my son. She was born in 1950 and, April, and she went to Stanford University last... She was an artist. She first went to the Art... Art Institute in San Francisco and then the last two years majored art in Stanford, and there met her husband and married after graduation. As he went to medical school at the University of California, San Diego and they lived then for four years while he went to medical school. By that time... I know I’m jumping but it’s an important jump... I had acquired a very large ranch in the... very close to where we lived... half an hour. And decided to put half of it in the names of my two children... undivided. So there was a 1200-acre ranch of which 600 belonged to my children undivided and 600 to me and my wife. And my son when he was 21 decided to build himself a house there, which I thought was madness. I said, how could you know what you’d want to do and so on? And he decided the way he could do it because I’d established this small trust fund for each child when they were, I don’t know, five years old. Maybe he was five, my daughter eight or something like that. And I still remember it was $15,000 of Syntex stock and that grew explosively. So by the time they were grown up their trust... from the age of 21 they got it... that was a lot of money and he decided to use some of that to build his house there and that became his home to this day. So in the end it turned out to be a very good decision. The strange thing is... so he was three years younger... already built a house when he was 21 or 22 and he’s a filmmaker, and he’s ever since used that as his headquarters.
My daughter who then went away to San Diego and so on, then decided to do exactly this, and her husband decided to do his internship and so on at Stanford in the hospital. That’s only half an hour away and she decided to build a house on the ranch there. So there she had a house eventually. My son had his house and I had built a small house there. I said 'I' even though it was still 'we'. My wife and I were still married although it’s clear that she didn’t care very much for it. But went along with a sort of [unclear] and a few years later I got divorced from her in this very bitter divorce where, of course, in... in California it’s all community property and everything gets divided up in half. And so the question was about real estate. Well, she wanted me to move out of the house in which we lived, which was a very nice one and I said, I’m not prepared to move out until the divorce settlement is finished. I’m not going to go and live in some temporary places. So that put pressure on her to really agree on that settlement at least quickly. And we simply traded and I took out the ranch property and she did the... where we lived... where she still lives to this day. Much closer and suburban. A very nice home. And so I moved then immediately into that small, very exquisite but small, sort of vacation weekend house. I mean it’s not small by ordinary standards but for us it was, and so suddenly I lived on the same property as my son and daughter. And so it was really... you might say the same compound because the distances are so large and it is so... It was mountainous and valleys and forest and open land and so on. By foot it took about an hour for me to walk from my house to my son’s, and roughly 40 minutes from my son’s to my daughter's... sort of a triangle so... and there were hills in between. So, it’s not that we lived next to each other, but yet we felt that we all lived together in a place having complete privacy yet also togetherness. And I became unbelievably close to my daughter at that time, you know, in part for obvious reasons because I... Not that I meant she took the place of my wife because that marriage had gone to pot quite some while earlier, but she was the only person to whom I could confide everything and it was a very wonderful relationship for two years.

On July 4th 1978... July 4th the holiday... she came over to me. We were sitting by my swimming pool and had a wonderful conversation. Talked about all kinds of things. We’d taken a wonderful skiing trip together, she and I. A cross country skiing trip that... earlier that year in the spring. And the following evening as I came home, I had this panicky phone call from my son in law reading me my daughter’s suicide note, but her suicide note said, I’ve... I’ve gone into the woods to kill myself. And... but he didn’t know where she went. Well, he asked would I help him? Well, of course... I mean what... what can you do? You know, you’re talking about wild forest and there was no evidence... We, of course, called the police immediately and we thought notify a radio station or something because if someone finds her then... we assumed that she would be taking pills. If you can find her in time you could do something, and we did not find her body for... for days. And, of course, at that point did not know whether she’d really killed herself. My wife, that was the first time we really spoke again. We really were not on... I mean she was not on speaking terms with me. She actually went... I couldn’t believe that because she’s a highly educated kind of person. Even went to a sort of a medium who told her that she was communicating with my daughter and she is, in fact, alive somewhere. I mean I just could roll my eyes, but what could I do about it?
My son was in Argentina filming and was notified and immediately started flying back from Buenos Aires. And I was at home four days after that, and it was already dusk. It was very dark and I was in the kitchen. I have, sort of, a small kitchenette. Well, kitchen is the wrong word. It’s such an elegant house but so small, and I stood preparing some food and seeing the main door, which is all glass, and suddenly I saw a shadowy figure there. And, you know, I had this unbelievable thing that my daughter has appeared, and then I saw it was a man. I went.... it was the ranch manager of Neil Young and he said... you know, they all of course knew about it and tried to help. He said, I think I saw the tracks of Pamela’s car. Pamela went away with her car so her car couldn’t be found. That’s why we thought police and so on could find it because, you know, it was... if they could locate the car you could find the body. And he said he thought he saw tracks in the meadow there and the only reason we’d always overlooked it because, only because the sun had been shining sort of way and you could see them and... but he said he didn’t have the courage to go there. So I quickly called my son in law who’s on the other side. On the side where these tracks were of the ranch and he, the physician, said he couldn’t do it. I mean not that he didn’t want to. He couldn’t. I should do it. So I, you know, drove as far as I could to that place and then started hobbling on my stiff leg alone. So then I saw that car in the distance in... under a tree and then I saw my daughter and already her bloated face. She was dead, of course. She’d committed suicide in the car.
So by that time I’d notified the police and I could already see the blinking light of the ambulance, and I couldn’t open the... I didn’t want to open the door. They then did this. And when we cremated her... decided to distribute her ashes, which is illegal in California strangely enough. You can only do in the ocean but I said, screw the law because that... Pamela and I had discovered once a wonderful waterfall on our property, very hidden and I said that’s where I would like to buried. That’s where I would like my ashes to be thrown. I’m not a believer in burial and promise you’ll do that. Never thinking that I would be spreading the... spreading the ashes of my daughter there, and that’s where we did them. It was... what is even more amazing... well, as a result of it I was her... I was the executor... I was, had appointed been... in her will I was the executor, not her husband, of her property, and I donated all this into this foundation establishing an artists' colony, and that’s really how the artists' colony started there. And eventually gave most of the land that I owned also to that artist colony.

Her house initially became... my... my former son in law then moved away to... he couldn't live there. I could understand that completely... and moved to New Mexico and he eventually got married, and I've lost touch with him. Her house became first a residence for visiting artists... for women artists. One at a time would come for a year. Later then, after four years, they established an entire colony.  And the first was an Israeli artist. Actually Tamara Rickman, a well-known graphic artist and sculptor whose husband Carmi, who's now dead, was one of the really important Israeli poets. And they spent a year there and then there were a couple of other women poets... women painters. And one of them, Sue Gussow who got to know me very well and, of course, they all knew about the background of this programme and the story of Pamela, once called me since I was living up there said, 'Carl I've found something that you have to see'. She was very shaken, and I wrote a poem about this. She opened a drawer and found a note there, and I... that poem I wrote in that year of separation of my wife. I've Nothing Left To Say is the title of the poem.
Five years after your death, My only daughter, I find this note: 'I have nothing left to say, So I don't talk. I've nothing left to do, So I close up shop.'  No date No address No signature Your handwriting.  Written for whom? Yourself? To whom it may concern?  Written when? Days, Weeks, Perhaps months Before you walked into the woods?  If only you'd said these words to me.
And then I wrote in my autobiography an entire chapter on this, which is called Scattering of Ashes. Which I felt I could write no autobiography that didn't write about her suicide, and I would say that suicide has become a complete preoccupation in everything I've ever written. My second novel starts with... the first... the first two sentences: What would you use to commit suicide? In Ego, in the play, this one here... then the play ends with again a threatened suicide.

This is a coda that I wrote at the end of this long chapter on my daughter’s suicide, and the reason I read it also here is there’s an interesting British connection to it here.
Thanksgiving Day 1989. We’ve already been hiking for four hours in search of some felled redwood trunks at least five feet in diameter. It’s a minimum size David Nash requires for the three-part sculpture he intends to site around some of the burned-out giant redwood stumps that can still be found here or there on our property from 19th century logging. Nash is one of the most distinguished artists we’ve had in residence at the foundation. A British sculptor now working in Wales, first came to the foundation in 1987 at the time of his retrospective exhibition at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. Wild wood, king of the vegetables he calls it, is his sole medium and chainsaw or axe his principal tools. He’d never before handled redwood or madrone, the two most prevalent species in our forest. During his first day he’d created a group of madrone sculptures for a highly successful show in Los Angeles. In addition, out of a huge redwood trunk that had lain for decades in Harrington Creek [a creek that bisects our property], Nash had fashioned Silvan Steps, a Jacob’s ladder rising at a steep angle out of the water into the sky. But he first selected that site, accessible only along the creek bed by clambering over rocks and fallen timber, he had no inkling that a few hundred feet upstream we had in 1978 scattered my daughter’s ashes. Within a minute some flecks of them must have floated past the spot where Nash’s steps now rise into the air. Silvan Steps is a magically simple sculpture, which many subsequent artists have drawn, photographed, or written about. But now, two years later, during his second residency we cannot find the massive... the massive log he needs. During our morning hike we’ve located four sites in the forest, but blackened trunks rise out of the bracken. Just the right backdrop for the scorched pyramid, cube and ball Nash plans to shape. 
Interestingly enough if now you go to the Royal Academy off Piccadilly in Burlington House in the main square in the opening to the... to the exhibition you see a giant... three giant ones... giant ones by David Nash in black. Right now... right... that exhibition is right now on in... in London. So here.
During our morning hike we have located four sites in the forest where blackened trunks rise out of the bracken. Just the right backdrop for the scorched pyramid, cube and ball Nash plans to shape. But still missing is the right arboreal progenitor for these forms. Of course... we cross the shadow of many a living redwood giant, but cutting one is out of the question. Then I recall that some selective logging has just been completed in our neighbour's land across Bear Gulch Road. Only a few days ago I’d followed inpatiently a slow-moving truck stacked high with redwood logs. Perhaps 'our' piece [our in quotation marks] had not yet been removed. I don’t expect anyone to be working there on Thanksgiving Day but after climbing over the locked gate and walking down the forest road inches deep in dust (it had not rained for weeks) we hear in the distance a grinding of gears. Soon we come up on a mammoth tractor setting up erosion brakes to preserve a road bend during the winter rainy season. 'Have you moved out all the logs?' I shout up to the bearded driver after he’d shut off the thundering engine. 'We need', I say and then explain who David Nash is and why we’re searching for a special fallen redwood rather than a turkey for thanksgiving. 'All gone', he says. But then remembers, 'a big one fell across the fence near the property line probably years ago in some storm'. According to him it was partly rotten. Sufficiently so that it had not been worthwhile to haul it to the mill. Nash is dubious that it’ll do but I say, 'Let’s look anyway'. 
We follow the man’s directions to the fence a half mile down the logging road. When we finally come upon it I’m dumbfounded. Eleven years ago, I’d hobbled here as fast as my stiff leg would carry me, but from the opposite direction. Down the meadow from our side of the property towards this fence across which the massive... massive trunk now lies broken into three enormous pieces. It is the spot where my daughter killed herself, where I had never dared to return. We find the rot to be only superficial. The wood is precisely what David Nash has been seeking all Thanksgiving long. 
It’s a very beautiful sculpture that, of course, is still there in the woods. And it’s interesting that that is the symbolism that is done in many of his sculptures since that to this day, which is now 16 years later.

Let me start with two poems. They are really quite short – because the first poem, literally the introduction to this small poetry chapbook [sic], that I spoke about yesterday, which in a way started my 'literary career', if you do want to call it that, is the following. And it was entitled Exhortation.
How does a chemist Transmute himself into a poet?Synthesise a poem? Distil its essence? Filter its impurities? Evaporate it to dryness? Stop the sophistry!Write the poem.
So that was the exhortation to writing the poem, but then literally... shortly after this sort of disastrous emotional episode that I spoke about yesterday in 1983, here's one that's entitled Diary Entry (11 August 1983). This was already after my traumatic separation, but it showed already how I wrote literature at that time. Remember I was a typically super-active scientist... chemist and yet I wrote all the time at that stage at scientific readings and so on. So here...
We sit in Copenhagen:Chemists from a dozen countries.The talk is heavy; the words are long.Male contraception,Cures for cancer,Morphine substitutes,Drugs from the sea,Medicines for the year 2000.We've mouthed these words for many years,Formulae hiding the chemists.Who are these colleagues, students, strangers?What do they do besides chemistry?If this were the Holiday Inn,Not the Royal Danish Academy,Would I guess who they are?A convention of grocers? Too serious.Car salesmen? Too little polyester.Bankers? Lawyers? No vests.Clergymen? Wrong collars.Poets? Nobody smokes.How did they come to chemistry?What do they do besides chemistry?What do I do besides what I doBesides chemistry?

When I arrived as a penniless refugee in the United States, I really was penniless because I remember we had $20 and were sort of robbed... robbed only in the... in the... not in the literary, but figurative way... by a cabdriver who charged us an enormous amount of money, the trip from the ship to the only relative there at that time in New York. We spent the first night there. I immediately went to school and that itself is an amusing story. I said I learned English in an American school in Sofia, which was called the American College. Of course, college in the United States clearly means the first four years of university. College in other areas can mean anything from... from, you know, a form of high school to a boarding school and so on, and that’s what it meant in... in Sofia. I had just begun my junior year of college. I was 16 so I.. well, let’s say in high school. So, I would’ve, according to the American or for that matter the European system, needed two more years of high school education.
One of my American teachers at the American College in Sofia, and I was a very good student during that last year in contrast to a somewhat mediocre one in Vienna where I had other priorities, sports and so on... but by the time I was in Sofia it was clear to me that grades would count a lot and I really exerted myself and did very well... said I’ll give you an address of a friend of mine in New York who can advise you where to go to high school since obviously there would be quite a number of choices in... in New York and I knew nothing really about the American education system. And that man taught at New York University. At that time to me he looked like a Herr Professor. In fact, he was probably nothing but an instructor, or a young Assistant Professor, but it doesn’t make any difference. I called him and asked whether I could make an appointment. He was very nice and said, 'Come'. As I said he was a friend of a teacher of mine in Sofia and I had my certificate with me, which I carried. And said, 'I want to ask you for advice in... about schooling'.
Now, I arrived in December, so this was in very early January right after Christmas, which of course was the middle of the school year. And he looked at that and he said, 'You know unfortunately we can’t take you here because we admit people only in the fall'. Well, the moment he said that I realised he thought I was applying for New York University whereas I was looking for advice where to go to high school, which would’ve been a very different proposition where, of course, they would have to take you whenever you show up. I didn’t let on. That already showed how shamelessly entrepreneurial I was and said, 'Gee that’s too bad but maybe... when could I do it the next time?' or something like that. Because I saw, instantaneously, I might gain two years. This is not something to be sneezed at and he said, 'I’ll tell you. I have a friend who teaches at Newark Junior College in Newark, New Jersey across the river and maybe they’ll accept you for the... for the second semester', which started in January. And he called them right then and there and he said, 'Look at this'. Well, he had looked at my grades, which were all As and so on. And if you think about it the subjects that were taken at that time in a... in a Central European gymnasium was really much more impressive than an American high school. I remember I had, in other words just in terms of languages, I had Latin and Bulgarian and German and French. Four languages and then, you know, everything else. The math was more advanced than it was in an American high school, etc.
And so I went to Newark, New Jersey a few days later across the... across the Hudson. A city which in some respects is the pits but it wasn’t quite that way. And all one has to do is read Philip Roth who comes from Newark, New Jersey particularly Portnoy's Complaint which is all about a Newark, New Jersey story. So, anyone can see the interesting flavours about this place. And they accepted me. So, lo and behold I instantaneously gained two years.

There was a very effective Jewish refugee organisation, HIAS... I think it's called the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society. And they funded, so to speak, for a family, which strangely enough was also called the Roths, to take me into their home for the first semester... first period. So I stayed at... at their home. They had a son who was about my age and went also to Newark Junior College. It was a very good adjustment and then a few months later I was taken to the home of a family called Meier and that was a... a real blessing. A wonderful family. A mixed family in terms of the father was a chemist... industrial chemist... was not Jewish and the mother was. Their two children, August and Paul, who... one was one year older than I and one was one year younger than I. So this worked really quite well and I think I have actually a rather nice photograph here. Yes. This was taken in their... in the home of the Meiers. So I was there 17... 17½... at Newark Junior College. We did learn how to type, which was an extremely important thing because at that time my handwriting was reasonable. Now it’s atrocious. But it was a typical German one, which was not very legible. Obviously legible but not very legible in an American context. So, it was much better to actually learn how to type, and that was great. I think there was still an Olivetti which I may still have.
They took me into their home. It’s an interesting family. The oldest son August died recently, but he became a professor of Afro-American history, a very distinguished one in Ohio. And the younger one, Paul, became the... the professor... he still is... he may be Emeritus... of statistics at the University of Chicago. A very distinguished statistician. So, it was a very nice academic family and the mother was a high school teacher, a very sophisticated one. So, I was taken into it as a third son and that was really quite wonderful.

So I went to a small junior college, which doesn’t even exist anymore. A junior college is really a most pure American invention. These are smaller, usually community... always community schools that only cover the first two years of... of college and are either for people who don’t want to go all the way through or can’t afford it, which was the case with me. And if you remember, at that time, the people that... in that school were primarily people who couldn’t afford it but were, in terms of intellectual knowledge, as good as any of the others. It was certainly true of,  let’s say, Roth who, who... where I stayed at the beginning who eventually became a very well-known pharmacologist.
Anyway so I studied all the usual curriculum. It was clear to me always that I was going to become a physician. I, you know, I was basically brought up in a... you might say in a... practically in a physician’s office since both my mother and my father practices... practiced out of our home. They had their practices... special rooms right in the flat. In the United States you do this by taking a premedical curriculum as an undergraduate, which was a lot of chemistry and biology and you have some physics and math, but also some other subjects because there we are much broader than I think the much more specialised British system where you immediately specialise at a very early... a much too early stage. Already really in... before you ever go to universities. I had a very good chemistry teacher. He was the only teacher... I say only, this is the arrogance of a research person speaks, but I don’t really quite mean it that way because he was very simple form or apparatus and really very... it was primitive anyway chemistry in the 1940s compared to what it is now, but in a small junior college even more so. But he made up for it in real pedagogy and very good lecturing and a very... the classes, of course, were very small. Totally different to what they would be in a large university now where, in the States... where hundreds of students in... in elementary chemistry classes. Totally impersonal with teaching assistants and so on when none of this existed, of course, in a junior college where, I don’t know, maybe there were 10, 15 students in a class and it was a one to one relationship. There were no assistants or anything like that. And I did very well so I found myself after a one, practically half a year being an absolute college student and never having graduated from high school.
And, of course, I realised that once I got into that system no one would ever ask me for a high school certificate. They’d ask you for whatever university certificate I have assuming... obviously assuming that I have satisfied them that I had been in high school, which in fact I was not. So I’d gained two years.

The United States was soon entering the war itself and the draft was instituted. And, of course, I registered and in fact, in way I say I was looking forward to also going to military service, as most Americans at that time. This was no Vietnam or Iraq. This was a very, totally different thing. Particularly let’s say for Jewish refugees from Europe. But my knee injury, which has since led to a fused knee, was from a skiing accident in Bulgaria and it already was in sufficiently bad shape that the physical exam that I... the military exam I was declared 4F, which was disqualified for a physical reason.
And that is a consistent theme in my life that misfortunes invariably led to something quite positive, and the first misfortune... misfortune is a very sanitised word for becoming a refugee from Nazi Europe or Nazi Austria... Germany. But that led me into a profession that I would not have had. There’s no question. I would have been a standard practising GP or something like that in... in Vienna if I had remained there. The second one was my knee... the knee injury. I mean this was in some respects catastrophic for a young person who always liked to ski and play football and so on, and yet that made it possible for me to (A) survive the war when contemporaries of mine either were killed or at the very least lost... if you want to call it that... three or four years of schooling and perhaps even normal life in the army. And to compound it during the war the American educational system... universities became very expedited in that, for obvious reasons because people wanted to finish school faster before they got drafted. Many schools operated on a three-semester level. In other words also in the summer, which is something that of course we don’t do as a regular curriculum.
In any event so I was.. after my first year at the Newark Junior College I was thinking about transferring because, of course, you’d be finished in two years and then you’d have to go to another place for another two years. And I looked around for places that you could get into, but at the same time I had written a letter to Mrs Roosevelt who to me was, sort of, the queen of America. Rather naïvely I’d written that actually a little bit before I just... I just, when I entered, I think Newark Junior College and basically said, Dear Mrs Roosevelt I need a room, board and tuition scholarship. That’s pathetic and naïve and very charming and I think it’s charming the context... charming with respect to telling you something of the humanity of that woman, or perhaps even the society at that time compared to let’s say with the President Bush... the entire culture during the Bush regime in the United States, which tells you how I feel about Bush, and I think I want to put this on record just so if people see it later they still remember it. Actually, digressing about... about political credentials, I was on the Nixon White House enemies list, Watergate fame, which I think by now is sort of a distinction. At that time, it wasn’t considered that, but I want to put that on the record as well. To return to the non-political issues, a few months later I got a postcard from Mrs Roosevelt saying, you have... obviously not signed by her but from her office... saying, you have received a room, board and tuition scholarship in Tarkio College, Tarkio, Missouri.

After I’d written to Mrs Roosevelt, before I got her reply, I started looking around where could I get a scholarship because of course I needed total support. I had absolutely no money to continue school, and there were only two schools at that time strangely enough that had special scholarship programmes for junior college graduates. Because obviously a junior college graduate was already a transfer student who would then transfer as a junior into a regular college or university, and most colleges and universities didn’t encourage very much of that. They encouraged people to start as freshmen and to stay for the entire four years. So most of these scholarship programmes were designed to entering students and not to transfer students. Two schools had special programmes that time... fellowship programmes... scholarship programmes and that was the University of Chicago and Kenyon College in Ohio, and I applied to both of them. In fact, it was about the only alternative I had.  And then I got this postcard from Mrs Roosevelt before, of course, I even finished my second year of junior college. I still had one year to go, but that was effective immediately at Tarkio College. T-A-R-K-I-O. A minute college in the north-western corner of Missouri. It’s a college affiliated with the Presbyterian Church right in the real bible belt of Midwestern America. A small village that had more churches than it had houses, and more denominations than you could shake your fist at. It was a four-year college, so I accepted it. By accepting it I automatically was eliminated from the University of Chicago and the Kenyon College programmes, which were designed specifically at junior college graduates but, you know, I figured I’d better grab whatever I have because again I thought that I’m already moving on sort of an express train and I’d better jump on the next one because that already got me at least in some sort of four-year college. I’d never heard of Tarkio. I didn’t even know where it was and it’s in a minute village. You need a pretty good map of... of the United States or of Missouri to even find it and I did it by bus, which is a very long bus ride. I forgot. 12... 20 hours, something like that. Changing a number of times to smaller and smaller ones until you got to Tarkio.
Now, the interesting thing about Tarkio that I only learned then there is that their most distinguished alumnus was, in fact, one of the most important American chemists, Wallace Carothers, the inventor of nylon. So here you talked about a really... that was rather encouraging because there you see there was a minute school. It had probably 200 students, or less than 200 students, and a faculty of maybe 15 or 20 that nevertheless had produced one of the chemical giants of America. Giants of the early 20th century, but no one told me that he shortly thereafter committed suicide after he did this work on nylon and plastics at... polymers at DuPont.

Well, I would say on the... practically first or second day people were very polite and nice to me. Of course, never seen a European and I probably was the only Jew there that had ever passed through this little town. They were very curious about me. They, of course, the people at the college, presumably knew how I got the scholarship, but no one else did. Not the students, not other people. They said, 'Why did you come here?' Well, of course, to them the idea that someone was fleeing from Hitler... Europe was, it’s basically, you know, an unknown concept and I didn’t volunteer anything. I just said, 'Well my parents wanted me to go to school and sent me to the United States'. Well, you know, in some respects it was true but in other respects it was totally untrue. But in any event... And the very first week they said, 'Would you give a talk to the rotary club?' Well, you know, I’d never given a speech before, but I said, 'Sure', you know. The idea was sort of as... as a thank you because apparently the money was raised really through the rotary club or something. So there... and they said, speak about the European situation. Well, you know, I realised I could pontificate easily to... to people who had never been to Europe and to whom places like Bulgaria were so totally unknown they couldn’t even tell you the countries which bordered on Bulgaria. You know, geography has never been a forte of American education and it isn’t to this day. So, among other things even Austria was often confused with Australia. So, they went in the wrong direction, to the left rather than to the right if you’re standing in Missouri. And I realised that belabouring the Bulgarian origin, particularly the last couple of years, would make me much more exotic than even Austrian, and then I... at that time John Gunther... this is not a word... name that probably means anything to people now, but at that time he was one of the leading American journalists who had written some superb books. The first one was called Inside Europe and that was so successful he wrote one I think Inside Asia or Inside Africa, and it was a popular but rather sophisticated way of describing the political situation in these various countries. And I was an avid reader at that time and I was reading that, and for me of course this was not totally new stuff but it amplified or intensified my knowledge of certain things. So, I ruthlessly plagiarised John Gunther in my talk.
Well, you’d think there the... not quite 17-year-old kid talking to middle aged people who mostly were small town businessmen and farmers and perhaps a few professionals, and they lapped it up. So much so that in that audience there was... there was obviously there a sprinkling of ministers because you couldn’t be in any gathering in Tarkio without bumping into some ministers. And this was again... I remember it was a Presbyterian one who said, 'Would you speak next Sunday at my church?' Not preach but give a sort of a talk to the... afterwards to the ladies auxilliary or whoever it was. And I said, 'Sure'. About the... they'd found it so interesting. Well, I went back to John Gunther because I realised that that was already then and I’ve... I’d never want to repeat myself. I always want to be sort of a little bit newer. I figured I shouldn’t say the same thing that he had already heard. So I plagiarised some more of Gunther and this was so successful that at the end of it he called me into his office and somewhat embarrassingly said, 'Well, you know, that’s all we can pay you', and gave me the collection. Now, at that time you want to remember as, you know, people went after the service to collect money. People were dropping in dimes and... and nickels, five cent and 10 cent pieces. Twenty-five cents was very substantial, even finding the dollar bills there. So, he gave me this small change.
Well that was my first lecture honorarium. I don’t know. Maybe it was $1.50 or $2, but I felt very good about this and that launched me in a way on a lecturing career which hasn’t finished yet after, you know, another 60 or so... 67 years. Namely the word spread very quickly in this north-western corner of Missouri, which was just a few miles from the Iowa/Nebraska border to different churches, and every Sunday from then on, I was on this church circuit. Once I was a commencement speaker, which was hilarious, but at a grammar school. And I always got paid that way so that was my pocket money. And, actually, it was very good because I very quickly lost any embarrassment about public speaking. It was a very good exposure and I think probably because I realised, even though I was so much younger than the others, I was speaking from a position of authority which changed the power relationship. When you speak to an audience very quickly, even though the audience was very adult, I presumably know a hell of a lot more than they did about this, the minutia of... of European politics and history, which they of course did not share.

I became pretty blasé about this and since I was totally non-religious... but I had to always attend the service before. I always was the event after that. I used to sit among the congregation. And, of course everyone had their bible in their hand and I also was given a bible. And, so, if the bible is this size I wanted to have my reading, which always had to be smaller. So, it was like this. So, I always put that in there and I held the bible. This is, in fact, what I was reading when I was reading. And one thing that I read at that time sounds very primitive, but it was a Reader's Digest, which was really at that time an interesting American cultural phenomenon and you picked up some good things. But it was about this size. In fact, even a little bit smaller. So, I usually used to read a Reader's Digest in the bible in church on Sundays. My reading, yeah, until the collection plate went around. Now, that of course I usually didn’t do anything about. But that time I remember. It was still I remember the Methodist church, the first or second Methodist church in Shenandoah, Iowa. Things like this you remember a century, or half a century later... more than half a century later. It came by and I said, my god I’m going to get all this, and I had a 50 cent piece. Now, a 50 cent piece is the largest coin... American coin, and sort of dropped it in. On the spur of the moment we even made some noise. I figured maybe some other people see a 50 cent piece and think, ah I’d better put that in too, because most of the others were just nickels and dimes and the occasional quarter. So there... and I sort of... after all I was going to get this back an hour later. That was the only time when I did not get paid. When in fact at the end the minister just shook my hand and some farmer drove me back from Iowa... Shenandoah, Iowa to Tarkio, Missouri. So, it served me right. But I’ve never forgotten that. That here I had to go and pay to listen to myself speak.

At Tarkio I spent one semester, it was the second semester. In other words, since I started in January at Newark Junior College I went there for one year. So, in January the following year, that was by that time January 1941, I then went to Tarkio for one semester and then came the summer... summer break and I went to visit my mother who was working in upstate New York a thousand miles away or so. A very long bus ride. On the way, taking the bus from Missouri through the Midwest to New York and then upstate New York it went through Ohio and I decided to visit Kenyon College. The place that I really knew nothing about but had pretty pictures and so on. That I would’ve... that I’d applied for but was not eligible for. And, actually, I don’t know why. I probably have copies of that somewhere. I wrote them and said, 'Could I visit the college'... the person with whom I’d been corresponding about this scholarship and which had made me ineligible after having gone to Tarkio. And they said, 'Come'. And I went there and they offered me a room and board and tuition scholarship quite separately. I don’t know why they were impressed or why they did this. But in any event, I accepted on the spot and never went back to Tarkio College.
Now, interestingly enough, Kenyon is also a church... and particularly was then very much a church affiliated school. Even had a seminary, but that was high Episcopalian rather than the sort of much more fundamentalist Presbyterian in... in the deep Midwest. A very sophisticated one. A very old college for America. It was the oldest men’s... it was an all men’s college... west of the Allegenies. Very British. The architecture was completely Oxbridge. The name Kenyon came after Lord Kenyon, some Englishman who gave them some money or something like that. And a beautiful college. The architecture was superb. I mean if you walk around, you'd think you are at either Oxford or Cambridge, one of the older colleges... in one of the older colleges. And so that’s where I then ended up in the fall of 1941. And because it was such an expedited thing you could then go also in the summer and I took a lot of extra courses. I finished the next two years of college in about a year and a summer. So, by 1942, at the end of the summer, I already was graduated from college and Kenyon was a very good school although very small. It had only 300 students but had a superb English department. It was already one of the famous English departments. People like Robert Lowell, I mean really important poets... writers went there. It had an English department of ten faculty members in a college for 300 where men, whereas it had only two chemistry professors. One in organic chemistry and one in physical chemistry, and yet they were absolutely first class. Not only first-class teachers, but actually did a little bit of research with their students. And this was almost like a tutorial because the advanced chemistry course I took had maybe four or five students, something like that, and that was first class. And by that time, even though I was still a premed, I’d already taken on quite a bit of chemistry, had to, and at Kenyon I think I became a chemist because that’s when I did my first research. I still remember the quantum yield of ethyl iodide, but it was a physical chemical topic and it... it really turned me on. So, I graduated from Kenyon.
What was also interesting is that there were a lot of wealthy students. It was full of fraternities. I didn’t belong to any fraternity and, of course, I didn’t have any money. This was a place where many students even had their own cars. There were a couple who had private planes, which was just almost unheard of, and the literary ones were very sophisticated. I mean there are well known graduates from Kenyon... literary ones. Robie Macauley, EL Doctorow... the very famous novelist, for instance. James Wright, the poet, I know that I mentioned already. Robert Lowell, Paul Newman, the actor... these were all people who went to Kenyon. Not quite my time. They were... well, some of them of course my time, even slightly before. But Paul Newman, I think, Doctorow a few years later. But it was a first-class place. It had very sophisticated professors and I had a first-class education. No question whatsoever.

But I had still no money and it was not a question of then going to graduate school. I needed to make some money. But that’s when I wrote to all the pharmaceutical companies that... in the United States... most of them were all in New Jersey or New York. And I wrote to all the ones in that area because my mother was working in upstate New York as a doctor’s assistant. She couldn’t practice at that time. And Ciba, the big Swiss company... C-I-B-A. It doesn’t exist anymore because Ciba then eventually merged with Geigy and became Ciba-Geigy, one of the Swiss giants, and then a few years ago it merged with Sandoz and became Novartis, which is one of the largest pharmaceutical companies in the world. But even then, Ciba was a powerhouse. It had an excellent research department in... in Summit, New Jersey just outside of New York. Of course, the headquarters were Basel, Switzerland and it was a company that did some of the most important steroid research at that time, and was a Swiss company. A powerhouse in steroid medicine. Were the first ones to sell male sex hormones like testosterone and female sex hormones and adrenal hormones, etc.
So I was hired as a junior chemist, as an assistant to a senior chemist named Charles Huttrer, who turned out to be another refugee from Vienna who of course was older than I... had gotten already his PhD in Vienna before he moved to the United States.  But he accepted me as a complete equal, which was really most generous and wonderful, as a complete collaborator and we worked... so I was a little bit over 18... on antihistamines, which at that time were really unknown. And there was the instigation of another refugee. This really shows the enormous impact that the European refugees had on the entire scientific scene in America. Perhaps the reason why, I don’t know, a third or more members of the National Academy of Sciences are foreign born and mostly European. And that man was a pharmacologist from... from I think Alsace-Lorraine. Rudy Mayer, who had known about the early work on histamine and antihistamines, which was all European. People like Bovet, the Italian who actually won the Nobel prize for medicine for that and Fourneau, another man from France were the first ones to really think about the idea of developing antihistamines... agent that inhibit the action of histamine and that would be effective in allergies and the like because in a very simplified way thought the allergic phenomena were caused by histamine secretion and if you could inhibit that... Anyway, that was the idea and we worked on that. And it shows also how fast not just research, but introduction to practical medicine could go at that time. We synthesised... worked on such compounds and synthesised ones called Pyribenzamine. That was one of the two first antihistamines that were introduced in the United States. Pyribenzamine... at the same time as Parke-Davis, the competitor, brought in Benadryl. So, these were the first two compounds, Benadryl and... And I was one of the inventors on the patent and on the publication. That was pretty heady stuff and two years later, two... two and a half years later, hundreds of thousands of people were taking my drug, my, quotation mark. And that made me really an inveterate optimist and I thought everything was possible. That, of course, now would be inconceivable to work at that speed because the toxicological and regulatory requirements would be very different.
So that year was a very important year, which absolutely convinced me that I would be a chemist and not a medical person. First of all because a medical education was still quite prohibitive and secondly it was very clear to me that going into medicine, which I probably would have, I would not have minded to have gone to medical school if I’d had a scholarship or something, but I probably would have become a researcher rather than a practising physician. But in any event I... there was no way of getting into medical school. Financially I was then, of course, self-supporting. I lived in a boarding house in Summit, New Jersey and immediately decided that I’d go to graduate school at night.

There were night places... there were two in New York where you could get... go to graduate school at night part-time. There was New York University and Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, which is now called the Polytechnic University. That time it was called Brooklyn Poly. Now it’s just called Poly. And Brooklyn Poly incidentally became probably the... initially the most important centre in America for polymer research, again through refugees from Europe, particularly Marks... Mark... but also others who started this polymer centre at Brooklyn Poly.
I first started... so that meant working until five o’clock in the afternoon. Then taking the Lackawanna railroad for about an hour to Hoboken. Then taking the ferry to New York. Then catching the subway and ending up, while I’m doing all this eating some sandwiches on the train, and then going to night classes, and then making the return trip at whatever it is, nine or ten o’clock, to get back to Summit, New Jersey. I mean this was pretty brutal, but at that age you can still do that. Now, I was just taking classes, of course. I was not doing research there because I was doing research... Anyway, in many respects I had much more experience after this one year than any of the other graduate students who were doing other things. I was working in a very sophisticated lab, a very well-equipped lab, much better equipped than any of the university labs, at Ciba. But the graduate system in the States, you also have to take a fair number of advanced courses. So I started taking these and so for... during that year also went partly to graduate school but realised that this was the pits for someone who is as impatient as I am because I would probably have taken 10 years or something to get a PhD at that rate with part-time stuff.
And, so, at the end of that first year at... at Ciba... Now, Ciba had appreciated the work I did and treated me very well and I said, I want to go to graduate school full time, and I applied to various ones. I managed to get a rather attractive fellowship. Attractive at that time is to the amount of $65 a month but that was a reasonable amount, barely survival... in Madison, Wisconsin, which was a very good university... the University of Wisconsin. And I told the people at Ciba that I would leave to get a full-time PhD and they actually wanted me to come back. So they said, we’ll supplement that, and gave me something like maybe $1000 a year during my graduate career in the hope that I would then, when I get my PhD, come back to... to Ciba. So it was a very... not only a nice gesture, but it was, in fact, one that I appreciated and followed up on.

What was so attractive about the Wisconsin situation is that the vast majority of the graduate students... vast majority in chemistry in the United States, were self-supporting. There were very few people who would pay their own tuition and so on, but they all had to do it through teaching assistantships, which meant that you were a part-time student. You had to... roughly half-time or quarter-time be a teaching assistant, which was fairly brutal. It was the lowest form. You know, grading things, hanging around in the lab... very time consuming. I had a research fellowship. Very few universities had that, but Wisconsin did. They already had at that time something called the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation. Because they were probably the first American university... and the reason I’m mentioning all this is because of the recurring theme later on in my own life, particularly when I went to Stanford... the first one who started to exploit inventions by university professors in an economic way through patents, royalties and so on. And the initial first great deal of money that was raised at... at Wisconsin at that time was a Steenbock... Harry Steenbock invention. He was professor of biochemistry who had already done work on... on fortifying milk vitamin D and so on, and of course Wisconsin being a dairy state they really cashed in on this. And they used all of that money basically to support research at Wisconsin and have a series of research fellowships, which were full-time research fellowships which were really just quite wonderful, and I got one of these.
A number of other inventions helped... warfarin, the first really significant anticoagulant still used to this day was invented by Karl Paul Link who was my professor of biochemistry then. A very charismatic figure and that raised millions and millions, and created an enormous amount of support for research at Wisconsin. So, these two schools, Kenyon and Wisconsin, played a very important role in my life and I’ve felt always very grateful to them, including the context of actually doing something financially for these places. Some form of appreciation when I myself became more affluent, obviously not at that time.
So I went to Wisconsin. On the way to Wisconsin I mentioned already earlier I decided to get married. And through that fellowship to the University of Wisconsin, the supplementary grant from Ciba, my wife’s income as a high school teacher meant that we led a quite normal life. I’m not suggesting that it was even the vaguest affluence. And, you know, we had no car or anything like this, but we lived in pleasant digs. It was not in a room. We had a small apartment.

I did something, which in retrospect sounds extraordinary but of course understandable because I was married. And I was as a... culturally imprinted as a European in a sense that most of my colleagues were not in terms of both my reading was a much more sophisticated one, my knowledge really also. Music exposure, you know, I’d been to the opera and so on in... in Vienna and to theatre... big theatre. These are things that, you know, Midwestern kids hardly were exposed to. Even, I think, Chicago probably didn’t have an opera at that time. You had to be in New York to be... at the Metropolitan, I think the Lyric Opera came later. But even if it didn’t, certainly Madison, Wisconsin was... which is otherwise a... you know, it’s a real university town but opera was not their cup of tea. Although interestingly enough the theatre was. They had a great theatre, always a great theatre department... great theatre. And there were people like Uta Hagen who... one of the great American actresses who came from there. And I remember when... I personally have seen hundreds and hundreds of plays in my life, still remember... I went a great deal to the theatre in Wisconsin. In part because my wife... my first wife was an amateur actress and did this until age 80 or so I learned. In other words she never was a professional actress, but really enjoyed that. So, we went to the theatre a lot and I remember one of the greatest performances of my life to this day was Othello at, at the University of Wisconsin theatre with Paul Robeson as Othello and Uta Hagen in the... in the female role. So that was... that was a great place.
I was again in an enormous hurry and I still remember... Of course, I was a more sophisticated graduate student because first of all, (A) I knew some chemistry... much more than others because I’d worked for a year and I’d worked with techniques that even they had not worked at like chromatography. I basically brought chromatography, I would say, into the lab at Wisconsin and have been the first one to use it because that was really pushed primarily in Switzerland. So, at Ciba it was already part of the research tradition. Not at all yet, at that time, in the States. And secondly, I’d read quite a bit about steroid chemistry. Read, although I didn’t do it at Ciba, because I knew that people in Switzerland had done so much on it. So, it interested me. So, I wanted to get my PhD in steroid chemistry, and there were two young professors at Wisconsin working in the steroid field. A man named Wilds, a man named Johnson, and I picked Wilds. He was a very nice and, in some respects, quite tragic figure also. It was interesting both Johnson and Wilds were both colleagues and competitors, which is so typical of science. It’s the most collegial enterprise and also the most brutally competitive. They were hired the same time as assistant professors. They both had... did superb work as graduate students, Johnson at Harvard, Wilds at Michigan. Wilds was the co-author of the first total synthesis of the steroid, of equilenin, which was really a sensational invention... discovery at that time. And they were on this tenure track and, in fact, got promoted always at the same time. But Johnson was clearly the more successful one because he was more outgoing. He published more rapidly. Wilds was a total perfectionist, which was good for me but not for him, and what no one knew at that time actually, in fact, was a manic depressive. He really suffered from that at a time when it had not yet been diagnosed. Later on, he really basically survived on lithium for the rest of his life, but never quite made it even though he became a full professor, was a superb teacher, but he had that block. It took him forever to publish papers and so on whereas Johnson was a very different way.

The reason why I’m mentioning these two people is that Johnson... Bill Johnson... I only had him in a couple of classes, so I knew him as a professor but not really intimately because the intimate relationship is always with your PhD supervisor, who was Wilds. And yet Johnson played perhaps, in some respects, a more important role in my professional life than anyone else. So, I’ll return to him in just a moment. I remember very... my first interview almost with Wilds. By correspondence I’d already asked whether I could work with him so he expected me, I appeared there and so on. And the first question I said... I said, 'Well I plan to finish in two years'. And he, sort of, looked at me. You know, that was not exactly the way you start a conversation with your... with your PhD supervisor. You haven’t started yet and you’re already telling him when you’re getting out. But, of course, in a way most students do think of that, and I don’t know what he said. But he said probably something like, how do you come up with that? I said, 'Well, you know, in the catalogue it says that you have to be... you have to be there for a minimum registered... for a minimum of six semesters and you can now go to school full-time in the summer. So, it’s three semesters a year and two times three is six'... elementary. So, he smiled and said, 'Yeah well that’s true enough. You’re talking about the bureaucratic detail, but then you’ve also got to do a PhD thesis and that has to be successful'. And I said, 'Sure'.
But what was interesting about me that most graduates, particularly nowadays, all work at night and work usually seven days a week. That is certainly in the very macho American... current American graduate system. The elite university... is a sine qua non. If you don’t work every night in the lab and if you think that you’re taking off weekends, maybe half a day on Sunday, you’re out of your mind. You’re not going to last very much longer because the rest... people around you are working at that level. I had refused to work at night because I was married, and I wanted to do other things. I wanted to go to the theatre. I wanted to read and so on. So, I made it a matter of principle that I would not work at night. Now, that was not obligatory at that time in the way in which it is now. I mean you don’t punch a time clock. But the professors nowadays are just as workaholic and are basically slave drivers. Sometimes very sympathetic ones and do not demand more perhaps of their slaves than they themselves do, but that doesn’t change the system and I think it has deteriorated enormously and that we’ve become obsessive in that context. And I use that... use the metaphor of saying totally intellectually monogamous while it is polygamy that one should breed and teach at that time more than anything else. We’re going exactly in the wrong direction and it’s particularly true in the States, but also really in most other developed countries and certainly in the... in the Asian countries that really are pushing so hard, particularly China, Japan and so on. But I didn’t. I just absolutely didn’t, but as a result of that, and that was sort of Darwinian I think you can see this. In order to survive nevertheless in such a system, I had to be very well organised and, I think, in those two years I really became... that’s probably my real strength, that I’m an extremely well organised person. Very disciplined in my time. Don’t waste it at all. And the usual thing in organic chemistry, if you read organic papers... synthetic chemists... they’re cookbook recipes and say something is refluxing overnight or for 24 hours or for 48 hours. Something like this. And if you read journal articles, particularly at that time, no one ever questioned why does one have to reflux overnight. Why do you reflux for 24 hours... 48 hours? What are these... these things? Why not 17 or five or six? Well, the answer is perfectly simple. It’s something to do with your circadian rhythm. You know, you had something going in the afternoon. Well, alright, and you took it off in the morning and it was refluxing. Sometimes you took off for a weekend and it would be for a weekend, but I mean these things... And more so even if you reflux for a couple of hours, people set something up and then they would have coffee, or they schmooze until that’s over and then continue. I never did that. When I had something refluxing I did another experiment during that time. So, I was probably much more productive on a, sort of, unit time basis. It doesn’t necessarily mean that I’m... I don’t know whether I did actually more work altogether than my colleagues, but I did them in a shorter period of time because I spent less time in the lab. And I think that was very important for my... my life ever since and that I always refused to just say, I’m going to be a total chemist and nothing else, at least intellectually, culturally. And if there’s any strength of mine that’s probably the only one that I think one should emulate rather than dismiss. Although it made me already at that time, it has made me consistently I think in chemistry, particularly in American chemistry, an outsider.

They had offered to me and I knew I had a job, and by that time of course I was hired then as a senior PhD chemist. I had my own assistants and... and started working there. That was the positive side. The negative side was that Ciba... that was two of the three Swiss giants. That time there was a fourth one, Geigy. But Ciba, Geigy, Sandoz and Roche were the three or four huge pharmaceutical giants, each of them having branches in the United States of which Ciba and Roche are the two largest ones that were very close together. Ciba in Summit, New Jersey, Roche in Nutley, New Jersey. And... but the real control was Basel. It wasn’t autonomous in the United States. So, it isn’t as it is now where in some respects the research focus in these companies has been American and with Basel going down. At that time, it was totally Swiss operated and decisions were made there. And one of the decisions was that steroid research was done in Basel and we would be doing other research. So, antihistamines, I was continuing in that and... and antispasmodics and... and other drugs. And that in an organisational sense made, of course, sense. That was not unreasonable.  But I, by that time was interested in steroid chemistry. I’d really entered that... that rather successfully at Wisconsin. I’d published in the field, and at Ciba they permitted you to spend 10 or 20% of your research time on your own projects, and I did that with steroids. Not... they didn’t discourage it. They didn’t encourage it either. I mean they said, you could do that during that time. So, I was continuing to publish in steroid chemistry while I was at Ciba as well as in some other things. But I was able to do this as Carl Djerassi rather than as Carl Djerassi, the Ciba research chemist, and I didn’t really get any brownie points, you might say, within the Ciba structure for this. The brownie points that you would get would be for what did you do in the area that was assigned to you... in the therapeutic area, which was antihistamines and antispasmodics in my own case.
And so I worked there then for four years. I was one year earlier and then four years from ‘45 to ’49. But ’48 was an explosive year. It was really a bombshell in... in medical research and in steroid research. One of the great years in chemistry of the last century, and that was the discovery of the beneficial effect... First of all the structure but then the beneficial effects of cortisone, and that... that could be an effective treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. And the first developments by Hench at the Mayo clinic... the first clinical experiments showed arthritics who after getting injections of cortisone would dance a few days later. It was very dramatic, and everyone thought this is a real wonder drug and it would be an unbelievably remunerative one for the pharmaceutical industry. But it was a very complex chemical structure and three people won the Nobel prize that following year for that. Hench, a clinician, but first of all Reichstein, the Swiss who did the... who did the initial chemical work and then Kendall at the Mayo clinic and Hench. The three of them shared it. Deservedly so I’d say. It’s an extremely important observation, and everybody’s grandmother in organic chemistry, certainly steroid chemistry, then tried to work on... on the synthesis of cortisone.
Now, one chemist, a rather young one, I would think he’s probably just a few years older than I... he’s dead now... Lewis Sarett worked first at the Mayo clinic with Kendall and then went to Merck... almost alone, accomplished the first synthesis of cortisone from bile acids.

I really have to digress and... and go into steroid chemistry for a moment because it’s impossible to do this just by just speaking and it’s actually easier to do it here. Because if you... if you look at this... this is what a steroid molecule looks like. Steroid nowadays are a dirty word. People remember steroids... anabolic steroids, which were misused by... by athletes. In the 1940s steroid meant... if you’re on steroids that you’re on cortisone, but both of these are, of course, silly and completely meaningless descriptions because steroid is a chemical definition and not a biological one. And it simply means any compound that is based on this tetracyclic skeleton, four rings, three six-membered and one five-membered ring fused in that particular way, which is a fairly complex thing even. And you want to remember that even as it’s drawn here... well, you see it up on top. It’s all carbons and hydrogens. Carbon is the C and hydrogen is H, but then as a shorthand we don’t write this and we write it like it is shown down below it. So, a steroid is any compound that is based chemically on this. Biologically it’s an enormous number of different compounds, which as I mentioned included the male and female sex hormones, the adrenal hormones, vitamin D, the cardiac leukocytes, the toad poisons, vitamin D... you can... you can go on and on. The diuretic hormone, aldosterone, and etc, etc.
So, it’s a... an extremely important area of chemistry, but it’s a difficult one. And I’m digressing chemically... digressing chemically for a moment. That’s also important to explain the difference between total synthesis and partial synthesis. Before I just said the word synthesis, but synthesis really has to be defined. Total synthesis means you start from scratch and basically it means air, water and coal tar, benzene if you wish. And you can do... synthesise anything from that starting material, from those starting materials. Well, that is total synthesis in a very crude sense. Partial synthesis is that you start already with something that you transform into something else, and the best analogy is an architectural one. Speaking to you as a wife of an architect you would perhaps appreciate it more. So total synthesis is you start building... First of all the architectural analogy is also important because a chemist is both architect and builder whereas in most countries, though not all of them, these two professions are separated. They’re not for instance, in some of the Latin American countries where the architect is also the builder. But as chemists we pride ourselves we are both architects and builders and we refuse to be relegated just to the function of builder where the architect would have the fancy design and the builder has to do the dirty work. But you want to do both. Now... so total synthesis is building a house from scratch. You take from wood, whatever it is, stone, brick, concrete... from scratch. You have nothing and you build it up. Partial synthesis is transfer one... transform one into the other. I mean you could have a barn and you convert the barn into a real villa and, you know, you add plumbing and divisions and rooms, and etc, etc. And eventually that barn will be totally unrecognisable but it already had a foundation. It already had walls and something like that.
So that is partial synthesis. And all the steroids at that time were, with one exception, were all synthesised partially. That is by transforming one building into another. There had been only one total synthesis of, in some respects, the simplest hormone called equilenin, which is an oestrogen female sex hormone of horses. It occurs in horses’ urine. Not in human urine. So equilenin, that comes from that and that synthesis was accomplished by my former professor, Wilds, when he was a graduate student at the University of Michigan with his professor Bachman. And that synthesis, Bachman, Cole and Wilds [alphabetically], is one of the famous historical one... the famous synthesis... the first total synthesis of a steroid. So, at that time... so, and that was done already in maybe around ’39 or ’40 and now I’m already almost 10 years later, I'm now in 1948, ’49 and there’d been no other total synthesis yet at that point.

So everyone was working on partial syntheses of steroid horm... of cortisone. But all the other hormones, testosterone, progesterone, deoxycorticosterone had already been introduced into medicine. So how did they do it? That was done primarily by these European companies, Ciba, Roche, Organon a Dutch company, Schering a German company, Schering, Berlin based on academic research by German chemists and Swiss chemists. And they did it primarily from two raw materials. The most important was cholesterol because cholesterol is also a sterol... a steroid, and that you can isolate fairly readily from... from slaughterhouses... from animals because the constituents of... particularly of brain tissue and... Then there are some other, there are some plant sterols like soil sterols, stigmasterol, or wheat or germ sterols, sitosterol. But these are all very closely related to cholesterol and the conversion of cholesterol to these hormones was difficult but had been accomplished and that was the source... the industrial source of these compounds. That made them very expensive. It is much more difficult to do this in the case of... of steroids, of... of oestrogens and I think I should... I think I have here some pictures that probably would show this best. Yeah. I want to find an easy one. Is this funny? Yeah, here. For instance, if you’re looking at these structures here, you see here the structure of the male sex hormone testosterone and the structure of one of the female sex hormones, progesterone. You don’t have to be a chemist at all because if you look at these two there’s really only one difference and that is way up here. Testosterone has an OH and progesterone has a COCH3. Except for that they’re identical. Yet that is a tremendous difference. The female sex hormone responsible... particularly important in pregnancy and this is the male sex hormone.
Now, as far as oestrone or estradiol, the oestrogenic hormones, are concerned, because they are two female sex hormones, progesterone and oestrone or estradiol... see there the fundamental difference about the oestrogenic ones. You can see the difference in its outline in black. It does not have this type of ring. It has an aromatic ring, which is called really a benzene ring, and it lacks this solid figure which is a methyl group. So, the methyl group here blocks the aromatisation of this ring. You have to remove it in order to convert it. That... that was my PhD thesis. You obviously took a hell lot more than just drawing one step and it wasn’t just one step, but the removal of this methyl group from testosterone, a very difficult position, into the oestrogen is what I worked on. The difference between male and female sex hormones is only one carbon atom. The difference between you and me is only one carbon atom in a very fundamental way. And you could say the most important carbon atom in the world it separates really the difference chemically between male and female, and I really worked on the question of how do you eliminate that one carbon atom.
The reason why I’m emphasising this is because this will lead eventually to a discussion of the pill.  But so these... so this was, for instance, synthesised from cholesterol by quite a number of steps and this was synthesised cholesterol. But at that time there was no way of synthesising this. So even though oestrone estradiol was used in medicine, the only place you can get it was isolating in hundreds of thousands of litres of urine. Initially actually of pregnant women... of women. Later on, of pregnant mares and to this day one still isolates quite a bit of it that way. But I, of course, was interested in seeing if we can develop an industrial chemical transformation and that was in part... part of my PhD thesis.

So returning to cortisone in 1948.  Why is it that cortisone was so much more difficult? Because cortisone... and here is the structure of cortisone and that’s rather easy to see because you can see I... I emphasised in black the really distinguishing thing. First of all, this part here in black is exactly the same thing that you have in progesterone or testosterone. That’s very easy to synthesise from cholesterone. That is a common feature. But cortisone... the adrenal hormone is something else, has an oxygen atom at a position called position 11. That’s unprecedented because no other steroids have that. So that’s in a very inaccessible position and then is a side chain here. In progesterone it is just a simple one. In testosterone it was only OH. You see in cortisone it’s much more complicated. I just don’t even have to tell you what that is, but you can see it is more complicated.
So, the problem in a synthesis of cortisone that people faced was, (A) to generate this – but that was less difficult, not easy but less difficult – but how to introduce an oxygen here in a place where there isn’t any oxygen in cholesterol? Something like that. What Sarett did... that was the first partial synthesis of cortisone, is to convert a bile acid and this is called the oxycholic acid, though it makes no difference... a bile acid and you see the difference there. It has a long acid side chain but people know how to remove it because cholesterol also has a long side chain, except it doesn’t have this. So one already knew how to do that, but it had an oxygen. The natural occurring one in position 12. What he had to learn is how to move it from there to there, and you can’t just pick it up and put it there. This is again any number of steps. So he developed a synthesis of cortisone from the bile acid, which took 40 different chemical steps, and that was at that stage the longest partial synthesis in chemistry.
[Q] Who developed that?
Lewis Sarett, a young... at Merck. And Merck actually manufactured the first few grams... grams of cortisone from bile acid by what was at that time the most complex industrial organic synthesis that had ever been carried out. And, in fact, even to this day is one of the most complicated, but at that time it was unprecedentaly complicated and they accomplished that. The yields were infinitesimal because if you have... if you get an 80% yield in a given chemical transformation that’s a very good yield, and 90% is just superb. But just think about it. If you have a two-step synthesis and you get a 90% yield in each case the overall yield is only 81%. And if you do a three-step synthesis it’s only 72%, and if it’s a four-step synthesis only 56%. You do that 40 times and even if you have a 90% yield you’re getting to a fraction of a percent... final product. So, this is damn expensive, damn complicated.
So, everyone and his grandmother wanted to work on this, and I wanted it to. And I was, you know, was an organic chemist and I was sophisticated and I was ambitious, and I was not permitted to do this at Ciba because that... they, of course, worked on this very hard. That was being done in Basel and some of the real competitors were... there were two groups at Harvard. Woodward, the most famous organic chemist... American organic chemist of the last century. A man named Louis Fieser who was professor of organic chemistry and wrote the most important textbook in steroid chemistry. A man who among other things had worked during the war... very important on antimalarials as well as discovered napalm. So you can see the range is sort of like Fritz Haber in Germany doing both. You know, first poison gases and also nitrogen fixations. You see always black and white issues in... in chemistry. And every one of the pharmaceutical companies. So, everyone was working on this here and I couldn’t.

So these were steroids and he... he was the first one to demonstrate the chemical structure of these. That they really have these ring systems, which on the one hand look like even more complex. But then through really very brilliant, perhaps accidental, discovery, but a brilliant one, he discovered in essentially two extremely simple steps you can convert all this molecular garbage into this side chain, which meant that this became suddenly... and at very high yield... became a fantastic raw material for the synthesis of progesterone. And he quit Penn State and went to Mexico and collected some and made a couple of kilos of progesterone. Now, that was probably the world supply, which he just made in a relatively short while and then convinced a couple of, again, European refugees... one from Germany, one from... from Hungary... who had a small Mexican pharmaceutical lab to form Syntex. A small company, to manufacture progesterone from diosgenin. And they did this and again in his usual story, as I told you he broke it off everywhere, he broke off relation within a year and walked away with, you might say, the know-how. So there these people had a little company that was manufacturing progesterone. To give you an idea this cost at that time around $80 a gram, and $80 in... in the early 1940s was an awful lot of money. I mean that would be probably several thousand dollars in today’s money per gram. So that was a lot of money.
And they identified George Rosenkranz in Havana as a steroid chemist and persuaded him to come to Mexico. Of course, he already was in Latin America, already spoke Spanish and so on, and he basically redeveloped that process. I mean it was not a secret process because Marker had published it in the scientific literature, but it is one thing to publish something on a gram scale and something else to do it industrially. And they had no idea of doing it and you might say George Rosenkranz had to rediscover it. Not in a fundamental way, but in a practical way. And he did it very quickly and then... so they resumed the manufacture of progesterone and then he worked out a way of also making testosterone from it. So Syntex at that time, within... that was formed in ’44, ’45. By 1948, ’49 was already manufacturer of progesterone and testosterone.
No one had ever heard of Syntex because, of course, they were not a pharmaceutical company. They formed it and sold it to other pharmaceutical companies. But that was already very unusual because you had here a company in an absolute third world country, because scientifically Mexico you could say didn’t exist on the scientific ground. There was not a single Mexican PhD in chemistry yet, who had got his PhD there. There were a few who had gotten it abroad.  And, so that was a very small company. Annual sales of maybe $2 or $3 million, but... and then cortisone, of course, hit the news and they decided to see whether they could make cortisone from diosgenin, their raw material.
So you realise what it involved was to try and work out a way. This degradation of a side chain to this side chain one already knew from Marker's days. The transformation to... then one had to learn how to transform this into this after going from here to here. But most importantly still, what do you do about this oxygen? How do you get that in there? And that was a fascinating chemical problem. Fascinating because you just couldn’t do it just at that time de novo and what really worked out is a way of gradually moving it... moving around the periphery until finally you labilized this position and add oxygen. Many different chemical steps. So, everyone and his grandmother was working on this. As I said I’m using this, belabouring that point, everyone’s grandmother. There were no grandmothers in this. They actually were mostly young testosterone driven chemists.  Most of them below the age of 40, and that was an international race.

Syntex approached me and said whether I would come to Syntex as associate director of chemical research. And I remember I was at that time 27... 26, 27... 26. But I hadn't been an industrial chemist for four years, but I was a chemist at one lab in Ciba with two assistants. And Syntex offered me the associate director of their establishment with a dozen or more people in the lab. Now, you ought to get an idea of the primitive nature of a lab, however, of which I actually have a picture somewhere. Yes, right here. So, you see this was my lab at Syntex. You see it’s a primitive lab. Of course, labs were primitive, but you see how many people there were there. It’s pretty crowded. They all worked for... worked for me... with me and I myself, I’m standing right here, was also working in the lab. But so, you see that was a very important step and we... well, I’m jumping a little ahead because that was Syntex. They'd offered me a job. I’d never been to Mexico. I mentioned it to friends of mine. They said, you are out of your mind because, (A), not only can one not do really anything in Mexico. Typical Yankee arrogance, you know. Anything south of the Rio Grande didn’t exist scientifically. And secondly if you want to do hot research you’ve got to do it in the hot places, not there. Well, that made sense. I mean I realised this myself, but I’d never been to Mexico and they invited me to come there just for an interview trip, and I really felt... sure. I’ll have a vacation trip to Mexico. In fact, I did do that and then returned by way of Havana. So, it was my first visit to Cuba and you must remember these were days when... this was not a short trip from New York to Mexico, changing planes in Texas. I remember going to Havana on a DC3 from Mexico to... to Cuba on Cubana and so on, but it was a marvellous trip. But, and that was the amazing thing, I was absolutely charmed by the place. Mexico City was a beautiful place compared to what it is now. Very clear, fantastic setting, and I realised, why not go there for a couple of years and learn another language? You know, at 26 years you're prepared to do all kinds of things. I’d recently been... you know, I was married and George Rosenkranz just charmed me. It was, you know, another European. His wife was also a refugee from Vienna, made me the most marvellous Viennese dessert. That was bribery of exactly the way I can be bribed very easily. And so they offered me the job and I accepted.
The people... the people at Ciba were flabbergasted. Not only considered it, sort of, indecent of me so to speak to leave, but then were willing to raise my salary to match the... the one in Mexico. But I didn’t accept as I never did before. Whenever someone raises your salary to meet ae competition, that’s not the way to do it. I mean if they really valued me, they should have offered me that before and not in response in the way they deal with football players and so on. But secondly, the reason really was science. I wanted to work on cortisone. I didn’t want to... it wasn’t just a question of money, and I felt that here I had a much larger... more pairs of hands. They really were just pairs of hands because they were really all assistants. They were really not... they were mostly women technicians who had been trained on the job with very little... no higher education whatsoever. Most of them not even high school graduates, but who had been trained well in the lab there in the manufacture of steroids. And there were a few Mexican chemists who had been trained abroad and who otherwise really were very capable chemists. And I really immediately adapted to that.

And so we entered this race for cortisone, which really no one knew that we were even players in this field. And when I say a race it was very atypical. It really was that, and to make a long story short we won that race. Now, that is, in many respects, a meaning... meaningless statement because what does that mean? And yet that’s the terminology we use in science all the time, particularly in synthetic chemistry. Who is first? Now, the rest of the world really couldn’t care less because why should any patient care who was the first to make cortisone. They’re interested in getting cortisone. They’re interested in getting it the cheapest way. So, therefore, they want to have the cheapest synthesis. That does not necessarily mean the first synthesis, but for scientists it was the first. And we were first by a few weeks. So that’s all. So that makes really no difference and, in fact, there were four communications to the Editor published in one issue, the August 1951 issue of the Journal of the American Chemical Society, the most prestigious chemical journal... of two communications from Harvard, one from Merck, and one from Mexico City from a place that really very few people had heard of before. But, of course, you have the submission dates there and ours was the earliest one, and that put us on the map.
There were newspaper articles and pictures in Life magazine.  And this is the picture they actually showed, which is a very funny and amusing one here because you can see us right here. So there we’re sitting, the team, around a table mesmerised by this big root in the middle, which is really this dioscorea root from which we prepared diosgenin. And then George Rosenkranz was sitting there in the middle. These are two people... well, who have no lab jackets. I’m there and George Rosenkranz is here, and he holds a little vial. In there presumably there was supposed to be cortisone. Of course, we... we’d made a few milligrams so this was sugar that was in there. This was for Life magazine, but it really... it put Syntex on the map.
We did a lot of other work as well, but this was really actually quite sensational because it was done in a rather short period of time. You know, in not quite a year, which for this sort of thing was quite an accomplishment.

I would also work on something that interested me since graduate school days and that... and I’ll simplify it simply to say... is to try and convert progesterone, the female sex hormone, which is only active orally, into... is only active by injection parenterally into an orally effective one, and that’s a longer story and an entire... Listen, each of these books is largely about that and we accomplished that. I don’t really want to belabour that very much further other than to... well, I can actually show a little bit in this case here because I did use... was very daring into this... in this chemical... in this, in an ordinary literary autobiography. Not in a chemical one, which has a lot of chemical structures. But literary... to have a few structures and I decided to do it because I want to say, people should realise, you know, the Einstein quote [sic]... make things as simple as possible – don’t make them too simple. And I want to show that even if you know nothing about chemistry, if you look at... this is just geometry as a form of pictography. You can illustrate the complexity of the problem. In other words, C is testosterone. We learned how to convert testosterone into oestradiol, the female sex hormone, by removing this magic carbon atom and making a benzene ring. And then through another set of transformations were able to convert that back into this. You see it right here. These look like they are identical with one difference. That this angular position, which here... this is the shorthand for methyl, CH3, now became a hydrogen atom. So, what we really want to do is replace this by a hydrogen, which is really chemically extremely difficult... extremely difficult and the only way you could do it is via this. Now, each of this is about ten steps. So, you know, when I’m saying from here to here this isn’t just two steps, but these are the key transformations. So that... that way we made something that's called 90-nortestosterone and then did exactly the same thing with progesterone and made 90-nor-progesterone. So, these two are almost indistinguishable. But the tenet at that time was anything you do to this molecule would diminish biological activity, and this compound was an exception. This was even more active than that one so that destroyed the tenet that progesterone cannot be changed chemically without also producing deleterious biological properties. This was based on an observation by another German refugee, Maximilian Ehrenstein, who had worked in... in... at the University of Pennsylvania.
I belabour this point, always talking about refugees because it really shows you the sociological effect... negatively for Germany, positively for America that had... where literally a generation of really outstanding scientists were wiped out from one country and transferred at the height of their creative power into another one. And changed almost overnight the balance of organic chemistry where the United States was a second-rate country, without any question, until the Second World War into very quickly a first rate one. And taking a first rate one, Germany, and converting it pretty much into a third rate one within a period of just a few years in that area. So, it’s quite a dramatic demonstration.
Well, having discovered this, we then went one step further, and I want to show you that again. Again, showing this interesting difference, Germany and then transplanted in the United States. A German chemist in the Nazi days, so late 1930s, Hans Herloff Inhoffen chairing the pharmaceutical company Berlin had shown that he could take oestradiol, the female sex hormone, which is this substance minus what you’re seeing up here in black. And these black letters are the chemical structure for acetylene. If you add acetylene to oestradiol at this position, that was a discovery of his... you convert this into a highly effective, orally effective oestrogen. Again, the oestrogens are not very effective orally but with ethynyl... with acetylene – it’s called ethynylestradiol – it becomes orally active. That was his observation. He then tried to do the same thing with testosterone. In order to convert testosterone into one with acetylene here, because testosterone is not orally active. Again, and people are interested medicinally also take pills rather than injections, at least in the United States. So here was his rationale, but lo and behold while this now became orally active it was not a very good androgen. It was not a very good male sex hormone, but it had weak but perceptible progestational female sex hormone activities.
We put two and two together and said, ah if acetylene produces oral activity and we know from our earlier work I just showed you with progesterone that the removal of a methyl group converted into hydrogen increases biological activity, why not combine the two? And that is a substance. So, this is 19-nor. In other words, a 19 methyl group is lost. That’s what 19-nor means... minus the 19 methyl group. 19-nor 17 is ethynyl (that’s ethynyl in the abbreviation for acetylene) testosterone, and that is also called norethindrone, norethisterone, and that was the first orally effective, highly potent progestational hormone that represented the first synthesis of an oral contraceptive. That was done within a couple of months of the cortisone synthesis.
So I would say we really accomplished an awful lot in this third world country laboratory in Mexico, and it put Syntex really on the map scientifically. It became, within a few years, probably the most powerful industrial research laboratory in the world in the steroid field in competition with Merck and Ciba and so on.

Everyone had heard, by that time, of Syntex because one of the conditions that I’d mentioned for my accepting the job was that they would permit an unrestricted publication policy. Because I wanted to get into academia, and I knew the only way you could do that is to establish your name in the literature. After all that’s how Syntex had heard of me. From the publications I’d published, not any other way. And they agreed to that with the understanding of course, which I also knew, we had to also patent. Well we patented very quickly and then immediately published, and that changed in many respects the climate of the pharmaceutical industry at that time because we pushed some of the really... others to also publish long before they wanted to publish. They wanted to delay it because there was always the question, will Syntex be in first in beating them to the draw? And that had a very important effect.
And then it had a second effect. Syntex was the first company to really establish post doctorate fellowships. That came a little bit later than the 1950s and I’ll get back to it in a moment because again it shows how that little company changed a number of things really world-wide although people don’t really appreciate this now, or maybe they didn’t. Well, at that time they did.
So these were two of the really important discoveries we made and I must have published during those two years... I came in late 1949. By ’50, ’51 probably... 60 or so papers out of Mexico City. You know, from a place where there were no scientific publications before, and this was a flood of papers in the most prestigious scientific journals. And that really had quite an impact, and of course created much more visibility for me than it would have otherwise because no one expected it in Mexico. You know, you'd expect it if we were in Harvard, but not there. Well, I was really out to get an academic job and I’d been unable to get it before, and on the basis of that was offered one in what was at that time a fairly miserable university. But it was nevertheless an American university and that was Wayne University in Detroit, which then a few years later became Wayne State University, the third big university in Michigan. The University of Michigan, Michigan State University and Wayne State.
So, in 1952 after two... two years and a couple of months with a new wife, a new baby I left sunny beautiful Mexico City and ended up in filthy, dirty, cold, muddy Detroit in January of 1952. And again, people who first thought I was mad to have to gone to Mexico City now thought I was mad to leave Mexico City and go to Detroit. I was living in a lovely house. I was getting a good salary. Everything seemed to be okay and then I moved to a university where I have to get grants and everything else. But again, it turned out to be the wisest move that I could have made, just as the reverse one, because I knew I had to get this academic urge out of my system. I’d either discover that it’s the wrong thing to do or to start it as soon as... I was 30 years old by then and they, of course, did not... I didn’t start on the bottom of the ladder. They offered me an associate professorship with the understanding that if it works out within a year I would get a full professorship, and, of course, it worked smashingly well. So I was within a year a professor in an American university, and even though Wayne was very... very poorly housed in third rate buildings in the middle of Detroit, the university was extremely supportive and had a wonderful library, which is... a chemical library, which is very important, and was willing to spend money on instruments, which is what you need. And what is much more important is to have the instruments than to have fancy buildings. Now, what is even more important is, of course, that you have good people. But that I demonstrated already in Mexico City where no one thought that you’d get people there. Then with good people you can do important things wherever you are. And I really collected very quickly a first class group of graduate students at... at Detroit, and I suspected and it turned out to be completely right that if you do something significant in chemistry in an institution like that it draws much more attention than if it were in a first class institution. That happened to me all over again at Wayne.
So, I was there then and commuted to Mexico City every couple of months. I remained as a very intimate consultant to the company. I left on very good terms. They understood that I wanted to go to academia. So, I maintained that Mexican connection.

As I was in Detroit my knee degenerated more and more. And in 1956, so about four or five years after I’d been in... at Wayne I was living on 24 aspirins a day and I had to go again to the hospital for a second biopsy, and again they weren’t sure whether it was tuberculosis. Well they said, you have to put... you really have to end up in crutches and... and some supports or get your knee permanently fused. Now, that’s a major operation. Then you’re in a cast for... at that time it was six or eight months and that would be irreversible. Artificial knees had not been invented yet at that time, and that, of course, was a major decision. But I was in such pain that I decided to do that and discovered that one of the great surgeons for that operation was a Mexican surgeon in Mexico City who himself had that same problem, a fused knee, because of a tubercular infection and had a fairly lousy operation early in his life and that converted him into an orthopaedic surgeon who specialised in this. And he did more knee fusions in one week than most American surgeons at that time did in a year, and he was internationally known. A man named Dr Farill and I then met him on one of my trips and he convinced me that I should have that operation in Mexico, which again was ironic. Just like doing research in Mexico no one would go for medical reasons to Mexico. It was usually the other way around. They would go to the supposedly high-powered America.
Again, it was by far the best decision medically, and I combined that with something. Syntex was more than delighted to get me back because by that time the owners of Syntex had sold out to a Wall Street investment bank, Allen & Company, who converted Syntex into a public company. They really thought this company was really going to go somewhere. The oral contraceptive thing was... was not yet on the market but a lot of things were fairly obvious. And so George Rosenkranz had become president of the company and a friend of mine, Alejandro Zaffaroni an Uruguayan who joined Syntex same time I did as a biochemist, became vice president and then I went back to Syntex as the other vice president. So, on leave of absence from Wayne, because they also didn’t want to lose me... so I really had... Officially I went to Mexico for medical reasons. I mean that was not fake, but I blamed it on the medical thing, but, of course, there was also professional reasons.

I had an infrastructure there, which of course I couldn’t have at Wayne. I had secretaries and I was in a first-class hospital. Again, in Mexico it was a British-American hospital with large private rooms and everything else. And I said I would direct my students by telephone... long-distance telephone from my hospital bed in Detroit, and in the meanwhile ran a research programme also in Mexico City. And my secretary from Syntex would come every morning because, after all, within a couple of days I wasn’t really ill anymore. I was only totally immobilised in a hospital in a...  in a cast. But mentally it actually worked, and a lot of romantic stories were told about me running this... these research programmes out of bed so efficiently that that’s how one should direct research. A close friend of mine, Gilbert Stork, said maybe he should do this. He was professor at Columbia. I told him it takes a few more things than just doing it by telephone. But so, I did this and worked there for three years that way. I stayed on for... I’m sorry, two years. I actually stayed three years, but the Wayne connection is two years. So, I extended my leave of absence and, at that point, came this other development of Syntex.
By that time Syntex was already a bigger company. They had more money for research. I was then running the entire research; I was vice president of research. Everyone reported to me, also the... the non-chemists. And I brought quite a number of post doctorate fellows down. These were all people who’d worked... graduate students, post docs of mine at Wayne State University, and Syntex became really the first pharmaceutical company to have a post doctorate fellowship programme. That’s now quite common. At that time people thought it was impossible. How do you keep trade secrets, so to speak? As if there were many trade secrets in research and so on. And that turned out to be just quite superb. In those two or three years there were people from many different countries who all came to Syntex from Belgium, from France, from Germany, from Italy and, of course, the United States, England and that was really quite... quite exciting. So, I was there for two years and then was about to return to Wayne State University during which time they had built a new building and said that was where I would be able to move all my people into really good facilities. They were in horrible facilities before, and then at that moment Stanford University came.

While I was in Mexico one thing that I did, which in fact is related to a fantasy I had, which I never thought I would realise, and then realised 40 years later. When I was in my early 30s, I thought it would be really quite exciting, because I’d done a lot in chemistry, to drop chemistry altogether in my middle 30s and assume another occupation, and really do very well in another occupation, not just dabble in it, so it was not a question of retiring, just doing something very different, and I said, what would it be? And there were the two things I thought, I would either become a cellist, or an archaeologist. Now a cellist, I was realistic enough, was out of the question, because I only started taking the cello lesson when I was about 20, or 19, when I was... actually, during the year that I was working at Ciba, between undergraduate and graduate school, when I wanted to really learn an instrument that I could play in chamber music, and picked the cello, which was an instrument I liked very much anyway, for pragmatic reasons, because I already... you can play Haydn trios where the cello part is easy, but the first violin is not, and the... the violin at the beginning sounds horrible until you know how to play it.  A cello has such a wonderful tone even the beginning is not bad. So, I did do this for a number of years, and always had women teachers, interestingly enough, and sort of... I really did this, quite importantly in my first novel, Cantor's Dilemma, where the lead character is this wonderful woman... a spectacular woman who is a cellist, and there are really... there are erotic aspects to it too, because there’s nothing, in a way, more erotic than to see an attractive woman, sort of, clasping a cello between her thighs and... and then playing dreamingly, leaning against the... the stem of it. Well anyway, I... but I realised for that you had to start at age 10, and to become a really first-class cellist at age 35 would be completely impossible, so that was off.
Archaeology always interested me very much, you know, and that was great in Mexico, where I spent a lot of time visiting the various ruins. I read a lot.  During that time, I did a lot of travelling in Latin America, for instance Peru, and so on, Guatemala, Tikal, and a little bit later the Khmer ruins and Egypt, and so on. So I was interested in this, and I’d read quite a bit about it, but it was just romanticising, because clearly that I wouldn’t be doing it... and low and behold I did this shortly after my 60th birthday, when I really decided to lead another intellectual life as an author, and did that. But in those travels in Mexico, of which I did an awful lot, to quite inaccessible places, I of course learned a lot about the flora and fauna of the country, and one of the most spectacular things about Mexico is that... the cacti, the giant cacti. Now, the cactus is an entirely American plant, any cacti you see elsewhere all came from America. I don’t mean necessarily North America, I mean America, and probably there are no more, and particularly in diversity, per square inch, than Mexico. The diversity of cacti is quite extraordinary, and I was very struck by it, and the appearance of some of them, of course, is not unlikely the agaves, which are not cacti, although people think they are, from which, for instance some of the steroid sapogenins are isolated, and when we developed the second synthesis of cortisone, we did this from this sisal material that I mentioned to you, that’s called hecogenin, and that sisal plant is again... many people think they are cacti, but they’re not that, they’re just spiny succulents.
And so I became interested in this, and I also... even though I had a stiff leg, I was able to already do again some horseback riding. I don’t mean galloping, but horseback riding in a... in a... I think I... I may even have a picture, so you can see what... what I did. I have that somewhere. With a stiff leg, I mean what liberation that... that knee operation was in the end. Yeah, you see it right here, for instance. This was with my first... my second wife, Norma, in Hidalgo in... in Mexico. So, I did a fair amount, and you see... I mean this was not an Arabian racehorse, but a civilised horse, but... so we saw a lot in... Actually that’s an interesting view while we're at it... here I am with my first wife, in... at the University of Wisconsin, here I’m with my second wife ten years later... in... in Mexico, and here I’m with my third wife a quarter of a century later, on the day on which we got married. And on my ranch, and there’s a picture of my ranch with Tom Stoppard the playwright, so I just want to show that already, maybe I was smelling the theatre already, although at that time it was only social and friendship, and not anything to do with it otherwise.

I’m returning now to Wisconsin and a man whose name I mentioned before, namely William Johnson. Johnson by that time had become one of the best known synthetic organic chemists in the United States at Wisconsin. He was probably in his low... late 40s or something like that. Something like that because he probably was 15 years... 18 years older than I. And Stanford, which was a major university, had superb physics and biology departments. There were a slew of Nobel prizes that were won at that time by biologists Joshua Lederberg, Arthur Kornberg. There was the first physicist, Felix Bloch. Chemistry was so-so. They had a really good chemistry department but not at all at the level of biology and medicine and physics and so on. And they had a spectacular provost at that time, Fred Terman, who in a way was also the founder of Silicon Valley. He was an engineer and he established the Stanford Industrial Park. And some of the really top industrial companies, all in engineering, Hewlett-Packard, Varian, they were all established on the Stanford Industrial Park. Xerox then established its research lab. There was nothing in chemistry or medicine, and...
So, he first of all wanted to buy himself a new chemistry department and did it by hiring Bill Johnson away from... trying to hire him away from Wisconsin as chairman of the department. Johnson wanted to get me to Wisconsin from Mexico, because by that time I really had a very major reputation already. I haven’t talked yet about the work that I did in Wayne State University, which I’ll mention in a moment. But I... so he said, look I’ll do the following thing if you're willing to do it. I’ll tell him it’s a package. Either they take... bring me, Johnson and you as full professors to Stanford or else you come to Wisconsin.
Well, moving to Wisconsin was certainly a much more attractive thing than moving back to Wayne even though I was very fond of Wayne. But in terms of reputation they were just very different institutions as such and by that time I figured I might as well see what it’s like to do work in a first-class institution. I’ve shown that I can do it in a... in a lesser one. And so I flew from Mexico City to Stanford to meet Terman who immediately accepted because he realised by getting me there he would actually perhaps even accomplish this... because he was very taken on by the fact that I was a bigamist, a professional bigamist in industry and academia having done this at Wayne and so on, which other universities either would not tolerate or wouldn’t even think of. To him this was a plus and a private university could do it. A state university probably could not. So, he immediately went for that. And Johnson and I were very tough to negotiate because we said okay but he had to negotiate with each of us separately. Even though we were a package we each had our own conditions and we had to really agree on this... and that was that they had to build us a new building. And we wouldn’t go there until that new building is finished. So, in the end we accepted the job but would only move there when the building is up.
So, I then stayed for another year in Mexico, but by that time on leave of absence from Stanford rather than from Wayne. So, I'd actually been away for three years doing an awful lot of research at Syntex with a large research group by then as well as maintaining my research group at Wayne State University, which then moved into temporary quarters in... at Stanford. But I was not moving there until we had the actual building.  And the same thing was true of Bill Johnson who kept his students at Wisconsin until the building would be ready. And so, in 1960 we then moved there, and it actually was personally and otherwise a very important move. I then spent the rest of my life there. Well, the rest of my academic life for 40 years at Stanford.

I knew, of course, therefore a year in advance that I would move to California, which made it so much easier, and then I travelled back and forth every eight weeks between California and... between Mexico and California because my students... graduate students. There was about 15 or 17 students that already moved there, and I did a lot of it also by telephone. There was no faxes, no emails. That didn’t exist yet at that time. And so, my wife and I decided since we knew a year in advance, we’d build a house there. We bought a couple of acres 15, 20 minutes away from Stanford and then got a very good architect. It was Joshua Lederberg’s architect. The Lederbergs became very good friends of ours. They... they were very anxious to get us to Stanford and there were a number of very famous people at Stanford who wanted to... Arthur Kornberg, Henry Kaplan, a famous radiologist who was... has since died, because Terman had really enlisted quite a number of top people to promote my moving there because I was at that time already in a position where I could demand things rather than the other way around. I had a really good bargaining position.
So, we invited that architect to come to Mexico City and live with us for three days. I said that is the way an architect can find out really what we want. It was the first house that we really were able to build for us, while we'd only rented places before and I had a very special condition for this. One thing, I didn’t want to have any changes in level because by that time I already had a fused knee although I was out of crutches and so on. I wanted a swimming pool where I could swim because it was the one exercise I could do easily with my stiff leg, and I wanted to have very large rooms... but few. I wasn't only interested in a family room, the usual thing. I wanted to have a large study and I wanted to have separate rooms for each of my children... large ones. And, anyway, it was... this man understood it and came up with a wonderful design very quickly.
I ought to digress architecturally because you’re interested in architecture and I was too. Namely before I got that architect, I was introduced to a student of Frank Lloyd Wright who was really... which is both a plus and a minus. He obviously had first class training at Taliesin West in Arizona and... but he was also sort of a clone of... of Frank Lloyd Wright and while you might be willing to tolerate Wright’s idiosyncrasies because he was such a great architect, he was without question a pain in the neck to work with then. You got what he was going to do for you and not the other way around. I didn’t quite realise that yet. So, when my wife and I met that person who was a second husband of someone we knew at Wayne State University it looked fine and said, sure we’ll design this house. He saw the lot which we had. He said, 'I’ll build you a model. The next time you come up a couple of weeks later you can actually see it'. And that was much better because seeing a model you can easily visualise this. But I told him, one thing is absolutely important for me. I have to have lots of space for books and I have to have lots of space for paintings, for art.

That disciple of Frank Lloyd Wright made then that model, and I remember my wife and I visiting them. They lived in Sausalito, a marvellous place just outside San Francisco, and he had it actually covered with a... a cloth, and he, sort of, dramatically opened that.  And first of all I just looked at it, and I had this intuitive feeling it was all wrong, and I couldn’t put my finger completely on it. I sort of, looked at my wife and... well, all wrong, as the roof was removed.  And in desperation I said, 'But where would... where would I put pictures?' And he said, 'Ah, there’s a place right here where you can...' and he showed me then a design, 'where you can lean a picture right there'. He said, 'a picture', and I said, 'Yes, and..?'  He said, 'Well, then you remove it and you put another one there'. Well, you know, I mean I already realised we were just not communicating on the same wavelength, and extricated ourselves from that, and that’s when I felt that architect should live with us, because he has to understand it’s going to be my house... our house, and that is... he has to find out how we live.  And we... well, we want to have privacy for everyone in the house, so that was essential. We wanted to have a large living room, not broken up, and we didn’t even want to have a dining room, so we ended up with a 40ft long living room, you know, which is substantial, and there was plenty of space for pictures and... and books, and stuff like that here, and the same thing with the children's rooms and the study, and it worked beautifully.
So, then he got a very good builder, and so that was probably January of the year in which we were going to move on September... let’s say the 6th or 8th, something like that... early September. So, we said we want to move into that house when we arrive. So, on September 6th, let’s say, that house has to be finished, so that when we arrive from the airport we can sleep there, and we ordered some bed... most of the furniture was going to be... some was going to be shipped, but most of it was going to be new furniture anyway, and so we ordered beds, so they would be available.  And finally, we met the builder, which was a wonderful Finnish builder, very high quality, but he drew up his contract, and I said, 'But you know it’s September 6th?'  He said, 'Yeah, okay'. I said, 'But we are going to do what we do in Mexico, that is there is a penalty clause, and you pay X dollars a day that you are late', and that was a significant sum, and you know, by that time the man was withdrawing and said, 'Yeah, but you know, how do I know?' I said, 'Well, but that’s, that’s part of the thing. I’m willing to pay for this, but that’s what it is', and I said, 'I’ll make it quid pro quo. I’ll pay you for every day you’re early'. So that, of course was a real incentive, but it turned out that, in fact, they met exactly the deadline, and what was so amusing is that I... it shows again why I’m a tough client to have, I had one... one thing I’ve always... I’ve been always interested in art in the places where I work, on walls, in offices, and things like this, and particularly in office structures, where there are frequently long gangways, and you know, you walk, and you have... everything is empty and there are just doors on the side. And if you had something to focus on at a distance, particularly if it’s something artistic, in one way or another startling, then you focus on that and you don’t see the doors behind you. The gangway becomes just a tunnel where you focus on the light at the end of the tunnel. And there was such a corridor in that... in that house, with bathroom doors, and my study door came off, and that led to a bedroom door. And I said, 'What I would like you to do to that bedroom door, I would like you to convert the entire bedroom door', and I sent him the design, 'into a Mondrian painting'. Of course, not a painting, either you could... yeah, a Mondrian, and after any painter... house painter can, of course, copy a Mondrian. It’s not a Mondrian, but the design is there, and the Mondrian design worked quite well for that, to focus on, even from the distance, but you don’t have to see any real details there. The architect loved this, but said, 'Okay, I’ll modify it, we’ll make it really out of very high-quality plastic, rather than painting it'. Now, that was more complicated, but I said, 'Fine', so that was that.
So, there we arrive on 6th September, and the architect was so excited he actually met us at the airport. We were going to drive there and stay the first night there; it’s quite exciting to see your house. It was an experience for the... for the builder that he couldn’t believe, because we didn’t show up there before. You see, usually people come all the time, they want to change things, and so on, and we said, look, we’re going to make all the detail. We picked right at the beginning, the doorknobs, everything, so therefore it’s absolutely... there will be no changes, because otherwise this can... the other complication, of course, was the deadline comes in, when you always change everything. All the decisions, to the finest detail were made at the beginning, which usually you don’t, not in a residential house. And then I said... and the architect said... and he said, 'You’re not going to come', and I said, 'The architect is going to be responsible, so I don’t want any excuses, and I want him to show up there every day, therefore...' instead of thinking that we should catch any mistakes. I paid for that, so he became a real supervising architect then.  He couldn’t just wash his hands of this, so... and he... they all accepted that, but... so we were very peculiar clients.
So then we arrived from Mexico City the builder hadn’t... essentially only had met us once, and there we arrived at this house and everything was superb, but that door wasn’t there. And that’s the first thing I noticed, and I said, 'But listen, didn’t I tell you about this door?' And the man felt terrible and said the plastic hadn’t been quite delivered yet, the... it was really a very fancy Formica, a coloured Formica that had to be cut, OK. And I said, 'All right, I don’t pay until you have that'. And it was a joke, of course, but until that door’s in, the house is not completed.
And that house was superb, and it was perhaps the most dramatic aspect of my eventual divorce that my... my wife ended up with that house, but I ended up with the exquisite one on the ranch, so it was not... but that house always was just... it was really perfect. It’s very rare that you end up in a house that has everything that you want, and it hasn’t changed. I mean this house was... it was built in 1960, this is 45 years later and it is a superb house, unbelievably high quality, and very well maintained.

As soon as I moved back to Detroit, to Wayne State University, and to my own programme... academic programme, there was the question of what would I work on. And that perhaps, also brings up the whole question of why did I want to work in academia, and I think the reasons are probably two, both of them romantic and really not very sensible, because one would say I had everything I needed. I didn’t have to write grant applications, I was working in an industrial place where I made... established the priorities, well-equipped, etc, etc. But, just as in many... I think particularly Jewish families you often hear, 'my son the doctor', I mean this idea of... one should have a certain profession. I would say that to research scientists, the ultimate is academia. You imagine it, and somehow... and it is even more so, or was more so at that time, let’s say, in England, where at Oxbridge, I mean anyone having anything to do with industry was just a tradesman, and... and the Dons at Oxbridge wouldn’t dream of doing anything along these lines. The class structure of England was replicated in the professional class structure in this case, but that’s true in many other places as well, even to this day. Somehow a professor is imagined to be a much more wonderful thing, you have all this freedom of... of... you're in control of your schedule, your... the priorities of what you work on, and so on. These of course are illusions, particularly nowadays they are totally illusions, because research is now very expensive, and universities don’t give you a penny, and you’ve got to go and find it from all over, and that leads to an awful lot of... not only brutal competition, and also all kinds of ethical shortcuts, if you wish, but also an unbelievable amount of time that is spent on that sort of thing, and anyone who thinks that you just teach for a couple of hours and that’s what you do, and otherwise you twiddle your thumbs, are dreaming. So, it isn’t always rosy, but first of all it was rosy at that time, or anyway I imagined that way, and I was realistic enough to also say I’ve got to get it out of my system, whether it’s rational or not doesn’t make any difference. I imagine it that way, so I better do it, and that was certainly the reason for that, but the other reason was that freedom of choosing a problem, because even though, let’s say as vice president in charge of research of a company I could choose them, but I was, of course, how should I say, a servant of the company, in the best sense of the word, with real loyalty, and I knew they hired me in order to make money, and not just to satisfy my own intellectual curiosity. And I’d have to pick problems that in one way or another would have practical consequences, and they better have them sooner rather than later. Whereas many academics practice a form of grantsmanship that borders on outright lying, sometimes naivety, and sometimes deliberate lying, of saying, you know, they’re working on a cure for cancer or Alzheimer’s, or something like this, when they are light years away from that, and while theoretically they could do that, but no one will expect the solution within their lifetime, and yet they expect hundreds of thousands, if not millions of dollars of support. Now, I practiced that myself, that grantsmanship, and justified it by saying, well, I actually won’t be curing cancer, or Alzheimer’s, or whatever it is, but in the process of doing what I was convinced was important research, or frequently was, we’d end up with other things, because in basic research you can’t predict what you get, and that’s what basic research is all about, and that’s what the function of a university is. So I justified it in that context.

I, of course, in a way had my cake and ate it too, because I then continued in a completely bigamous relationship, particularly at Stanford, where... and I can jump back quickly to that, where I then convinced Syntex to move part of its research to the United States, because they were doing very well in Mexico, but the real future, of course, had to be a pharmaceutical company in the States, and for that you better have a presence in the States, and move into other areas, rather than just steroid chemistry, and all the pharmaceutical companies were on the East Coast, and I said we ought to be different. So, if Syntex is going to do anything there, you ought to do it on the West Coast, where you have first class universities, first class scientists, but they all, if they want to work in the pharmaceutical industry, have to move to the East Coast, so you can even get the best ones and they’ll stay right there, which turned out to be the case. So that’s when Syntex decided to first establish a research headquarters there, in part, and eventually moved most of the company there, to Stanford Industrial Park, because I was there. And so, Fred Terman, the provost, accomplished exactly what he wanted to accomplish, and enabled me to then go on a part-time... so for many years I was a halftime professor, and halftime I ran... I was then President of, for a while, of Syntex Research, and then formed some other companies, as Chief Executive Officer, which would have been impossible in any other university. But it was possible there, in part, because I also did something which people, of course, don’t do now. I built a firewall between my professional, academic and industrial work. Since it was next door, five minutes away, each day I could be... I was in my academic job from roughly 8:00 to 11:00, and then I went over to Syntex. I had a university telephone and the industrial one, and vice versa, and stayed there until about 2:30, or 3:00, and then I went back to the university. And so I was able to teach, I'd see my students, and all lunches were always working lunches, and I actually, literally worked at probably 110% efficiency, and even though I was officially a halftime faculty member, I had the largest research group at that time in our department, and was the most productive person, I would say, in terms of, at least publications in my department... in our department at Stanford, even though I was half in both places.
So, in a way I never had to make the ultimate decision, and I think it made me a much better professor, because I realised what the real world was like, and it made me a much better industrialist, because I really knew where the cutting edge research was going on in certain fields. But I never worked in the university doing things that were industrial problems, and vice versa, I felt there should be absolutely no confusion. I never filed patents on any of the industrial... academic work, I immediately published it, and that I think was a very useful decision, because people could... I never exploited my students in that respect, and I think that was very important, which is of course the main problem right now in this interaction between academia and industry, which is a complicated one. It’s not black and it’s not white, but it is very grey, and I really kept it very, very separate. So that did work. And at the same it meant I didn’t really have to make any decision about which one I'd favour, I was a true bigamist, having two wives at the same time and being equally happy with them, and sleeping with both of them on the same day, not on alternate days, and I think that was important.

In Mexico I was entirely a synthetic chemist... Making things with an object to make them, so that they can be used for medicinal purposes, mostly by synthetic chemists, but the cacti... and it really started with that. Interest aroused my curiosity what’s in them, and that led me to start working on cactus chemistry. Now there were very few people worked on cactus chemistry, there was really only one natural product that was famous, if not notorious, and that was mescaline from peyote buttons, but these were small cacti. They were from Mexico, but they were small, and not the really giant treelike ones here, and so I focused on that and we did... I probably did maybe a dozen PhD thesis’, and many post docs who worked on the constituents of giant cacti, and we did some very important work. And it had no... there were no practical consequences of this, and I didn’t even mean there to be, but chemically they were extremely interesting, and that led me also to alkaloid work, and to... what I really found were interesting, triterpines, and triterpines are compounds that look like... like steroids, but are even more complex. I don’t know whether I have some... I may have some structures in here? No, probably not. Chemical structures, but I worked on these, and that led me to alkaloid chemistry, and that led me to antibiotic chemistry, but it led me to the structure elucidation of compounds, rather than to the synthesis of it. And structurally I’ll use, not quite an architectural metaphor, which you try to use for synthesis, to try and draw the difference between total synthesis and partial synthesis, but a different one, and at that time it was, I think for me, intellectually an even more challenging one, and it was something which was primarily practised in Europe, and later also in Japan, and much less so in the United States, which sort of, continued my, sort of, outside status I mentioned, even in... in chemical priorities. Namely, natural products of chemistry means to identify the chemical structure of chemicals in natural products, and that was the first priority, and the next one was what could you use them for, or why are they there, and then finally, even how are they synthesised by that plant or animal?  Most of them were plants at that time.
The analogy is that you walk into a pitch-dark room, a furnished room, and you want to find out what is in this room, and by that I mean what sort of furniture, and initially, just are there tables, beds, chairs, what are they made out of, what are their shapes, what are their colours, and so on and so forth?  And in the end, how are they made, why are they made, why is that there, assuming that you don’t even know what a chair is, and a table?  Now, how would you do that if you go in a pitch-dark room and you have nothing?  All you can do is grope around and you feel with your fingers, and sometimes you can be grossly misled, and sometimes you wouldn’t be. This is a good example, this table here, which is oval. Well, you know, when you feel it around you would not necessarily think that this is actually a table, and even the material is an unusual material for a table. This happens to be metal.  Most dining room tables are not really metal like this, and it wouldn’t feel that way, so you could already be misled if you just did it by feeling, although eventually you might be able to figure it out. Well, the next thing you do is you try and at least light a match, and when you light a match you can really illuminate only very little, and for only a very short period of time, so you have to either light a lot of matches and do it gradually, and then discover it, or maybe if you are lucky you can try and get a candle, and then you can see more, and maybe a flashlight, and so on. Now, of course the ideal thing would be if you take a photograph, and in fact, if you take a colour photograph then you’ve got everything there. With one photograph with a wide-angle lens you take the entire room, you see it right there, and you even see it in colour, and then you can already extrapolate very much what the materials are, although not necessarily entirely so.
Well that’s exactly what natural products chemistry is. You want to know what is in that particular plant, let us say, but how do you do that? The chemical structures are very complex ones, and many of them... in fact, that’s the interesting part, are unprecedented ones. So the idea would be to see pieces of furniture that you have not the foggiest idea what they’re really being used for, then you also have to figure out what they might be used for, and then, even when you’ve figured it out... why on earth did this plant, or this bacterium, because this is true, for instance, with antibiotics, would do this extremely weird chemistry, and how do they do this chemistry, which is so damn complicated, so much more complicated than anything we would do, and here is this little miserable bacterium doing all this, and how are they doing this?  That is what natural products chemistry is, and from that standpoint it’s very different from synthesis, and in my... at that time, much more difficult. Because synthesis meant you know what you’re synthesising. In this case the house, where the house is a chemical... has a structure. Well, the architect who designed whatever it is, a roof, windows, well the chemist does it with chemical formulas. You saw what the steroid looked like, and then he could take a steroid that had never been synthesised, one he knew that has... it does have this... this ring system that you see here, but you know, you’ll add things here or there. Over here things that have never been made, but still, you know what it looks like immediately. Then you have to work out ways of doing it, so all you have to do is then work out building ways of constructing something that’s never been constructed before. Maybe you’re the first one to develop an arch, or a different... or use materials that hadn’t been used before. I don’t know, bamboo, or plastic, instead of wood or concrete, but nevertheless it’s there, you have precedent, it is not completely de novo. In the context of a natural products synthesis, in other words structure elucidation, rather than structured synthesis, it is diametrically the opposite, and I’ve found it intellectually so much more challenging that I became a natural products chemist, and therefore worked on many new alkaloids, and antibiotics, and terpenoids, etc, etc.

But then I moved one step further, and that all started already at Wayne, which was in some respects, in retrospect, remarkable. Because using again the analogy that I used about the, kind of, light sources one had, when I was at Wayne, and not because of Wayne, it was because of the timing, the 1950s, about the only light source you had would be, I think, candles, or maybe a little flashlight. They didn’t have yet the flash camera, or anything like that, so you had to be very ingenious and clever, and intuitive to extrapolate from what you saw with brief exposures with small lights, to draw... to draw the entire picture. So I also became interested in methodology, in trying to develop better lights, if you use that. Now, I’m not an engineer, so I was not really interested in... in finding new... building new batteries or building new cameras, or something like this, but I wanted to know how one could use much more intelligently, existing ones. And that, I think, if I'd have to summarise what is the most important contribution that I made in science, in chemistry, as a scientist, as a chemist I would say it is not the synthesis of cortisone, or oral contraceptives, or the many other things that we synthesised, it is not even the structural elucidation of the many natural products we synthesised for the first time, but the application of methodologies that we developed over the years, and I would say, of the horrible number of papers that I’ve published, some 1,200 or so, I guess that probably well over half of them, if not more, are really on the application of physical methods in organic chemistry, and that I think is, in many respects the longest lasting and most important contribution that I made in chemistry, because at that time when we did this, this was not fashionable and it was done by very few people.
Now, of course, it’s so accepted that people forget that completely and take it for granted, but that I think was the interesting one, and the methods that I got involved in, the first one... Well, let me say, the physical methods that organic chemists use, and the order in which we use them is, first of all, ultraviolet spectroscopy, then infrared spectroscopy, then nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, then mass spectrometry, and then some of the more specialised ones, like, electron spin resonance, or optical auditory dispersion, or circular dichroism and so on. These are all... I purposely say that, because these are words, which are completely meaningless to the average person, or even when I say infrared spectroscopy, well, you know, they’ve heard these words, but even that, they don’t really know what spectral range you’re really dealing with, and ultraviolet spectroscopy, maybe intuitively people know that ultraviolet is here and infrared is there, but that’s about as much as they know, but what is it that you find out in this spectral region and that one, let alone X-rays, which of course becomes X-ray crystallography.

X-ray crystallography is the equivalent thing to taking that colour flash picture, and in one image, in one... I don’t mean that this happens in one second, but the result that you get, that picture tells you all. And that is what happened in natural products chemistry, and people like Rosalind Franklin, to use an example, or Dorothy Hodgkins, interestingly enough, that here in the UK it was in this very misogynist academic setting of the UK, you had X-ray crystallography that was really populated largely by very important women. Not exclusively, but Kathleen Lonsdale, already under the Braggs, and Rosalind Franklin, let’s say, at the time of Bernal... I’m taking the men and the women, and then Dorothy Hodgkins, Olga Kennard, and so on, you have all women who did powerfully important work in X-ray crystallography. Why? I really believe that the reason for that was, and I’m not excusing this, but it was very laborious work before computers. You had to have an unbelievable amount of patience, and apparently it was supposed to be really very repetitive, and so on, and, and I think men would just say, well, this is okay for women. Of course, the women showed that it wasn’t just that... they had that quality of perhaps patience and persistence, but also could show... people like Dorothy Hodgkins, who won a Nobel prize for that... that in fact you can also do spectacular work in this.
But much of this was either before computers, or just with very primitive ones. But as computer technology advanced and so on, then X-ray crystallography became very automated and much more rapid, and so on and we could apply it to molecules that were completely beyond X-ray crystallography at that time. This has become now, almost with many things, except with very big molecules, quite routine, particularly for these smaller molecules... small, by chemical standards, molecular weight, let’s say, below 1,000 Daltons, whereas proteins, of course are in the hundreds of thousands, or more than that. And that has completely destroyed a natural part of chemistry, because you realise, of course, the game, the intellectual game of guessing what is in a dark room, becomes... It’s total dull stuff if you just come and take a picture, develop it, look at the picture, and ah ha, here it is. Well okay, so maybe you become a technical photographer, but nothing else. This is not like filmmaking where you can also add artistic things to it, there isn’t anything to add to it, it’s either it’s here or it’s not here, that’s what it is or it’s not. And so that destroyed completely within, probably 30 or 40 years, what was in a way, the most, intellectually most exciting area of chemistry, and at one time... organic chemistry, and at one time the most productive. And why do I say that?  Because, in order to be able to develop, you had to find also chemical ways of... which would be the touching, of sophisticated, intuitive touching of the dark room. You had to develop chemical procedures, not just... not just the physical ones, so a lot of real chemistry was developed in the process of trying to determine the structure of a compound, and some of the giants in Germany and Austria... Germany and England, in particular, people like Sir Robert Robinson, for instance, one of the great organic chemists here in this country, developed a lot of chemistry as a result of this. But then came also these physical methods, and I... because you’re willing to try anything that will help you get a better light, then you’re going to use it. So that type of natural product chemistry is intuitively more receptive to using new methods of that type, and I decided not only to use them but to develop them, and I did that in a number of areas. And the one, I think, in which my research group is particularly well known is so called chiroptical methods.

These are methods which tell you something about the stereochemistry of a chemical structure. And what do I mean by that? Stereochemistry is basically the three-dimensional picture of... of molecules, rather than the two-dimensional ones, which I’ve shown you right over here. And furthermore, what is very important in chemistry, the chirality, the handedness, of the molecule was it left-handed or right-handed, because most molecules can exist in two forms. Organic ones, left- and right-handed, and we call them dextro- and levorotatory. And in other words they are... you can see right here, they do not fit into the two hands, they are mirror images, but they are not really identical, you know, I mean it’s not... if you superimpose it, it’s not identical it’s a mirror image. It turns out that virtually all biologically-active molecules are optical... are... exist in mirror images, but only one of them is biologically active. So it’s extremely important to be able to tell, and we call that determining the absolute configuration of a compound, whether it’s left-handed or right-handed. Now, what does left- or right-handed mean? We use, really as an index   how it transmits, or... or absorbs left or right circularly polarised light, and therefore it’s called left or right, levo or dextro.
So I was very interested in working also on methods to determining that. Because, again if you want to know a... the composition of that empty room, you don’t really want to know the chair and just draw a picture, a two-dimensional one, you want to know the depth of it, you want to know, of course, again the chirality of it, even the position of it here, both relatively and absolutely, and I worked very much on methods. In the first book I ever published, called Optical Rotatory... Optical Rotatory Dispersion, that was the technique, applications to organic chemistry. And that was the first method, and that was... had a big impact in stereochemistry and the applications of that, and we were particularly interested in natural products, because we always wanted to determine that for each natural product.
And the second one, the method in which we started work, is mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry is really a method where you use a minute amount of material, really an invisible amount of material, and at that time... now you can do it in many other ways... you bombard it with electrons, and what you’re really doing is you demolish it, absolutely demolish it, because you hit it with an awful lot of energy, and so I take you and I fragment... Well, let’s- rather than commit murder on you, let’s assume you are just a beautiful sculpture, and I really want to know what that sculpture looks like, rather than the room, and now I’m taking something in it... the sculpture. And what I really do is, as in archaeology, you find segments of an arm, a leg, a head, and so on, and if you find enough of them, as an archaeologist, and it shows again what I would have liked to done at one time, you can start putting it together. And if you are very successful you put the whole thing again together from the pieces that you find originally, and sometimes you need only a few pieces to tell an awful lot, and that’s certainly true in palaeontology, where people discover a lot from just certain skeletons. So, in mass spectrometry you destroy that substance, but you don’t destroy it into just... into just ash, which of course wouldn’t help you. In other words, if you just convert it all into carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, or whatever atoms it contains, then it tells you nothing, but into segments, and the ideal one is, they do it in such a way that if it’s a sculpture it happens to cut off, ideally let's say, the head here, and arm here, a leg there, so it’s very easy to put it together. That, of course is usually much too easy, it doesn’t work that way, so instead you lose also a ear, and in some cases a piece of a nose, some teeth, and therefore all the different places, but you learn how to put them together. When you see that ear really fits over here, and that head really fits to that torso, and that torso really to those legs, and before you know it you can start putting this together, and that’s really what mass spectrometry in a way is. But what is so great about it is you need infinitesimal amounts of material, and I would say, with... I was not the first one to use mass spectrometry, but one of the first, but I probably used it more extensively and published more than, probably anyone else.
I published with two of my post doctorate fellows, one an Austrian, Herbert Budzikiewicz, and one an Englishman, Dudley Williams, who just recently retired as a Professor of Chemistry at Cambridge. We published four or five books together, just on mass spectrometry, and I’ve probably published something in the order of, maybe 300 papers alone in that field, on applications of mass spectrometry. And some of this was very sophisticated work, because of the way you could only develop... really develop the language of interpretation for these mass spectra, and some rules... the rules of the game, so to speak... interpretive rules, and we could only do this by labelling known compounds with isotopes. With deuterium, or carbon 13, and... or oxygen isotopes, and a few time nitrogen isotopes, so I also got involved with a lot of isotope chemistry, but these are stable isotopes, not radioactive ones, so therefore there’s not a question of hazards, but it’s... these are labelling devices. I really won’t go further on this, except saying that was an enormous contribution, and that I did when I first came into Stanford, because all the instruments were expensive, and I was able to get a mass spectrometer, which until then was really only used by men in the petroleum industry for the analysis of very simple petroleum constituents, and it was a petroleum chemist who introduced mass spectrometry, which otherwise was a physical instrument, because the instruments themselves, whether it's ultraviolet, infrared, mass spectrometry, they were obviously developed by physicists developing... implementing physical phenomenon in instrumental terms, but having not the foggiest idea what the application of this would turn out to be. And these were usually then applications that only the user would develop, and I was one of these users, and particularly, I think, did this rather well, and in these particular areas.

So I used that in... for years, for decades. I had lots of graduate students and post docs working in this area. At the same time as we developed the methods, we also used them for the structural elucidation of more and more complex molecules, and methods such as mass spectrometry, or spectroscopic methods, such as infrared, ultraviolet, nuclear magnetic resonance, a non-destructive method. It’s like, you know, when you carry out an X-ray of a person, or an MRI of a person, when you put them in the instrument, you know, and the X-ray, radiologist and so on, but they don’t destroy you in the process... or hopefully they don’t, they just get the picture and you’re still there. Well, the same thing is with instruments, with spectroscopic methods, you take this compound, you either dissolve it, or even with a crystal, you analyse the spectrum but you still have the material there, which is quite important, because non-destructive methods of analysis mean that you can apply it to things which are very, very rare, of which you have only very small... small amounts. And that ability to analyse smaller... and to determine the structures of smaller and smaller amounts of material, extended the power of structural elucidation enormously. If you think about it, let’s say the structure of morphine, or strychnine, we’re taking two molecules, which are very famous natural products. Morphine is a constituent of the poppy, and you know, strychnine is from the strychnos plants. Chemists worked for decades on these. There was a German chemist working on strychnine, who spent his entire life essentially on the chemical structure of strychnine, and gradually got more... never solved the entire structure, but got many pieces of it, but he needed hundreds and hundreds of grams of this. Well, to use the opposite extreme, the last sort of natural products chemistry I did in the last 20 years, and I think with that I’ll be able to, sort of, end the... almost the chemical story I could say, of my chemical work, we worked so little that in some cases you couldn’t even see the material, and yet we could tell what the entire room looked like, which is really quite extraordinary, but means you need very, very little material, or you have only very little material. And that you can only do through physical methods, and not through chemical manipulation. And once we reach that point, and we’re pretty well at that point now, we chemists, I don’t mean the royal 'we' of Carl Djerassi, I mean we chemists, means that we have destroyed... we’ve made a major advance forward; we can do certain things much more rapidly, with much smaller amounts of material, but in some respects in a much less interesting way. We’re just using black boxes in a way... really, well, I was going to say, artificial methodology, which is the wrong word, but it leads me to the one methodology that I forgot to mention.

In the 1960s, late '60s, which was probably the most productive time of mine... It’s very interesting, someone at... a man named Eugene Garfield, who is one of the pioneers in, really, Information Technology, and has developed all kinds of ways of analysing bibliographically, references and citations in literature, which is what it’s all about in science, that’s all we leave behind. And he decided to just take me as an example. He sent me an email, which I haven’t even answered yet, because it’s so involved, where he’s taken my 1,200 papers, and analysed them, in terms of who cited them, so you get into these tens of thousands of papers, who cited them, and he sent me all this, so that I can go and look through this, for which I unfortunately don’t have the time, even though I think it would make me feel better if I read this. But then he gave a bar graph, which interestingly enough I’d never done myself which is how many papers I’d published in a given year, and it’s a complete Gaussian distribution curve, and there was actually one year, and I couldn’t even believe this, a couple of years where I published over 60 papers in a year. And I thought, my god, over a paper a week, and the ironic thing is that for that time I still wrote every one of these papers. The first 600 or so papers I really, literally wrote the first draft. I then changed my mind, because I realised that I was very well organised and knew how to do this, but I have to teach that to my students, from then on I switched around and said, you write the first draft, and I will correct it and comment on it, which in fact took much longer, but of course was I think pedagogically much more useful.

I really, intimately collaborated with two major professors at Stanford, in very different disciplines. That was one of the attractive things about Stanford, the entire campus, everyone is together, the medical school was across the street from us, which is usually not the case, the medical people are very far away from the chemists. And that was Joshua Lederberg, who became a very close friend of mine, who at that time was the Chair of Genetics, but he’s an absolute genius, with interests in many other areas. And the other one was Ed Feigenbaum, who was at that time the Chair of Computer Sciences. And Ed Feigenbaum was one of the pioneers of artificial intelligence. Joshua Lederberg, who knows everything, was among other things very much interested in exobiology, namely life in outer space, and was involved in some of the preliminary work on some of the NASA missions at the time, and is still focused on unmanned exploratory things, and therefore wanted to develop methods of detecting natural products, if they existed, on Mars and on the Moon, by methods which had all have to be spectroscopic, and Feigenbaum... Well, he and Feigenbaum got together and realised that there was a lot of computer stuff that has to get involved in this, because then it’s only through telemetry and computer interpretation that you can go and analyse these data, and then became interested, and it was just the beginning of artificial intelligence, and as I said, he, Ed Feigenbaum was one of the pioneers in this. And he first started collaborating with Joshua Lederberg about this, and a couple of years later approached me and said, how about using it in chemistry, and we’ll use you as an example, and say, we’ll let the computer learn how Carl Djerassi thinks, and let’s see whether you can put that into a program language, and that led to a series of papers. We probably published something in the order of 40 papers on this, which had always the title, Application of Artificial Intelligence to Organic Chemistry, and that became very interesting, so we did an awful lot of work on this as well, and computerised even the structural elucidation of natural products, which are then used very much pedagogically, and I’ll explain this in a very amusing experiment... illustration.
The manner in which an organic chemist thinks, even to this day, when he doesn’t do any chemistry any more, but only uses spectroscopic methods, when he wants to arrive at the chemical structure of a compound, and say, you know, this is a structure of a compound, this here, and you can see that this has nothing to do with steroids, it looks very different. Or this, the chemical structure, well, you know, you don’t see it, you don’t have it in your hands, you, you infer it, and what you’re doing is, you draw up straw men, alternative ones that are consistent  with the data, and then you try and find a piece of datum... I always... for me data was the plural... a piece of datum that eliminates one but not the other. And eventually what you do is you kill all the other straw men and you’re left with only one, but he’s still a straw man in a way, although emotionally you are convinced logically that really exists, but you don’t really know that. You will only know this under two conditions, either if you actually then make it unambiguously, and therefore, then you’ve confirmed it, because then you have it in your hands, so to speak, or you take a flash picture, an X-ray picture, which shows you there it is, even though you don’t have it, but there it is. Well, the computer, while it can think completely by himself, and I purposely always visualise him as a man, as a dull man, and not really as a sexy woman, is... the computer can operate much faster than you can, although with the fundamental things it may be a different proposition. So the computer can analyse all the data that you have, and compare them with the straw man that you have drawn up. It can do more than that, it can create straw men, all the straw men that are consistent with the data that you have, and it turns out that almost always the computer can think of more straw men than you can, which is something which is humbling and also quite interesting. Now, we... when you do that, and so he comes with some more ideas that you didn’t have, but then he draws pictures, theoretical ones, and then, of course I the intelligent chemist can say, ah, but I could devise a method that will separate that new straw man from the other one, and eventually you still reduce it to only one, but by having the confidence that the computer came up with all possible straw men, by reducing it to only one, then I think you are there. So I used that in an advanced course in chemistry with graduate students, where basically we taught them how to use that software program, and then said, you go into the literature, each of you pick on your own, a different paper that’s been published by different people, which purports to describe the chemical structure of a new natural product, and sometimes it’s quite complicated. Where they then publish it and say, this is it, proudly, and they’ll take all these data, which are described in there, and put them in the program, and tell the computer, can you think of any other straw men? Well, it turns out, in every paper the computer thought of at least one more, but in some cases as many as 40 more, and then I said, now write to these authors, who happen to be in many different countries, and say, dear Doctor So and So, you published this paper that the structure of compound X, Y, Z, is this, but I’m afraid your data is also consistent with this, this, this. Well, this is really terrible, when you write this to a person, you will either take it as an insult, or you’ll take it, you know, as a wound, or you are horrified, and so on, and there were three kinds of responses to that. From some we never got a response at all, they just didn’t even want to hear about it. There were those who said, would you send me that program, I’m fascinated, I’d like to use it, and the others, the third one, that was the most interesting and amusing one, said, ah yeah, very interesting, but of course this is not possible, the one that the computer sent, because we have another piece of information that excludes it, and they did have it, but they didn’t publish it. And that is the important thing, in other words, their rigorous analytical process was not really systematic and rigorous. They happened to find little driblets, and said, oh yeah, but this we had found somewhere else, and that excludes this one, and so on, and that is very, very useful, and that really... we had quite... made quite a contribution there, in the '60s, and '70s, and even '80s, in this particular area, which was, sort of, the last physical method, you might say, that we employed there.

All of these physical methods, though, enabled me to examine an area which is much more difficult, because natural products chemistry, which has the longest history in organic chemistry, involves terrestrial things, and for obvious reasons, because... things that you could find easily, and in general even in areas that are accessible, and of course, the more esoteric the areas are the more likely, geographically, you are likely to find newer things, and in tropical plants... and plants are easier than animals. So the bulk of natural products chemistry is overwhelmingly plant chemistry, and then animal chemistry, and more recently also insect chemistry. But when you get to the ocean, there is of course an awful lot more in the ocean than anywhere else, but we don’t get to it. First of all, because it was not accessible until fairly recently, you know, until even diving equipment, even scuba diving was invented, which was really, only you know, the last century, and... but even that, the... only depths to, let’s say, 150ft or so, conveniently for really collecting. If you want to go further down it’s submarines, and then you may even get into depths where you have unmanned submarines, but these are things that have only been developed quite recently. And the things that you can then collect are, first of all, very few things, very little, and sometimes very rare. And it is marine chemistry that I became interested in, in the late 1970s, early 1980s, and probably for the last 20... the last 15 years of my chemical life... I closed my lab in 1992, more and more the focus of the natural products part of the research was done on marine animals.
It was then a fascinating completion of a circle, because I focused particularly on steroids, and particularly on sterols, things like cholesterol, and so on, and that was an area of steroid chemistry that I, and most other steroid chemists thought had been exhausted, almost exhausted. There are very few new terrestrial sterols that you isolate. Cholesterol is the mother substance, and it is a constituent of cells. It is not only the raw material out of which we make our hormones, through chemical transformation in the body, but cholesterol as such, without any further modification, is a key constituent of all cell membranes, and you cannot have a cell without a cell membrane, or it wouldn’t be one, and the cell membranes consist of two things basically, phospholipids, and then cholesterol. And so the question is why... what is the magic role of cholesterol, and a lot of work has been done on this, thousands of papers, and it’s one of the key areas in biology... structural biology, and etc, even evolutional biology, if you wish. And what happened is, working on marine animals, I suddenly discovered that they contain sterols, but of a very unusual nature, in that only one part of it there, not the part of... and here I can show you some chemical structures, because I’m sure I have it in here. Well, here just the tail... yeah. See it right here, here’s the structure that basically is cholesterol, except it has a double bond here, but that would be cholesterol, and has this side chain, each of the carbon atom... R means... R is not an atom; it just means here there could be other things as well. R is equal to hydrogen, methyl, ethyl, and so on. But if you forget the R and put in a double bond, that’s cholesterol, and cholesterol is present in all of the cells. Now, what is very important is this thing here, because this has to occupy space in the cell membrane, and modifications of this R in ordinary mammalian cell membranes, and so on, and makes them poorer, because one can make artificial cell membranes, so one knows cholesterol is the ideal... evolutionarily the ideal situation.
Suddenly we discovered in marine animals, and this is just this part, just the side chain, things like this, where each of these circles and other methyl groups, so you see this bizarre thing, you see methyl grouped all around, in places that we never anticipated, it was just a... I mean, and then even more bizarre   were the things that had these rings, three membered rings, which are cyclopropanes, or three membered rings for the double bond, which are called cyclopropenes, and there are practically no natural occurring cyclopropenes anywhere in nature, very, very few. So all these bizarre things were suddenly discovered, and we literally, as I said, there were hundreds of new sterols at a time when you’d think there weren’t any more sterols, and all from marine organisms. And that got us going on an awful lot of things, but we started first with sponges, but then with other marine animals, and that we really only could do because we developed these techniques, and in particular mass spectrometry, because sometimes you had so little material that you couldn’t even see it, and yet we could determine the structure through just two things, namely, mass spectrometry and NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance, and then we eventually synthesised them to confirm that they actually existed.

I had not worked in that area before, in natural products, where we work primarily on structure, and now we worked on function and biosynthesis. Why do sponges make these things, I mean these bizarre things, which are not present in terrestrial organisms, and secondly, how do they make them?  Well, the only way you can do the how is through radioactive tracer work, in which you think of certain precursors, which you feed to the sponge, let us say, and that is how biosynthetic work in natural products has been done with plants, or animals. You inject a radioactive precursor in the plant. How do you do this in a sponge, which grows in the water, underneath, sometimes a depth that you can’t get to, and how do you inject it in there, you know, there’s water all round and it just gets dissolved? So we had to work out ways of getting it, with sort of, make little holes in sponges, and with plugs in there, but then this had to be... it turned out this takes the... then they had to be kept for quite a number of days, weeks, or months, in an aquatic environment, which we couldn’t do in the lab. So we established underwater labs at depths of 40, 50, 60ft. Platforms that were anchored, and where we then could dive back, and it meant that every one of my students had to be... who was willing to work in this field, had to get, of course, had to be checked out for scuba diving, which was a fringe benefit that many of the students loved, who’d never done any scuba diving before. So when I interviewed graduates students, the first question I asked them... do you know how to swim, you know, and they’d think, you know, what other personal questions is he going to ask, and the next one was scuba diving. And when they said no, I said, would you like to... would you be prepared to be checked out, which was quite a commitment?  But then the fringe benefit was... and where would you want to do it, and I said... well, the Bahamas, and the Great Barrier Reef, and New Guinea, and the Mediterranean, near Naples, and etc, and Africa. So that turned out to be one enormous fringe benefit, and we did this in tropical waters... primarily was the really interesting one.

We worked out the synthesis of these compounds, and then discovered something, which was sort of, almost amusing. Where is it? I just saw it here... Namely, we wanted to work on the biological function of these, what are they doing in these cells, and I thought I saw this somewhere. Oh yeah, here. Well, one of the functions of cholesterol is cell membranes, so we started looking at the cell membranes of sponges, and the two components of cell membranes are basically the sterol, and we’d already discovered that the sterol is very unusual, and the other one is a phospholipid. Lipid means lipid, the fatty acid constituents of the phospho-, of course, because it was phosphorylated, but I’ll talk just about the structure of fatty acids. Well, phospholipids, in general, again have the usual fatty acids there, C16, C18, 16 to 18 carbon atoms, one or two double bonds, things that everyone knows, oleic acid, palmitic acid, you know, people even who don’t know any chemistry know about saturated fatty acids, cis fatty acids, trans fatty acids, and it turns out that in ordinary cell membranes there are very few, and they have a certain kind, the trans are not... the cis don’t fit well, and they are only a certain length, and it’s very dull chemistry. The chemistry, and not the biology, but the chemistry, very dull. And what would you discover in sponges, you discover again the sponges have the weirdest forms of fatty acids, and I circled them only with alkyl groups, so instead of being 16 or 18, some of them are as long as 30 carbon atoms, so they are absurdly long, they are branched, they are complicated, and you wonder what’s going on here with sponges? And of course sponges, in a way are evolutionary, they are also animals although we don’t look at it this way, but they are a dead-end branch that really didn’t continue through the apes, and you and me, so that is still an unsolved question, why they did all this, and by that time I closed my lab. But this turned out to be... this shows you how we got from one thing to another, to a third thing, and I noticed just here a very charming area... I’ve got a paper here somewhere. Well, you see here a picture, for instance, of horsing around diving. This was, of course one of the fringe benefits, this was in the Maldives, and this was on a Soviet oceanographic vessel. I was there, with the Soviets at that time, in 1989, I still did quite a lot of work, and they were very well equipped with oceanographic vessels, much better than we had. So I was on this one with my son, with whom I was in this case diving in some very cold water, near Monterey, with the Stanford Marine Biology Lab.
But I want to show... I just thought I saw that here, which is quite amusing, namely, one of my favourite... a post doctorate fellow in Belgium... Oh, here it is... named Ben Tursch, who was a fantastic diver, and had then organised a small marine biology laboratory in a small island off the coast of New Guinea, and that was on his boat in New Guinea, and this is my wife sitting there. And then, in celebration of my... what birthday was this? Ah, right. I had once a great party known as the Millipub Party, the thousandth publication, and a lot of my students came together, and we released a thousand balloons, and so on. It was a mad thing, it was out in New Guinea, and he sent me this fake paper, and it was prepared exactly like a scientific paper, in exactly the style, and he managed to persuade a chemical journal to bind it in their reprint binder, so when he sent it to me I for a moment thought this man really, really, you know, did my... did something here that he shouldn’t have, namely published a paper with fake authors and Carl Djerassi. But it turns out to be a wonderful fake paper, which in the end showed that what we isolated was really only a hydrocarbon, which was bent that way with the shape of a... a steroid. It was just very funny, very amusing.

I think I’ve actually led you through all of chemistry, and I think the rest would take probably two years, and an elementary course in chemistry, before we could really go through it in detail, because what you really need is to learn the pictography of chemistry, and I’ve always used a very corny analogy, and explained why we have probably more trouble than almost anyone else in the ordinary sciences to make ourselves intelligible. I’m not talking about mathematicians, which is now completely different, but let’s say, in particular, biology and chemistry, if you compare the two. It would be like telling you... I want to tell you about the intricacies of old Chinese poetry. No, I could try and do it, in ordinary English, but that isn’t Chinese poetry, and I am talking about old Chinese poetry, not even modern, but even modern is bad enough. But first you'd have to learn Chinese. You’d first have to learn how to write Chinese, and that’s not an alphabet, it’s a pictography of Chinese, which is a monstrous... it’s not impossible, but how many people are willing to... adults, who don’t... are monolingual anyway, in America, and perhaps also in England, are willing to suddenly go to the trouble of learning Chinese, and learning a hell of a lot of Chinese, not just the ordinary pictography, because I want to teach them sophisticated poetry, and not really just to ask in Chinese, where the men’s room is, or something like this, but really some beautiful metaphors? Well, that’s what it is to try and explain the chemistry that turned me on, or perhaps even still turns me on, for which I need a language which is so complex that even most chemists don’t speak it any more, they only speak certain dialects in that language, and that is the horrible problem, that the difficulty in communicating, not just with the broad public, but even with each other, because we get so specialised, and we learn more and more in greater detail, about less and less. That I think is a great dilemma, probably an unsolvable one, within science, because more science has been created and discovered during the last 50 years, or perhaps even 30 years, than in the history of mankind. So how do you learn all that?

I think what I’d like to do is end with how I started, namely with this autobiography, and with this title, and say... make a few remarks about all three items. In a way, the pill, I’ve spoken the least about this, although in the image of some people, and perhaps the reason why you want to film me, you associate me with that development, and of course, by my not mentioning it to any extent just now doesn’t mean that I think it is insignificant, it’s just that I’ve spoken so often about this that somehow I’d like to hear other things, which I consider just as important, or maybe more important for myself, for my own personal life, than the record. But it’s worthwhile, I think, to talk about it briefly, since I showed you, particularly the chemical background, and since virtually all the people who were involved with the pill are dead, which includes even the very young chemist Luis Miramontes, who was sort of, 20, 21, who worked in my lab, and let’s say, did the actual final experiment, who just died recently, maybe a year or two ago, at age... I forgot... 77, 78, or something like that.
I’ve often been referred to... some people in newspapers and so on, for the sake of shorthand, as the father of the pill... words that I always object to, not only because it’s historically inaccurate, but what is much more important, because I consider it meaningless. As someone who is very much involved, right now in particular, and virtually all my writing, even my last play Taboos is involved with conception, with birth, rather than with prevention of birth. That’s not an important point, but my point is that anything that gets born needs more than one person. It’s not parthenogenesis, it usually involves a mother and a father, and people always have this phallocentric tendency of speaking about the father of the invention, the father of the country, the father of this, but who’s the mother in this? You couldn’t have a baby without a mother. In fact, if you think about it, the egg, and then the maternal environment, and I’m still talking about the uterine environment, and the nourishment, and so on, it’s much more important than a single puny sperm, which we contribute in the beginning and then we disappear. And in most species the male hasn’t got the foggiest idea who his offspring are. I mean fish don’t know who is their baby daughter, or their baby son, so to speak, you have to get to relatively few species, and of course man, and even in man, many fathers don’t know or care who their child is. You wouldn’t find this to be the case of the mother, who couldn’t, whether she wanted it or not, couldn’t ignore it. So I really, when my publisher originally wanted to do something like, about the father of the pill, and I said, forget about it, and came up with a much more complex, and I think a much more meaningful title, The Pill, Pygmy Chimps and Degas' Horse, it has a certain alliteration also. But in German, when the German biography came out, and that you see is thicker, because it even has a couple of more chapters, which English publishers didn’t want to publish, and the German one did, also because the German language is longer. Well, in German this would be a so much longer title. Just pygmy chimps, which is short, but it’s in German, Pygmäe Schimpansen, which sounds horrible, or Degas Horse is Das Pferd von Degas. So the German publisher wanted to call it Der Vater der Pille, and I said no, but you can call it Die Mutter der Pille, the mother of the pill, and then of course he liked it, because it sounds cutesy, and of course if I just meant it that way it’s also corny and kitschy, but there was no question that journalists, and so on, picked it up, but I meant it seriously, and I think I should really talk about it, because of that context.
Namely a chemist, not just Carl Djerassi. The chemist is invariably the mother of a medicinal drug, or a medicinal drug invention, and it’s the biologist who’s the father, and it’s a clinician who is the midwife, and you need all three of them, you know, at the very, at the very least. Now, I mean of course, not just the three individuals, but the three disciplines. Nothing can happen until the chemical has first been conceived in the chemist’s mind and head, drawn on paper, the architect, and then still nothing can happen until the chemist builder has made it. Only then can the biologist come and do something in the building, or with the building, and that something are usually the animal experiments, because he can’t experiment right away with humans, and then after that has been done, and it’s been shown that the building, so to speak, is habitable, then will come the rest of the people, and in that case it will be a clinician who will really demonstrate the clinical applicability. And usually the chemical role is either ignored out of ignorance but sometimes deliberately, particularly by the clinicians, who know nothing about the chemistry, and are the most distant from the origin, and also people then forget it, because they of course get it from the clinician, and think that’s where it started. But that’s where it ended, not where it began.

Now, the biologist, particularly there is a very important biologist whom I think one justifiably could call 'the father', or at least a father of the pill, and that is a man named Gregory Pincus, who was not at Syntex, he was 1000 miles away, he was in... at the Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, who did some of the early... not the very first, but the very early biological... important biological work. But what was much more important about him, he was an extraordinary entrepreneur, and I mean this in a positive sense, not in any critical, or derogatory one, because it took really, a scientific entrepreneur to drive that through. It’s one thing to just do work, but it’s another thing to convince other people that it’s important and should be pursued, and he was obsessed by that. So he wrote a major book, he died in the late 1960s. He wrote a major book about, about contraception, The Control of Fertility, which was really, sort of, his opus magnum, in which he recorded the whole thing, and it had... I forgot, 1500, or 2000 references in it. There was not one reference to a chemist, there was not even the name of a chemist, never mind whether it was us, because in the end he used another compound, but he just... as far as he was concerned that somehow appeared from... from the sky. So, that’s bad enough, but it was worse than that, because the idea was not really his. That idea is... the idea of oral contraception, and of the pill, was propagated in writing, in publications, in a book, and in newspaper articles in the 1920s, by an Austrian physiologist named Ludwig Haberlandt. And I think the story has to start with Ludwig Haberlandt, who is the maternal... who is the paternal grandfather, I would say, because he was a physiologist, not a chemist, and he was the first one to point out that something that was more or less recognised at that time, is that there is a natural contraceptive in nature, and that is progesterone. That women do not get pregnant during pregnancy, absolutely not, it’s a 100% effective contraceptive, and the question he asked, and he was the first one to ask that question, others already had started to understand the biological role of progesterone, but he was the first to ask why not use progesterone as a contraceptive in humans. And he published an extraordinary book, which hardly anyone seems to have paid any attention to, which is really called The Hormonal Sterilisation... I’m translating in English... The Hormonal Sterilisation of the Female [sic]. It was published, I think, in '30... 1930, '31, and he died the following year. Now, progesterone was not even known at that time as a pure compound. One knew it existed as a glandular extract of both the corpus luteum and of the placenta, and he actually worked with such extracts, and used them in animal experiments to show that they inhibited ovulation, which of course is the process by which oral contraception also works, and that this was a mechanism. And he then convinced a pharmaceutical company, an important Hungarian pharmaceutical company that is even to this day the biggest Hungarian pharmaceutical company, Gedeon Richter, and who do market hormones, and did them already then, glandular extracts, and now do market oral contraceptives, to market the compound under a trade name, which he even invented, Infecundin. And Infecundin, interestingly enough became the trade name of the first oral contraceptive that Gedeon Richter released on the market in the 1960s, in other words, 30 years after the man had died. So he convinced them to try and collect this huge number of glandular extracts, and he worked on making concentrates of this, and he was hoping that this would be orally active, but he died before anything could be consummated.
A couple of years later, around the early 1930s, in Germany, the structure of progesterone was isolated in a pure form, its crystalline compound, by chemists, Karl Slotta, another Jewish émigré, who then left for Brazil, and was one of the persons who started really some... a certain amount of science in São Paulo, and much of the faculty of the University of São Paulo, in chemistry in particular, were the German refugees of the 1930s, and that became one of the leading chemical departments in Latin America. Well anyway, it was Slotta and Butenandt and other people who then isolated and established the structure of progesterone in the 1930s, and then synthesised it by this form of partial synthesis that I mentioned. At that time, primarily from stigmasterol, a soybean sterol, partly from cholesterol, and partly from bile acids. So, progesterone was then introduced in a medicine. Now, one actually tried it for ovulation inhibition, and discovered that while, of course progesterone does it, it is not orally active, so that any dream that Haberlandt might have had if he’d lived just a few years... He died in his 40s, so he could have, if he had been just a reasonably mature man who had lived, and he certainly would have deserved to do that, he would have found that his dream was not realisable unless he got himself the right chemist, which obviously he didn’t have, because it was not orally active, and women might inject themselves daily for diabetes and insulin, but not for contraception.

So that was the end of any idea of using progesterone as a contraceptive, but the idea was well known and published. What progesterone was then used in medicine, however, was for some of its other uses, namely, it is produced by women during the menstrual cycle, but generally during the second part of the menstrual cycle, in preparation for... in case they got pregnant, in which case the secretion would then continue for nine months to inhibit further ovulation, and further fertilisation, and also to maintain the proper environment in the uterus for the development after implantation of the embryo and the blastocyst, and so on. So it’s used for menstrual disorders to this day, and it was used for infertility, which is ironic, but there are women who get pregnant without difficulty, but cannot maintain a pregnancy to term, because they do not produce enough progesterone, and therefore their uterine environment, let’s say, is not optimal, and they suffer spontaneous abortion, and that is... particularly at that time, was one of the treatments for habitual abortion... spontaneous habitual abortion in women. They were then given progesterone by injection, in order to offset it, and in a number of cases, of course it did so. And one man who did quite a bit of work in this field was a clinician named John Rock, at Harvard. So there you have Rock... And then... so that was that.
In 1951 we synthesised this compound norethindrone, because we wanted to develop new drugs, of course, for Syntex, and we thought this was an interesting one. Namely, Syntex was in the progesterone business, as a supplier of the raw material to pharmaceutical companies, but what if we could make a proprietary drug, which would be a much more remunerative thing, and one that would have a real function which progesterone did not fulfil, namely to be orally active, and that’s why we made this compound, and I indicated how, and it turned out to be orally active and the most potent progestational compound known at that time, much more potent than the natural hormone. We were then, even though we were a very small company that had no biology, or clinic, we then farmed it out to... sent it to many different biologists, and quite a number of them published then on our work, and we also sent it to Gregory Pincus, who at that time was in the Worcester Foundation, and was a recognised biologist in that area, and suggested he might be interested in this. He, in fact, was not the first one to publish on this, even though people think he was, but it was... or claim he was. No, not even claim, ignored the fact that he was not, but that’s sort of, beside the point. We sent it also to the National Cancer Institute, and that’s where it was first published, but what they all confirmed was the compound was active orally, and they then carried it through rabbits, guinea pigs, to monkeys, and the very first clinical experiment, the very first clinical experiment on the clinical efficacy of norethindrone was done by a man named Tyler, T-Y-L-E-R, who is now dead, but at that time was working for the... at UCLA, and he was Medical Director of Planned Parenthood. But he was interested in various applications of progesterone. Pincus was interested in really... I wouldn’t say rediscover, because of course he knew about it, but extending and improving the basic idea of Haberlandt, and that’s perfectly okay. In fact that’s what science is all about, you build on the predecessors. But I have never forgiven him is that this book of his that has 1600 references, and quite a number of them are totally unimportant, has not a mention of Haberlandt. If you look in the index, where there are hundreds and hundreds of names, not only doesn’t he have any chemists, and he might say, all right, he’s a biologist who doesn’t believe in chemistry, but here was a biologist, and he’s not there. And that bothers me, and therefore calling Pincus solely the father of the pill is inappropriate. Calling him a father is totally appropriate, but he was a key contributor, but not the only one, and something came way before, and that was Haberlandt, and then what came then was the chemists making the orally active compound, and then came me, and then the first clinician, and that was John Rock, interestingly enough. So he clearly would be the midwife, and I think it is appropriate to call Pincus a father, or maybe even the father, but he certainly didn’t play the maternal role, he needed that too, and that is the one that I have been describing, both here and in this book, and then the brutal details, and there are interesting patent details, because a year and a half... and we published our stuff right away, patented it right away. Four weeks, or five weeks after we published this, we published it... I mean completed it, on October 15, 1951, there's was a real birthday, and by November, something like 22, or so on, we’d already filed a patent application, and in March of the following year had already published it, the first report, and then a little bit later a very detailed one, in the Journal of the American Chemical Society. A year and a half later, after that, another chemist, Colton at GD Searle, which was a much larger pharmaceutical... well, a real pharmaceutical company, near Chicago, much larger than ours... he worked there... made a very close analog of it, so close that if you... some people would call it, like me, call it a pro-drug. That is... it is a compound that is different from the actual active compound, but if you put it into the body it gets transferred... transformed into the original compound, and that’s the active one, and in fact it is a compound that the double bond is only in a difference position, and when it’s exposed to acid, in other words the stomach acid, it gets transformed into our compound, but that, of course circumvented our patent. It’s perfectly legal this also, I’m not talking that there’s any shenanigans about it, I don’t mean that at all, but that was a year and a half later. But he worked for the company that supported much of Pincus’ work, and sent it off to Pincus, of course considerably after we did, and Pincus selected that for the first... for his work, and that was again perfectly appropriate. He had financial and other relations with them, and there was nothing inappropriate about it, that’s what you would pick.

So we resumed our work with other people, and not with Pincus, and in 1957 the FDA approved both compounds. Ours was called norethindrone, and theirs was called norethynodrel, Frank Colton's compound, for menstrual disorders and infertility, in 1957, and then it was on the market. Ours under the trade name Norlutin, and theirs under the trade name Enovid, E-N-O-V-I-D. We didn’t have any marketing organisation, so we had licensed Parke-Davis, a very large American pharmaceutical company, to market this, and they in fact were the ones who marketed it under Syntex license, and our patent, and it said that. But they were a very conservative company, and then as the work continued on the oral contraceptive application, the clinical work, which of course took longer, and the FDA required more things, got cold feet, because they were afraid of a Catholic boycott, and returned the license to Syntex for that application... only continued it for the menstrual disorder one. So Syntex had to go and chase down a second licensee, and the selection turned out to be a first class one, namely the Ortho division of Johnson & Johnson. Now Ortho is just a division of Johnson & Johnson, who is the largest pharmaceutical company in the world that make a lot of other things as well, including bandages, and things like that, but the Ortho division was entirely dedicated to contraception. They were the main manufacturers of diaphragms, of spermicidal jellies, and so on, so they were boycott-proof, because they were in this business and you couldn’t boycott it. That was probably, also why Johnson & Johnson had a separate division that only dealt with women’s issues of this type. So they became the licensees, but had to repeat a bit of the clinical work that Parke-Davis had already done, because Parke-Davis was not willing to hand it over. So we lost nearly two years on this, and GD Searle therefore came out first on the market with their oral contraceptive, late in 1960, whereas Syntex, through Parke-Davis... I’m sorry, through Ortho, came out only... I’ve forgotten... a year, a year and a half later. But things then moved so fast that by 1965 Parke-Davis had again changed their mind, because there were no boycotts, and again got the licence back, and so on, and Syntex had already started marketing it in its own name, so by the middle of the 1960s the Syntex product, Norlutin, and they had other trade names, Ortho-Novum, and so on, became the biggest selling oral contraceptive, much more so than GD Searle’s, which had then gone off the market, whereas our substance is still taken by millions of women, although there have been now modifications since that time, and there are a few other very closely related analogs.
But that basically is the history of oral contraceptive development, particularly as far as Syntex is concerned, and I think the Syntex development was not only absolutely crucial, and I think in many respects sensational, but even more important, and that’s why I feel strongly about it, and resent it even more, are the attempts to underplay or eliminate it, is that this was a Mexican development and not an American one. And people have got again this tendency, like the Russians, the Russians think they’ve always invented something first, and the Americans think so, but in fact it was a not an American development. You know, in started in Austria, if you want to start with Haberlandt, and the chemistry was done in Mexico, and only then some of the subsequent biological work was done in the United States, so it was very much of an international thing. The way science operates. What is unusual about it, after all, Austria historically was once in science, one of the powerhouses. You know, around 1900 there was more science and medicine, and so on, in Austria than there was in all of America, so that was historically a sophisticated country. That Mexico should have contributed in this case is something that I think is extraordinary. The first time, almost, that a third world country, scientifically speaking, contributes so heavily, and I think that should be remembered, and one should give credit to that. And so that’s why I really belabour this point, which I perhaps wouldn’t belabour so much after... otherwise.

That’s basically the pill part in this, but then you wonder what does pygmy chimps have to do with it? Well, in some respects they have nothing to do with it, and in some respects they have a great deal to do with this. My work in Mexico really taught me, first of all the unbelievable hurdles that people in the southern world have in contemporary science, because all dialogue, all travel, all communication in science is East-West, or was, I mean at that time, totally East-West. It was Europe and the United States, and to a certain extent Japan, and the driblets in the south were really only driblets, and there would be Australia, and in chemistry to a certain extent, maybe a little bit... Australia and New Zealand, and in chemistry a little bit actually also in South Africa, in the pre, sort of, in the... not colonial times, but you know, the white South Africa, which after all there are British modelled universities there. But except for this it was all North-South, period... ah, East-West. So that difficulty, and the overt and inadvertent discrimination against people from third world countries, I became very sensitive to this, even though I was not one of them, but I worked there, and I basically felt like a Mexican, and talking about the Gringos, and the Yankees, and how they really discriminated against us. And I think that esprit de coeur, and we really belaboured the Mexican aspect, or belaboured the Mexican aspect of Syntex very much with... even though it was a very international group there, but there were quite a number of Mexican chemists, so that really got them to really work on the thing as hard, and I think as enthusiastically, as they did. So that really taught me a lesson, and when I went back to the States as an academic, I maintained some pretty intimate relations with the University of Mexico, the National University of Mexico, with students there, and I had some post docs there, and then developed it as a model for research collaboration in Brazil and... under Rockefeller Foundation auspices. For 20 years, I had a research group in São Paulo and Rio with Brazilians who then worked there with post docs of mine on Brazilian projects and so on. I became very much interested in North-South relations. And in the 1960s, by which time I was already a member of the National Academy of Sciences, I became a member of what is called the Latin America Science Board of the National Academy, which dealt with relations... scientific relations between the United States and Latin America. I, of course, was appointed to it because I spoke Spanish and I had perhaps more experience about Latin America than many others, because I’d lived there. And eventually became the Chairman of an overall board, called the Board of Science and Technology for International Development, a very long term... a very long word. The acronym was BOSTID. And that dealt with... it’s now 1960s, middle to late 1960s... with bilateral relations between America and third world countries. That time we really were interested in this and [US]AID, the Agent for International Development gave about $16 million, which was a fair amount of money, to the National Academy, to develop programmes, bilateral ones not multilateral ones, which probably would have been better, but bilateral ones with individual countries in Latin American, Africa and Asia. I was not only the Chairman, the overall Chairman of this, but I was involved in many... as a working member, in many of the individual ones and this included countries, I'm taking a few where I participated in workshops and travels, first of all, of course, Mex... First of all, of course, Brazil. Mexico was not one because it was not an AID country; it had to be a country supported by the Agency for International Development. Mexico never was. But it was Brazil, Argentina, Indonesia, Tanzania, Columbia, Kenya, Egypt, well here are just some countries where I was involved. There were many others, Bangladesh, Pakistan, etc, etc.

I wrote an article as part of the Pugwash conference with which I was involved, in which I raised this catch-22 question: How can a third world country ever become a first world country in science when there is an enormous gulf and when, you know... they may develop but the developed country develops of course more rapidly so the gulf becomes wider and wider? And furthermore, the third world countries have priorities of simply literacy and first grade and high school education, whereas here we’re talking about centres of excellent research. How could you break this? And I wrote a model based on my experience in Brazil saying, one could perhaps do this by having visiting directors of research from highly developed countries, who would work in the developed country. They, of course, would not be willing to abandon their lab so they would only be there on a part-time basis but they’d have post docs over there, and train local people in situ rather than bringing them to the highly developed country and spoiling them by American or British or European standards. But I'd rather show what can be done in a third world country and at the same time, those visitors, part-time people, would really learn something about the problems that existed there. And do that model and then African... a very interesting African scientist Tom Odhiambo, a Kenyan insect physiologist, endocrinologist, read that and got in touch with me and said, 'How about trying it in Kenya?' And I gave some models. I said Nairobi, Caracas, I used a couple of examples... would be typical ones, because they had to be places that you could get easily to. Nairobi was always in the line of all the airlines that at that time all, of course, went down to South Africa but stopped there. And politically, Kenya at that time was perhaps a more stable country, that was still in the post Kenyatta days before all the problems arose there. And I said, 'Why not?' So we eventually came together and founded something called 'icipe', the International Centre for Insect Physiology and Ecology in Nairobi.
Why insects? Because in a separate area, which I haven’t mentioned, one other involvement of mine has been insect physiology and ecology. And I founded a company called Zoecon, in 1968, the year when DDT was banned about developing new approaches for insect control, which do not involve pesticides but hormones, similar to the birth control pill on the Stanford Industrial Park. So I knew something about that particular field. And we said, here is a good example, and we would make... establish a centre of excellence in Kenya, in a really very interesting new area, endocrinology of insects, which was a new scientific area, but where the end point was a very serious one. And we’d study insect physiology of mosquitoes... of the main diseases. In other words, sleeping sickness, malaria and some other tropical diseases, which are spread... vectors are spread by particular insects. And yet you could do really fancy research that would be recognised everywhere and yet would have immediate application to that particular country. Furthermore, let's take the tsetse fly. You were not even permitted to do research on the tsetse fly in places like the United States because, of course, they don’t want to introduce the tsetse fly there so you’d want to do it in situ anyway. And so we founded icipe, which has become one of the major African research institutes, and was eventually taken over by the World Bank and so on, and funded and still is in existence. And eventually trained quite a lot of African scientists and became a really African institution.

So a couple of years later, at the same time as I was Chairman of that BOSTID, we got an enquiry from the Congo. Now that was extraordinary, because the Congo is hardly a place that you think would have anything to do with research. And Congo had just become independent, after the horrible civil war and everything else from the Belgians. And Mobutu, that dictator, had just become the President... Dictator-President of the Congo, which the following year then changed its name to Zaire. And Mobutu, as part of his desire to get away from the colonial masters of Belgium and the United States was interested in having some diplomatic influence in what is really the most... the biggest country in Africa, with land surface and one of the richest, potentially, came to the Americans and said, would you advise us on the research priorities of the Congo? Well in a way that's a silly question and that’s one of the more important priorities. But they wanted to do this and so the National Academy was asked to appoint a committee to travel there. And they didn’t have any experts on hand so there was no problem in appointing a non-expert, and that was me, as a Chairman, primarily because, I at least I had some real exposure to Africa in East Africa, this is West Africa but anyway. So I knew... and so it was a group of about four or five, and it was a very interesting meeting. But then we had to come up with something realistic to suggest, what can we suggest to the Congolese? I mean, they had no infrastructure and the Belgians had established some interesting research institutes, which they’ve completely abandoned. So I still remember in Eastern Congo, Kivu and Bukavu and Lake Kivu, in other words the place where all the slaughters had been going on between the Rwanda Burundi and right now which is the worst place to travel to. This was the centre of a huge research institute called IRSAC, what does it stand... it’s an acronym for... a French acronym for Institute for Research of... Institut de Recherches Scientifiques en Afrique Centrale, IRSAC. And I still remember going to this totally abandoned place and looking at the library. And there was not a single person there, and there were journals there I had never even seen, like the Proceedings of the Albanian Academy of Sciences, I still remember that. I never even knew there was such a thing and there I would find an entire set in the middle of Africa. And you wonder why. Because IRSAC, under the Belgians, had published their own journals and they had exchanged them with the academies all over the world. So there was this fantastic library but of course nothing there, no people. And to the question: what could you suggest to them? And the suggestion, and I came up with that. And I’m really quite proud of it even though it was in some respects a Pyrrhic victory, if you want to call it that. I said, if you want to do any research in the Congo, and you may have to argue the point whether you should do it, it had better be of some relevance. Now, of course, you could say the relevance ought to be diamonds and minerals and something which is really what the strength of their... Congo is... and had a college of mines there. But the more basic one, I, of course, thought of birth control. At that time, of course, birth control in Africa was one of the burning problems. And one of the problems of contraceptive research, which was still very fashionable in the '60s and are not fashionable at all anymore because the pharmaceutical industry lost interest in this, is to find a reasonable animal model. An animal model that makes sense with respect to humans. We do our research on dogs and guinea pigs and so on, which have no bearing whatsoever with human reproduction. And that has held back, in fact, and slowed down research in human reproduction enormously, in that we have no good animal models.

One would intuitively say monkeys would be, of course, the one. But, you know, you could use the Stein analogy, and say you know a rose is a rose is a rose... you could say a monkey is a monkey is a monkey but that is nonsense because a monkey has very little to do with higher primates. And higher primates... and is our closest relative the gorilla? Well it isn’t. Anyway, besides the gorilla is hardly an experimental animal that you want to use. And I'd, you know, did a little bit of reading then, discovered that there is... at that time a species that was called the pygmy chimp, which is a smaller version of the chimp. Because the chimp was considered to be the closest relative to us genetically speaking. Now the pygmy chimp by definition is smaller, about half of the size to a general chimp... to a general chimpanzee. And is... was on the endangered list. And virtually the world's population of pygmy chimps occurs in the Congo. Especially in the central and eastern portion, in particular in the so-called Équateur province. So I said, well here is an interesting thing, we could kill several birds with one stone. Try and establish a centre for pygmy chimp research in the Congo, preferably on an island in the Congo, where it could be an open colony where you’d learn how to breed pygmy chimps. So it had the advantage, first of all, to maintain an endangered species and secondly produce them and then try to do some biological research on them, in particular biochemical research and really determine whether they are as closely related to us. Nowadays, of course, you do it by examining their genome. At that time, it was just even blood pictures and hormone levels, and stuff like this. But do really serious research on pygmy chimps. Now there was some research that had, of course, been done on pygmy chimps. Interestingly enough, especially by some Japanese. But it was very minimal and it was really much more of the Jane Goodall type of research... observational animal behaviour studies. And I felt that the missing one is of course the biochemical leg. And so that was the suggestion.
Well the Congolese were... by that time the Zairean people were widely enthusiastic and the National Academy was game for this, and established a small primatology sub-committee. Well that is a group that is very competitive and incestuous because there are not very many major primatology primate research centres in the world and those that exist all want to have their own specialty and that would be a real coup. So there was the Yerkes Centre in Atlanta, which was the great one at that time, there was the Smithsonian, and there were a number of other places. And who should they appoint as Chairman of this? Well they, I think it was a wise decision, take someone who had no vested interest in this, which was a chemist, namely me. So I became the leader of these primatologists, knowing that I knew nothing about primatology, not then and not much now. But I was, I think, from an organisational standpoint, exactly the right person. Because I had no axe to grind whatsoever. I was only interested in that problem.

It was a mad trip because the rest came from Washington to Kinshasa. I was in East Africa at that time and tried to fly from Nairobi to Bukavu. Because Kivu-Bukavu which is on Lake Kivu, which is in eastern Congo. Well there was a plane via the Zairean airline, actually also the East African one... All transportation in Africa was North-South at that time. It wasn’t across-country except for the Ethiopian airline, which was a very good airline; the others were almost hopeless and had occasional flights. Well I managed to get on to some East African flight, which was then cancelled. So there was no way of getting across and that whole delegation, because there were a lot of government officials from Zaire and so on, who were all coming and everything was going to meet in Bukavu. I, the Chairman... there was no way of even reaching them. Telephone calls were very difficult to make, and I remember going to the American Embassy in desperation, and they suggested: go to Burundi and we’ll talk to the American Ambassador there and they’ll try and help you. And then you’re just across a lake. Well, you know, Burundi was not exactly on my, at that time Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi wasn’t exactly one of my main, you know, destinations. But I did do that, and it what was very amusing there.  The American Embassy in Burundi at that time was the smallest embassy we had anywhere. I think there was only an Ambassador and a couple of secretaries. And of course, they hardly ever saw anyone, so they were delighted that someone came and put me up. And I had a very good time in Burundi, in Bujumbura, and then I went across the lake and met the rest of them. At a time when these cities were abandoned cities, because there had been a lot of civil war and the so-called Zimba [sic] revolution. These... well there was a horrible civil war at that time. Still the remnants of it still existed. And that’s when we were... I had a good time and I describe all that in the...
Well the long shot was that it all had to go through the dictator Mobutu. Mobutu sticks his nose into everything. And they were actually willing to give us an island, so we went to the central, to the Équateur province, in the central Congo. And that’s where we established that but he would only do it on a... But then we realised the first experiments better be done in the United States. So we needed to get some baby... some pygmy chimps to the United States. And he said it would only be a lend-lease operation. He would lend them to the Yerkes Center in Atlanta but they would eventually have to be shipped back. Which is OK, except there were a few zoos in Europe and I think the San Diego Zoo, which were the only ones who already had pygmy chimps. Incidently, they now have different names, they’re called bonobos, but at that time it was pygmy chimps. But the first few of them were shipped eventually to Yerkes. He got as a gift from Yerkes, an orangutan, for his own zoo. Mobuto’s was probably the first orangutan who ended up in Africa, because that’s a species of course from South-East Asia. And lo and behold, some of the really key experiments on baby chimps, which were done and published, were done on the descendants of that particular one. There have been major studies carried out on the learning behaviour of pygmy chimps, on their sexual behaviour. It’s very typical of humans. They are the few one... the few animal species who do sex in the missionary position, I mean just to give you an example. And even the courting behaviour, the masturbatory behaviour there is very human, the frequency of intercourse - rather different from chimpanzee behaviour. And one marvellous example of even learning behaviour, which has been demonstrated particularly in pygmy chimps at... by a woman named Sue Savage, who’s sort of the Jane Goodall of pygmy chimps. And these were all really based on... they all came from that particular source. Again very few people realised where they... even she did not know how these ever ended up in Atlanta. But it all started at that point. But I use that not so much as a travelogue in my title, but rather as a, you might say, metaphor for my interest in third world... science in third word countries. And while this one was, in some respect, an abortive one because then Zaire went completely to pot and there was no chance of establishing that particular research centre there, but something happened anyway from this pygmy chimp research.

This work on pygmy chimps didn’t do much for Zaire. In fact, it did practically nothing, but in the scientific sense it clearly was very useful, because it really facilitated, greatly, serious biochemical work. There was a lot done on blood and hormonal levels, and behavioural studies with pygmy chimps, which crystal clearly demonstrated that the bonobo were the closest relative to humans, and in theory would be the ideal animal model, if you want to use at all an animal model for reproductive behaviour. Now, for that... that would, of course, only work if, in fact, you could breed them, and breed them, not only humanely, but then therefore... and that was my idea, not only breed them in a way that would be free breeding namely on an island, so you would not have to enclose them, but secondly in a place where you want to be sure that the endangered population gets replenished, so that would have been the ideal thing. Well this is priority zero, obviously, both for the Zaire government, the American Government, or anyone else at this point, but that was the idea behind it. And I think, if I would do it all over again I, both for personal pleasure, and I think, even for the intellectual challenge, I probably would have done it again.

This autobiography is not written like a standard autobiography. It starts with a birth, my birth, and my parents’ birth, but it jumps back and forth just like I did, and that’s how I really wrote it. I decided to write memoirs on certain events, and then... sometimes amusing, sometimes tragic ones, and they were like pebbles, throwing them into water, and then these concentric expanding rings. I threw a second one, and these rings started overlapping, and then eventually became like islands in a sea, and then I just had to interconnect them. So, that’s really what I did, and if I’m looking here... I mean I obviously skipped a fair number of them, but one, which is a long and important chapter here... the Russian ones I’m skipping here... is the Pugwash one, and it’s simply called Pugwash. And it really describes my involvement with Pugwash, which started in the 1960s, '66, '67, and in fact started with... it was, sort of, how shall I say, almost an analogy to what the antihistamines did for my chemical enthusiasm. The proposal I made at the first Pugwash conference was the one about icipe, that’s where I published that particular paper. My talk was the creation of centres of excellence in places where there can’t be any centre... presumably there can’t be any centres of excellence, and how could you do that? That’s why I did this. And Pugwash, just to refresh your memory to an extent; you may not have known it was established in the late 1950s, based on a famous Einstein, Bertrand Russell manifesto, which really declared that the greatest danger to humanity is the atomic bomb, and nuclear bomb potential, the cold war, etc, and it would be worthwhile for scientists, who after all ought to be more sensible, and should be able to speak across borders and political limits, in neutral places, about that, and convinced Cyrus Eaton, who I mentioned earlier, to fund this. And he funded it in Pugwash, Nova Scotia, a very small island. And the first group, were just groups... there were Chinese, English, American, German, French, and Austrian I think, and an Italian. Maybe 20 or 30, all nuclear... all physicists, with the exception of Linus Pauling, who was a chemist, who interestingly enough, just a few years later won the peace Nobel Prize for his strong opposition to... or opposition to nuclear warfare. And one key person was a Polish refugee, an émigré refugee in England, a biophysicist named Joseph Rotblat, who then eventually became the executive secretary of it. He still is alive; he must be close to 100 years old now, or certainly in the late 90s, if he’s not already 100. And when Pugwash won the peace Nobel Prize in 19... I forgot, 1995 I think, around that time, it was divided. Half of it was given to the organisation, and half of it was given to Joe Rotblat himself as an individual. So he was one of the ones who was involved with this. And that was visualised as an area where scientists from countries that are potentially bitter enemies, could nevertheless speak, and that really worked.

It worked for the Soviets particularly well, because there were such enormous restrictions to travel for them that any opportunity to be able to travel was already a great thing, and somehow they were permitted to travel, part because Cyrus Eaton was also a persona summa grata in the Soviet Union... I might just add this. So, the fact that he offered his place in Nova Scotia probably helped in that respect, and I’m not sure, but it could well have done so. In any event, that went on every year, and obviously it did... each year in a different place, in absolutely, wonderful places. Anything from, I don’t know, from Venice, to Kashmir, to Mexico, Africa, you name it, wherever you are... Nice, Oxford, and in Finland, Romania. I’m just trying to remember some of the places that I went to. And it was always limited to about 50 to 100 people, and it was all by invitation only, you could not just decide you’d go there, and it was until the middle 1960s, exclusively an East-West proposition, and deservedly so. And the main focus was only nuclear disarmament, and they had a great deal to do with facilitating the first Geneva Trade... Test Ban Treaty [sic], of 19... whatever, '62, or '63, which was the first real success, because the Russians started to trust the westerners, and the westerners that participated in it, all were on the... on the slightly pinkish side, or sometimes even pinker than pink, but so it was... it worked. But, interestingly enough, there were some very important people. Let's say Kissinger was a member at that time, and many other very influential politicians, ex prime ministers, or prospective prime ministers of countries, ambassadors, and so on here. So, it more or less worked. And in 1966, or '67 the Pugwash Conference was held in Sweden, because that was in celebration for the 150th, if you want to call it, anniversary of continued peace in Sweden. Sweden literally hadn’t had a war for 150 years, which is really quite extraordinary, and they wanted to really celebrate this, under the then Socialist Government. It was opened by the Socialist Prime Minister in southern Sweden, and they celebrated it by establishing an International Peace Research Institute in Stockholm. And so the theme was that, which was a very lovely one, and that certainly is an important think tank, which still exists, and it really resonated with me. It was the first conference I attended, and I’ll tell you in a moment why, because, when I lived in Vienna, as a child, two minutes away was the War Ministry. At that time, literally it was called the Ministry of War, and it was probably the only country during the ex-imperial times where it was called War Ministry. In every other country the euphemism is Defence Ministry, although most of them are not really just defence. And there was a big Latin inscription over that building, and it said, Si vis pacem para bellum. If you want war... if you want peace prepare for war. And I’ve always changed that in my mind, and it is also the screensaver on my computer, which says, Si vis pacem para pacem, you know, I pronounce it the German way, that’s how I learned Latin. Here you would say, Si vis pacem para pacem, in other words, if you want peace prepare for peace, rather than prepare for war. Well that, in a way, was the motto of the Peace Research Institute, of the Swedes, so that was a great thing.

It was held in Ronneby. Ronneby is in southern Sweden, maybe an hour’s drive from Malmö, which is on the border between Denmark, just across the water from Copenhagen. And that was an extraordinary day. It was the day on which... I’ll never forget it, Sweden decided to switch from left-hand driving to right-hand driving. They were like the Brits, and they were the last country, other than the UK that drove on what we call the wrong side of the road. Now, to try and switch that is really pretty tough. I mean you realise people... you say at midnight of the day you drive on the other side. Well, you know, what about the person who just... whose watch goes slow, or they’ve just had a drink, or something like that. Anyway... so they actually decided for 24 hours to have no traffic whatsoever in all of Sweden, and that was the day on which we arrived there... all the delegates. Now, that was really quite amusing, and I remember some Israelis who’d arrived by air, in Stockholm. I arrived from Copenhagen, across from Malmö, where a bus met us. You know, it's not a huge conference, it was one of the bigger ones. Every five years they have a bigger one. This was a quinquennial one, but still they had maybe 150 people, or something like that. And all the people who came from Copenhagen then crossed to Malmö, and then took a bus. That bus drove 25 mph and had a police car in front and back, and there were no other cars on the roads, so I don’t know what they got so excited about, but anyway. We had no problem, we were prepared for this. But then there were some Israelis who flew in from... to Stockholm... didn’t know about it, and said they got out there and they thought, war had broken out, you know, you can imagine in a city, absolutely not... there’s no traffic moving, I mean in a major city. And so that was the Ronneby conference.
And the reason why I was invited to it was they decided for the first time to add north-south agenda to it, and I decided to... that was my paper, based on my experience in Brazil, and Mexico, and Africa, and so on, and that was a very successful one. And then I was invited and went every year, for about 20 years, because Pugwash then, more and more dealt with these. And in 1969 I actually wrote one of the most important papers I’ve ever published, of 1000 or something papers, and it was called Birth Control after 1984, which was a prediction of  the direction in which birth control might go, or will go, should or should not go, unless we make certain policy decisions in the developed countries, which were never made and this is why, in fact, we do so little research now, and it’s one of these, I was proved right, but I’m very sorry I was proved right, I wish I was wrong... I had been wrong.
And that was in Sochi, in the Soviet Union, on the Black Sea, so that was a very unusual place, because that’s not a subject that was very much discussed in the Soviet Union at that time, and that also was a very successful one. And I learned a lot during those conferences, because for instance, the one in the Soviet Union, this was during the height of the Nigerian Civil War. I mean it was a slaughter, and yet the two sides, the Igbo, and the I forgot... the Hausa, or whoever it was, literally... some of them managed to get to Sochi, which is extraordinary, and there these two warring tribes met together and really spoke. And then a little bit later, at one of the Pugwash conferences, first in Austria, and then in Munich, and in other places, I witnessed, really the discussion between Arabs and PLO people, and Egyptians and Israelis, just as an example of this here.
And so I was involved for quite a number of years with this, and the last time I actually went... next to last time, was in 1982, when I really discontinued... that was in Warsaw. I discontinued because I really felt I had other priorities, I had so many other things to do, and I felt that to me the utility of Pugwash, well not exhausted, is much less important, because there are so many other ways now of having communications. I mean there was no need... I’m not even talking about the collapse of the Soviet Union. Even before then there were so many means of communicating by that time between Russia and the other eastern European countries, and the west, you didn’t need special places like Pugwash. In fact, they were, in some respects too private and too clumsy, so I stopped. But that was an extraordinary conference in 1982, because it was the first time in my life I was really gassed. It was tear gas, because that was the second anniversary of the Solidarity Movement, and there were some giant protests. At that time Poland was very communist, Stalinist communist, and a little of the conference was held just during the anniversary, and the Solidarity Movement had threatened to have some giant, sort of, protest, and the Pugwash people, the organisers, the Polish organisers, and the government were, of course, very concerned, and they’d arranged a tour that day to Copernicus’ birthplace, or something, I don’t know. Well, this is 100 miles away from Warsaw, so everyone was taken on this tourist trip to Warsaw, because during the week of Pugwash normally there was always one day, or half a day, of some social occasion. Well, they made that one the one. And I decided not to do this, and stayed behind, and got... didn’t want to get involved, but I ended up in really pretty hair raising... and being chased by, you know, water cannons, and police in gas masks, and so on, so that quite an experience. And that was my next to last one. Then I went to a Pugwash Conference, maybe 15 years later, in Norway, which was sort of, reminiscing, but I’d lost my own... not taste for it, because that would be unfair, but I think it was déjà vu for me.

So that gets us to the last topic, Degas’ horse. And Degas’ horse is simply a short catchword for my interest in art. Now I’m not an artist... in the visual artist sense. I am definitely an artist now, because my definition of art, in so far as the artists' colony creates a much broader... it involves, of course, creative writing, and music, and choreography, and I’m a writer, so I feel I’m certainly an artist in that context. But I’ve been an art collector ever since I was able to afford it, and that started in Mexico, when I was the second time there, from 1955 on, when I collected Pre-Columbian art, which I stopped, more or less, when it became illegal, in the '60s or '70s, in terms of exporting Pre-Columbian figures to the United States. And by the 1960s I started to have a serious art collection, and what interested... because I was able to afford it at that time, and of course, still it was considerably cheaper than it would be now, and I... what I was really interested in, and again it reflects my own bigamous, polygamous views, is to collect artists who cross two boundaries. Namely, sculptors who were also important painters, and important painters who were also sculptors. So, for example, some of the great ones, you know, Picasso, who most people call a great painter, but if he had never painted a single thing and just done his sculpture, he would have been a major sculptor.

There was a great Picasso show... a Picasso sculpture show, here in... London, in 1962, or 3. And the reason why I’m thinking about this, and again make one of these side steps, is that is probably where I realised that my marriage was going to pot, and that was a least a dozen years, if not more before I ever got divorced... 15 years. We were... we flew... we were on our way to Africa, to Uganda to the game parks, and... Kenya, but particularly Uganda I remember, at that time, and we stopped over in London for a couple of days, with my wife, my two children, and it was in July, and at the time of her birthday, which I think was July 2nd, if I’m not mistaken. And there was this great show, this Picasso sculpture show, and all four of us went, and were enormously impressed by the range of things that he did. And I remember my wife talking very... my second wife talking very movingly about this, and my daughter already had, sort of, indicated her real interest... she was the one who really... eventually a professional artist, a practicing artist in our family, in this, and we stood there at a small vitrine that had a series of Picasso bronzes from the post-war period, around 45 or so, which all were only about this size, and they were female figures, and there was one particularly that I liked, because you saw his thumb imprint obviously on the... wax, this was now the bronze cast. And most of these bronze casts were, sort of, an edition of five or something like that. And my wife was really taking about, look at this one, and so on, and suddenly I thought, her birthday will be in a few days, while we are in Uganda. What can you give someone in Uganda, and... I thought, gee, I wonder... I had no idea what Picasso’s cost, Picasso sculptures, and I looked and I saw in the catalogue that one said Gallery Berggruen, in other words it belonged to Berggruen. Most of them either belonged to museums, private collections, or maybe Picasso, but this said, Gallery Berggruen, and not Hans Berggruen... his private collection. I didn’t know him, but I had, sort of, heard of about the Berggruen Gallery, and eventually I got to know him quite well. So I went back to the hotel and managed to get his phone number in Paris, he is a Paris dealer. I called him the same day, out of the blue sky. He, of course, he didn’t know me from Adam, and I said: my name is Carl Djerassi. I just saw the Picasso exhibition, I saw that Picasso there, and it belongs to you. Is that for sale? And he said, 'Yes'. And I said, 'How much is that?', and he said... so, which was a manageable sum, or manageable for me, not that I had that much money with me there but I said I’d like to buy it, so would you reserve it for me? So he... he basically... he was very charming, but as I say, you know, basically, who are you, how do I know this is serious, and furthermore he said... and I told him I’d want to buy it for my wife’s birthday, and he said: well, you can’t obviously have it now, this in the... exhibition, and the Tate was going to run until... for another month or so, and then that entire thing was moving to the United States, to a museum, but at that point he would then... I could get it... after that.
So eventually, I forget how we left it, I would send him a cheque for $500, or $1,000, which I could there with the chequebook I had with me, which indicated he had nothing to lose by this, because he was not giving me the Picasso, but he knew that I was obviously serious. And then when I came to... when we came to Uganda, I still remember the Murchison Falls, it was my wife’s birthday and I gave her a card. I told it to my children, but not my... wife, I would surprise her, and I said, 'Happy birthday', or something like that, 'what every woman needs for her birthday is a Picasso sculpture'. And it was, I guess, a postcard or something that had that sculpture. And instead of, I don’t know, kissing me, or saying... or at least saying thank you, she looked at me and she said, 'You bought this for yourself'.

My wife took one look at... you know, not that she said it angrily, but there was an element of sharpness in there, which took me completely aback, and I felt that even if she had it, that would have been the time to hide it, because I thought it was a very charming gesture. And the interesting part is that when we got divorced 15 years later, and there was this very terrible divorce, and I mean, controversial and everything else, and we had to divide everything in half, and then came this... in this division there was this little... it was negligible compared to all the other things that were at stake, as I'll mention - the entire Paul Klee collection... She said, 'Well, this is mine'. I said, 'You forgot what you said that time. You felt I bought it for myself. This is community property. I have half of it'. So of course, then neither one of us ended up with it, and we donated it to the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, which was probably just as well, but I do remember that Picasso digression.

So I started collecting works of art... of sculptors, or also painters, and there was this very amusing thing to pick up that Picasso, because it’s only very small, and Berggruen's Gallery was in... in Rue de l’Université, on the Left Bank, in Paris. A very important gallery, he was one of the main dealers of Giacometti, Picasso, Klee particularly, he has a great Klee collection. And rather than ship it to me, which was a pain in the neck to ship, you know, sculptures... customs, and so on. You have to show that this is really... not that you have to pay customs, but you have to show it’s a real original, and stuff like that. But it was so small, I said, 'Look, I’ll be in Paris in a couple of months, I’ll pick it up'. I was there for a lecture, as a chemist, and I gave the lecture, and a friend of mine, a French chemist, who also was very knowledgeable about art, was with me, and I said, 'Look, I want to stop at Berggruen...' Berggruen was a very well known gallery, so I’m just saying that he knew that, '... to pick up something'. I said, 'Let’s go there, let’s see what they have there'. So we go there, and I always carry a little bag with me, in which I put my footstool, like a woman has a bag, and I said, 'I have to pick up something'. So we were there, and... and Berggruen by that time knew me, and he kept it there for me, so I just took the Picasso figure, and his mouth dropped open. You know, there he goes, picks himself up a Picasso, and just walks off with it, which really became... was over the years magnified in rumours, by people.

In my collecting phase at that time it was mostly in Paris. Galerie Maeght, which is one of the important Picasso... Giacometti dealers, and Giacometti was one of my absolute favourites, and there you had the example, the really prime example of a sculptor and painter. In fact, I bought an important oil, a Giacometti oil, from Berggruen, and I bought quite a number of... a number of bronzes from Galerie Maeght. And the Maeght one was again an example, where it was at an exhibition, and they had to ship it to me, to Stanford. And I remember being at Stanford during the day, and a lecture was given that evening about Giacometti, by Peter Selz. Peter Selz was at one time the chief curator of the Museum of Modern Art in New York... the author of a monograph on Giacometti. A very sophisticated and also very arrogant... and... very arrogant person... snobbish. And he gave this... so... and I wanted to go to that lecture, which was the usual five or six o’clock in the evening lecture, and I knew, of course, the people in the art department very well, and the chairman of the art department organised for this. He knew that I was a collector of Giacometti. Actually, so did Peter Selz, and he told me and I said, 'Yes, I'll come to it'.
Literally, on that day the Giacometti had arrived in my office. Now, that was one of the famous Diego Bronzes... Diego's face. These are now, that size, and of course, even if you’ve never heard of Giacometti you’d immediately recognise this as a Giacometti, it’s just one of the classical ones. And I was just absolutely tickled. Of course, I had to open it. Well, then I stuck it in my briefcase, because you don’t have to pack these up, it can’t break, or anything else, and I had only paper in my briefcase... it was still in the days of briefcase. So I decided to take it home inside my briefcase, but I first went to that lecture. So there I was sitting at the lecture, with a briefcase in which there was a Giacometti. Well, I hadn’t intended to show this to anyone, and he gives this lecture, and suddenly he shows a slide of my Giacometti, and I thought, you know, I should probably say, oh, and by the way, I happen to have that here, but I thought, no, they would all think I did it for effect, so of course I didn’t do this. But at the end of the lecture, I go, and there were a lot of people talking to him, and I go to the chairman of the department, whom I knew very well, and said... and I opened the briefcase and I said, 'Look into this', and he just looked in, and he nearly fell over and said, 'My God, why didn’t you say that?' I said, 'I can’t do that, it’s embarrassing', and he said, 'All right, look, we have a reception right now. Go quickly there ahead of time, and just put it on the table, and... and say nothing', you know. And it was really... so he came in and he really just headed straight for that, and it was really, actually very funny.

I was not in London, and that went on sale at Sotheby’s. It looked like a reasonable price, and Tom Stoppard’s wife at that time, Miriam Stoppard, used to bid for me here in London, when I was not here. She enjoyed that very much, and did it with real élan, but therefore the result is that on the... auction record it was bought by her, you know, then on... my behalf, so the records indicated that it was bought by Miriam... Miriam Stoppard. And then I said, keep it until I come to London. I was travelling a fair amount, I was not at that time living here, and again it was one of these things, you know, it's a horse. So it’s a bronze horse, it’s this size and it fits into an overnight bag, and again I was going to carry it in my overnight bag. It was a tricky thing about customs, because I wanted to eliminate the red tape with customs agents. I don’t mean customs inspectors, but then you need brokers, and stuff like this. Now, a sculpture like this is, of course tax deductible, this is a work of art, but the interesting part of the American rules, and I knew them perfectly well, is that only the first ten casts of a sculpture are tax deductible. A very unusual... not tax deductible, I mean not subject to duty, and the duty is significant, it’s something... I forgot... several per cent of the value of the sculpture, and when you’re talking about a Degas you’re talking about thousands of dollars, of course, even at that time. So the first ten are deductible, they are... in the case of Giacometti there’s no problem, he’s never done ten casts, he does five or six, and the same thing is true with most of Henry Moore, but for instance, it turns out to be the case with Degas, who always did 23 casts, and so I never knew that it means that if you have the 11th cast, you know, remember they’re numbered, so if you have the 11th cast you pay thousands of dollars of duty, and if you have the 10th cast you pay zero, which is of course ridiculous, because the value, if you bought them, they don’t charge you any more or less for the 11th or 10h cast, or the 22nd cast. But in addition, Degas does not number them, but letter them, so instead of one, two, three, four, five, it says, A, B, C, D, E, F, until you get to whatever it is, the 24rd letter, or 21st letter, because then another one is for the foundry, and that has, whatever the label is, fondue, or something like that, but then... and there... there’s one for the family, and that’s called... that’s labelled HER, for the heirs. That was my cast.
So now you could make an argument. Is that the last one or the first one? My argument would be, the family comes first, and then comes everything else. Someone else could say, well, first they go from A to S, or T, and then comes finally the... the riffraff. Well anyway, later I was preparing myself for this, but just carried it with me, and I said, I’m not even going to mention it.

I was at that time flying via Washington. I was going to a National Academy meeting. So I land in Washington, I have this... just a little bag in my hand, otherwise I checked the luggage. I go through the line, and this was, of course, in the pre-inspection, not like today. It was slowly moving, and finally the man came and said, 'Anything to declare?' I said, 'N... no'. But the way I said it, you know, not really, you know, these people are very good. He said, 'Nothing?' Well, I said, 'Nothing, just a piece of art'. He said... how do you say, because it was very clever, he said... I think I have it here because it’s such a funny story. Let me see whether I... 'Nothing to declare; how long were you in London?' I hesitated a couple of seconds before answering. 'Nothing', he repeated, 'you didn’t buy anything?' My airline bag was sitting next to my suitcase on a low platform between us. I put my hand on my bag, a protective gesture. 'Buy anything?' I echoed. 'Oh, I did buy something, but nothing to declare. It’s just an art object', I added, silently apologising to Degas in his grave. 'I see', the agent nodded, as if he’d expected just this answer, 'And what did you pay for it?' Realizing that the time for off-handedness had passed, I mentioned the non-trivial five digit sum I paid, and mumbled 'guineas'. His face showed no surprise. You see I picked guineas, because that would be the... the smallest number. At that time I think it was probably $4 to the pound, and guineas was 10% more than the dollars, so the sum, the actual number sounded smaller even though the value was bigger. His face showed no surprise, nor did he pursue the question of currency, he didn’t even ask the nature of the art object. He stroked his chin. 'Are you an art dealer?' 'No', I replied quickly, 'I’m only a collector'. Impassive, he pursued, 'And what do you collect'? My left index finger slowly traced the outline of the bronze horse in the thin airline bag. I felt like a defendant, who knows that each answer would lead to further questions. 'Art', I said. I said, 'Art', I said. 'I understand that', replied the inspector, with limitless patience. 'Whose art?' Whose art, he was after all no simpleton, but what did he know about art? I considered murmuring Picasso’s, although I owned only one of his sculptures, and a rather minor one at that. With our two children, my second wife and I had visited the Tate Gallery's great Picasso retrospective, in 1967, and we stood, overwhelmed and euphoric in front of it. Well, here I’m telling, I’m calling this... telling this story about it here. I didn’t tell any of this to the customs inspector, I decided to test, rather than impress him. 'Klee', I said, pronouncing it the correct German way, as C-l-a-y, figuring that would separate... separate the potters among the inspectors, from the cognoscenti. 'Paul Klee', he exclaimed, a smile stealing over his face, 'my favourite. Have you been to the Phillips collection here in DC?', he continued. 'If you haven’t, you should see their Klees'.
It turned out that I’d picked the principal art specialist among the Washington customs inspectors. His primary function was the evaluation of important art imports, especially to local dealers and collectors, whom he mentioned, and some of whom I knew. He was serving temporarily as backup to some regular inspectors at Washington’s Dulles Airport. For several minutes we exchanged Klee lore. 'The most intellectual painters are among the most verbal', I proclaimed, oblivious of the passengers waiting behind me. 'Can you think of anyone else who would use a title like, Two Men Meet, Each Thinking the Other is of Higher Rank [sic]' one of the great ones that I own. I mentioned that I’d bought several Klees from Berggruen's Gallery in Paris, and when the inspector nodded understandingly I pointed to my bag. 'Don’t you want to see this?' 'Don’t bother', he smiled, 'I better take care of these passengers. Enjoy DC', he waved me on, 'and don’t forget to stop at the Phillips'.
So this is why I decided to pick that for the real story, even though Degas was an exception, in a way, because the really important thing were Klee, which I really collected since that time, and have collected ever since, Paul Klees.

In the 1980s I sold my entire collection. It was an extremely traumatic event, because I really loved these, but the artist colony, which I’d founded on... in response to my daughter’s suicide, to run it was a much more expensive thing than I thought. You know, it was basically a question of either continuing it and expanding it, or doing something with my art collection, and I really basically said, I can do nothing for dead artists. I can do nothing if I collect for Picasso, or Degas, or anyone else, whereas we are supporting living artists, forgetting even that the reason was my daughter, but even all the artists who were coming there, and I simply... By that time I had married Diane, and she convinced me that this was also the right thing to do. So I did this in some auctions at Sotheby’s and Christie’s. It was very traumatic. I had a fantastic Henry Moore, deep in the woods, my ranch. I thought it would never leave that place; it was so difficult to get it there, deep in the woods, and all that just went out from one day to another. The only thing I never sold were the Klees, because I... that was a separate thing, and I knew that I would leave them anyway, to the museum in the end.
So that was, sort of, the story about Klees, and Picassos, and Giacomettis, and so on, in this particular chapter on, on Degas’ Horse. I then did a bit more about it in this last memoir, how I... This Man’s Pill, where I really wrote about how the pill had changed me, and also some of the effects of it, and while I wrote primarily about cultural, and scientific, and sociological ones. I also said that, in a way that’s how I became a writer, that’s how I became an art collector. An art collector, because I could then afford to collect art, and a writer because I really changed my teaching very much at Stanford as a result of the work of the pill, and realising that the socio-biological aspects of it are much more important than just the scientific one, and that you have to find ways of communicating with the broader public, and I became interested in using means other than just ordinary lectures, but rather novels, and eventually plays. But so I described... here’s a chapter, which is called The Pill and Paul Klee, and you think that’s a fairly esoteric connection, and I told a story here, which I have not told in this one here, and I think it’s probably just as well to end this entire thing on that note, because it is... A, it’s amusing, but it has a touch of drama, and it deals with something that I’ve... that is very close to me. I mean the Klees are just extraordinarily important, and I still collect Klee. So I started that chapter in the following way, and I’m just literally going to read this.

On July 30, 1985, a San Francisco Chronicle front page article bore the headline, Six Stolen San Francisco Museum Drawings Found. At that time, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, commonly known as SFMOMA, had not yet moved to its elegant new quarters, south of Market Street. It still occupied the top two floors of the War Memorial Building, next door to the San Francisco Opera. Its main entrance facing Golden Dome City Hall, across Van Ness Avenue. The War Memorial’s ground floor entrance hall is a rather grand space, and is occasionally rented out for anniversary celebrations, weddings, and other private functions. On the less fashionable side of the street, SFMOMA faces some apartment buildings, one of them the abode of a 19 year old psychology student, attending San Francisco State University. When an art student friend from out of town paid him a visit, his host suggested they crash a private party, then in progress, in the War Memorial’s foyer. 'You know, being a student with no money, it’s an easy way to get food and drink', the newspaper quoted him, 'so me and my friend went over'. According to the thief, the reception was saving the champagne and food until later, so they started to get drunk on vodka and grapefruit juice. Some people get sleepy when drunk, others belligerent, but some art lovers evidently turn curious. 'We wanted to see what the museum looked like in a different light', the instigator confessed, so they climbed the rear steps to the top floor, and pulled on the door until 'it just popped open'.
Even now 15 years later, I get weak-kneed when I visualise that scene. 'I hadn’t seen Paul Klee'... quote again. This is this... in the newspaper, quoting the art student. 'I hadn’t seen Paul Klee for a long time, so we went over to where his paintings are', said the discriminating burglar, 'but it was dark, pitch dark. So we took four off the wall, to the hallway, so we could look at them. On the way out we passed some Picasso's. Oh my God', he said, 'Picasso, let’s take two of them'. Unbeknown to the drunks, they’d set off a silent alarm, but by the time the private security personnel had come to check, the thieves were gone with six drawings under their coats. The Keystone Cops working for the firm, who I trust has since fired them, found nothing amiss.
Around 3 am the two Klee kleptomaniacs had started to sober up and panicked. Deciding to return the stolen drawings, they made the return trip across the street with the four Klee's and two Picasso's under their coats, but found the front doors hermetically locked. Upon reading in the morning newspaper about the value of their loot, and the magnitude of the sentence they were facing, the younger of the now cold sober pair, left the artworks in a cardboard box, on the third level of a downtown parking garage, and called the police.
The story was rather funny, in a slapstick sort of way, except to the embarrassed museum officials, and the pained owner of the purloined art. The owner is me, and what has the pill to do with all this?  The answer is simple. The money that made possible the purchase of those Klee drawings, and well over 100 hundred others that have been shown in numerous Klee exhibitions at SFMOMA, all came from the pill. Not directly of course', and then, etc. But it was a very amusing story, and it was an actually quite superb one, and he had good taste the man who... who stole these.

In fact it is so good that I’ll show it to you. Because here is the... here is a book of my Klee collection, from an exhibition that went to Europe, and... and the one that they stole was one of the... one of the great... great ones that hardly anyone would recognise as a Klee. It’s ridiculous; it’s the usual business, you, you go... I thought it was 1927, but it is... well, maybe it was 1922? Ah, here it is, 19... 1924. You’d never recognise it as a Klee, but it’s a really superb one, and that illustrates more than anything else why I’m so enamoured by Klee, because Klee also numbered... he dated and numbered each work. So if it’s 1924, you know it was there, and then he says, 1924, 218, which means that’s the 218th work he did that year. Now, if you look at this. I’m sorry, that can’t be... that’s a mistake, I think it is... well, maybe it’s 218.
Here are two works, and they are 255 and 256, which means he did them within a couple of months of this. Who would ever believe this, which is an oil transfer drawing, and is therefore black and white, and it’s not colour, so this is not a black and white reproduction, that’s what it really looks like, and this is this technique that he developed, which is very different? Who would have thought that this, let’s say, oriental girl, or this one, which is an old man, which is this wonderful juxtaposition, was painted within a few weeks of this, that the same person would do that, and that to me is really just... Well, I’ll show you another illustration, because these are... these are really my... my real favourites. Here’s one, and here would be the... this is a portrait; one of the few portraits where you can actually recognise the person and this is Josephine Baker, in 1927.  And look at this, who would think that this is a Klee? And then you, you know, you look at another portrait. This is a self-portrait here, so it’s... I mean the difference is just extraordinary. I mean you... this you would perhaps recognise, so no wonder this is my... Even that one I like so much, because this is a skier, and you know, skiing was both my nemesis and my pleasure, since I still do it, with a stiff leg now, so this looks more like a stiff legged skier here, not doing very well, but you know, it’s...

In a way it should have occurred to me, but it didn’t, so it’s in answer to a very specific question that you asked, about my being Jewish. The question is, of course, what does that mean, and why am I prepared to answer this question now, after really having talked for so long? It’s because that is going to be the subject of my next play, so therefore it isn’t as if it were something past. On the contrary, it is exactly what preoccupies me, and I have written about it in three different ways. I wrote an entire chapter in this autobiography in a very peculiar way, by entitling it the search... The Quest for Alfred E Newman. Most people don’t even know who Alfred E Newman was, except, sort of, Americans who knew about this magazine, Mad magazine, which was published for about 30 or 40 years, and it’s now stopped, and always had a face on it. He was called Alfred E Newman, and the question is, who was he? And so that’s how I wrote about it there. Then I wrote an entire novel, which is called Menachem's Seed, so I used as Jewish a name as I could find, and I’ll just show you what that looks like, because that’s also important.
So this is my real Jewish novel, and yet... So these are the hard back and the... and it’s interesting that the covers seem to have nothing to do with it. The cover, which is a very sophisticated one, was a Leonardo De Vinci drawing, in... in Queen Elizabeth... in the Queen’s collection. One of his famous anatomical drawings, which is called Coition, and is really his view of the anatomy of the penis and the vagina, and instead of using this for the paperback, Penguin used in this instance a famous Dutch painting of Solomon and the Queen of Sheba, because this story... I mean the novel... the first sentence: What he doesn’t know about the Queen of Sheba isn’t worth knowing. That's Menachem Dvir she asks in a low voice, white beard and glasses, it does look like a biblical scholar. No, le Guru whispered back. Unlike a subject of their conversation, the Frenchman was one of the few participants without a nametag. He didn't need one. Everybody at the Pugwash Conference knew who le Guru was. That’s one of the Russians, Dvir is the other one. 
So it starts, but it is in fact dedicated to an Israeli who is now dead, and you see there to Shalhevet Freier, and he was the head of the Atomic Energy Commission, and a number of other things, in Israel, and was the Israeli representative at many of the Pugwash Conferences. And it is really my novel about Pugwash, in a way, but also about the rapprochement at... rapprochement is wrong, but the beginning conversations between Palestinians and... and Israelis, so I wrote it here. And... and what I describe here is really how many of the European secular Jews, secular Jews, refugees, either denied their Jewishness or did not volunteer it, but they never flaunted it. During that time when they came there was tremendous insecurity. I even had it, even though I did not suffer, in the context of having escaped a concentration camp, but only the Nazi events, and was able to get out a few months later, so it was not yet at the height of the... of the worst murders. But, nevertheless, I didn’t volunteer it, I did not deny it. I have friends of mine from Europe, who to this day do not... will... will not mention it. They will not say they’re not Jewish, but the subject is taboo, they will not discuss it.

And then there are those who then later, not only start thinking about it, come to terms with it, but then flaunt it, and in some respects I fall into this category. Although my flaunting is flaunting in the context of only making the point that I want them to know that I’m Jewish, and that’s particularly true in my present mode of having had some form of reconciliation with my Austrian childhood, but I want them to be perfectly plain that the person who is willing to meet them partway is a Jew, and not anything else, and that they kicked me out. And whenever... in these many lectures I give, and I'm always being introduced now, and then the German, let's say the Austrian Government gave him... gave him citizenship, and medals, and... left in 1938, and I always interrupt, even though I left in '38, of course they know what it is, I was kicked out. Please, get it straight. I want no, you know, embellishment of this term. That’s why I was pleased in the stamp that I showed you, that they admitted it... it was their choice, I was kicked out.
But the question what does that mean, what does Jewishness mean to someone who is not religious, so it has to be something else? And... and that... that’s complicated and it takes a long time, and the play that I’m working on now, by working... I haven’t started it, well, I've written a few things, but I’m still doing a lot of reading, and I will do much more reading during the next few months, because I’ve just put the finishing touches on my last play Taboos, which really will come out soon, as it’s now been finished. The name of the play is called Benjamin’s Grip. Grip, G-r-i-p, as a pseudonym for a briefcase, rather than the other meanings of the word grip, handgrip, or something like that, and I purposely pronounce it the German way. I mean when you read it, anyone in England or America would call it Benjamin’s Grip, but his name was Walter... Walter, not Walter, Walter Benjamin, because he was a German from... from Berlin, and one of the most important literary critics of the last century. His entire fame and everything was posthumous. No book of his had been published prior to his death. Articles, of course, had been published, but not books, and since then you have collected works that are 16 volumes, and he hadn’t seen these, and some of the great minds, Hannah Arendt, and other people, were very much involved in Jewishness, and so on, and also had these mixed histories. All were part of that circle, or he and she were in fact even related... cousins.
I want to write about him, and about his last year when he committed suicide. Again, also a German suicide, so of course it’s so important. And all the characters but one, or at least I think that one will be in there, are Jewish, but one is Bertold Brecht, who also was a person with whom he had a lot of dealings. And all of these... well, with one exception, Gerschom Scholem, were German Jews who were more German than the Germans, and either denied, or wanted to forget their Jewishness, and he was one of them. Benjamin, Adorno, and so on, all fell into this category, and they’ll all be characters in there, because the ultimate... even though that’s not a dramatic... and you can’t build a play necessarily around this, but the theme of it is just that: what does it mean to be Jewish to those people, who were brought up in a culture, which clearly was not Jewish culture, to which they contributed enormously, but in fact contributed as Jews to that? That outsider status was very crucial for them to make that particular contribution, cultural contribution, and there are lots of people like that. Stefan Zweig would be a very good example, and then he also committed suicide after he left. In this case Benjamin's was no different.
So I... it’s a subject that is very... very much in ferment. I don’t think that I can really make it very plain as yet. I don’t know that I ever will, because it has so little to do with religion, or essentially nothing to do with religion, and to define that... that characteristic is not easy. What is also ironic, and you see this in my fiction; in every fiction, in one way or another, not deliberately, there’s always a male character or two that are always Jewish. None of the women are Jewish, and that’s perhaps also an example; none of my three wives were Jewish, and yet two of them, number two and number three... I shouldn’t call them that way, although I call my wife, my present wife, sometimes, la ultima, meaning both that she’s the ultimate in every respect, including the last one also. But are very interested in this, and in some respects know more, or read more into it than I do, but it’s... I think I’ll probably leave it at that, and it is interesting that in all my life, the early stages, and now, I always am curious when I meet someone, whether is there a question, frequently there’s not, but they could have said, is he Jewish. And I am more interested in that question than, is she Jewish? So the question is why, and I think it is because I always considered it more threatening, the undertone after all, that curiosity is invariably... the worst overt anti-Semites were men, although it’s probably not true, that fundamentally it could also be women that were, I don’t know, concentration guards, and so on, but on the whole, and that is particularly the real evil, the physical evil, was mostly male, and I think there’s something behind that.
