danny.hillis

W Daniel Hillis (b. 1956) is an American inventor, scientist, author and engineer. While doing his doctoral work at MIT under artificial intelligence pioneer, Marvin Minsky, he invented the concept of parallel computers, that is now the basis for most supercomputers.  He also co-founded the famous parallel computing company, Thinking Machines, in 1983 which marked a new era in computing.    In 1996, Hillis left MIT for California, where he spent time leading Disney’s Imagineers. He developed new technologies and business strategies for Disney's theme parks, television, motion pictures, Internet and consumer product businesses.    More recently, Hillis co-founded an engineering and design company, Applied Minds, and several start-ups, among them Applied Proteomics in San Diego, MetaWeb Technologies (acquired by Google) in San Francisco, and his current passion, Applied Invention in Cambridge, MA, which 'partners with clients to create innovative products and services'.    He holds over 100 US patents, covering parallel computers, disk arrays, forgery prevention methods, and various electronic and mechanical devices (including a 10,000-year mechanical clock), and has recently moved into working on problems in medicine. In recognition of his work Hillis has won many awards, including the Dan David Prize.

Let's begin with my parents. My father grew up in Arkansas during the great depression and that was sort of formative for him. They were very poor and he always worried a lot about money because of that. He was raised a lot by his grandmother because his mother was very young when she had him and his grandmother was very assertive. So I still remember his grandmother, nana, who was born in the 1800s kind of calling the shots.
And his mother was a twin. I called her Jane because we played a game called 'Me Tarzan, You Jane' and I insisted that she was Jane, I was Tarzan. And so for her whole like I called her Jane. And she was very different than my other grandmother who grew up in Oklahoma. So my other grandmother was a writer and she wrote bestsellers about women alone on the prairie, feeling very lonely and isolated, and she was quite progressive. She was one of the original members of the committee on racial equality back when that was a very suspect, sort of almost communist, thing in people's minds.
So people were sort of outraged and they did things like burn crosses on her lawn and she was married... Her husband, my grandfather, was an engineer. That's really where I came from. He was my only exposure to an engineer, he was the only engineer I knew. But he had a slide rule and he taught me how to use it. And he actually left me his slide rule, it's the oldest possession that I have. I've somehow managed to keep it through all moves and evacuations and things like that. But he was a petroleum engineer for the Philips Petroleum Company.
My grandmother was very literary, and it's funny listening to my... So they both ended up in this small town in Oklahoma, Bartlesville. And both ended up working for oil companies. But my father's mother was, I would say, more typical of the town in terms of her political views and so it's very interesting listening to her descriptions of my maternal grandmother. Of how liberal she was. She did things like have parties where people sat on pillows on the floor and ate sandwiches cut into triangles with the crusts cut off. And they're still talking about that in Bartlesville.
But she was definitely very active in the civil rights movement. And in fact when World War II happened she wrote a letter to the New York Times complaining about the internment of Japanese Americans in the concentration camps that the United States had and saying it was wrong. And for years and years she got hate mail from people who thought that she was pro Japanese and anti-American. And she always read it and she always tried to answer it, and for her, that was just her way.
And she was quite a good writer and she actually made money during the depression writing the little notes on the inside of greeting cards for Hallmark. They had a little poem or whatever that says Happy Birthday and I think she got paid 15c a piece for those. But that was a significant source of income for her. And at some point when one of her books became a bestseller, a book called Root out of Dry Ground. Her publisher flew her to Boston, and she got to go to Boston for the first time. And my mother loved Welsh poetry, but she'd only seen one book of it. And so my grandmother went to the Boston public library and copied down, by hand, volumes of Welsh poetry from the Boston public library to bring it back to my mother in Bartlesville.
So she was quite a remarkable woman. There's lots of stories about her and I've always thought I got a lot from her. Her grandmother had actually been one of the first women in America to get a PhD in mathematics. So I probably got my mathematical ability through that line.

Certainly my parents... my mother was the more mathematical. My father was a doctor. He'd gone to medical school because the people in his church had actually taken up a collection to help send him off to medical school.
And so he and my mother met in Bartlesville, they married very young, and moved to Baltimore for him to go to medical school where they had me. So I was born in Baltimore where my mother worked as a secretary to help put my father through medical school, and he studied and became a pathologist. But he was a natural healer, too. I mean, he was one of these people who made patients want to get better. And he always had his little black bag. So later when we travelled all over the world, since he was the doctor in the community, people would come knocking at our door at all hours of the night and he would get his little black bag and his stethoscope and he'd go off and take care of people.
And it was funny because of course we would get sick too, but during my whole childhood he never took out his little black bag, no matter how sick we were. And I began to realise this little black bag was really more for show than actually helping him be a doctor.

We had a very close family. When I was very young my father graduated medical school and went to Denmark to study virology. And so my brother and sister were actually born in Denmark. And I grew up actually speaking Danish. I spoke Danish to children, I spoke English to adults. In fact even apparently up when I came back to the United States I spoke Danish to children and English to adults. But if you ever listen to young children talk, they don't really listen to each other much, so it worked fine.
And so my brother and sister... My first memory was of the birth of my brother. And being... It was the first time I had been away from my mother. And she was in the hospital and I wasn't allowed to see her. And I sat with my teddy bear, I had a teddy bear Pooh, and I still remember in great detail... I remember sitting on a stairway in Denmark, we had a house that had two floors, and my brother was being born, must have been two-and-a half or something like that. And sitting there alone, probably for the first time I'd really been much time alone. And with Pooh. And I remember looking at Pooh and looking at Pooh's eyes and realising that Pooh was looking at me like I was looking at Pooh.
And this moment of sort of revelation that there were other people in the world, that each had their own point of view, and I was just one of them. If that makes any sense. That I was in the world. The world wasn't me but I was just something that was in the world. Just like Pooh was in the world. And being very... not frightened by it, but very surprised by it. I know that sounds like a strange thing to understand but that's my first memory, is understanding that. I'm understanding that Pooh had a different perspective on things than I did. And so that was probably an important moment in my intellectual development. It was important enough that I've always remembered it.

So I lived a very happy childhood. My family was very close, my brothers and sisters were very close. And my father studied hepatitis. So every time there was an epidemic some place we would rush off and live in strange parts of the world. So I remember the first was Africa. But before we went to Africa we had to go down to Louisiana where chimpanzees were, to the Delta Primate Centre. And I lived in rural Louisiana for a while while they learnt to operate on chimpanzees and studied chimpanzees.
And I had a... So I have lots of memories of Louisiana then. And that was the days when segregation was still very common in the South and may parents told me it was wrong.

So I went to school, I was in second grade then. And I went to school with a teacher named Mrs Catherine who was full of all kinds of wonderful misinformation like if you breathe in really deeply every day you would live for ten years longer. Or she told us the story about the person... you could sometimes smell the paper mill in Bogalusa and she told us about... the story about the guy who fell into the vat of acid and they pulled him out and he was just a skeleton.
She was very nice, but she also said that... We had Cajuns around, and she explained that the Cajuns were one third Indian, one third black and one third French. And I remember thinking, I knew enough about genetics then, to try to figure out how you get a third out of halves. And calculating and sort of realising, it was my first... I guess I sort of figured out infinite series and I realised that no matter how many halves you took of something you could never get to a third. So there was no way that could be true, and trying to explain that to her and having her just be totally baffled.

But one of the things they did in Louisiana is we had these little double desks. And so they paired people. And since I was only temporary, I got paired with a kid who hadn't been paired, who was a mentally retarded kid named Johnny. And there were probably about 30 kids in our class. And it was actually pretty good because I could do my work and then I could help Johnny do his work. And so I became friends with Johnny because nobody else would be friends with Johnny.  And it was actually really sad because, I know this sounds unbelievable, but they passed a rule while I was in this rural school that during the middle of the year, that everybody had to wear shoes to school. It was a new rule. And Johnny would come with his... He only had Sunday shoes which were polished black shoes. And he would carry them with him, he was afraid of getting them scuffed. And the teacher, Mrs Catherine, didn't make him put them on, which at the time I thought missed the point of the rule, but I now understand it much better. So all the other kids had to put on their shoes but Johnny was allowed to carry his shoes which he was very afraid of getting scuffed. But he had to have shoes with him.
And there was... Some of the kids were very poor so there was a federally subsidised lunch, for 25c a week you could get lunch every day. And so we would line up and we would each pay our quarter on Monday morning. And she would check it off and she would always, when Johnny would stand in line, she would always take a quarter out of her pocket and put it in and check it. And I remember noticing that, but she would do it very quietly so... But she'd let him stand in line and do the whole...  And then sometimes he would come with like black eyes and things like that. And I now realise he was physically abused by his father. He was very frightened by his father but at the time I didn't understand. So she felt, you know, she knew what was going on, I'm sure.
But Johnny followed me around because I was nice to him and he did everything I did. And I was sort of the new kid so I wasn't particularly friends with the other kids and we'd go out and play in the woods and there were actually woods around the school in those days, in Covington, Louisiana. And so... 'the glen' we called it, a bunch of pine trees. And we'd go out and play and Johnny would always follow me.

And actually going back, I remember even earlier, a couple of years before, Kennedy had been assassinated. So this was the second school I'd gone to. Let me go back to the first school I had been to which was Hearthstone Elementary School which was a private school, it was a very good school. And I would actually take the public bus through San Antonio to get to Hearthstone.
And I would take it in as a six year old, take the public bus, and it went to first grade and the beginning of second grade there. And I remember when I was in first grade coming in one day from recess and the grownups were crying. And I had never seen grownups cry before. And I asked what happened, and they said, 'The president has been shot.' And we had just seen... The president had just come by our school the day before. It was in Texas, in San Antonio, and he'd come to San Antonio right before going to Dallas.
And eventually they cancelled school and we went home. And in those days there were only like three television channels, and all the television channels were just showing over and over again the footage of Kennedy being shot. Like nobody could believe that. And that went on for several days until the funeral and so it was sort of a big event in my life. And so it's not surprising that anybody kind of my age remembers when Kennedy was shot. It was also kind of a... It was kind of a change in the whole feeling of America, I think, when that happened.

When the new election came along, I was in... We had moved to Louisiana in preparation for going to Africa. And there was an election, and in Louisiana segregation was a big issue. So I went... I would ride in a school bus in St. Tammany Parish for a long ride, I would go past the black school to the white school. And my parents explained to me that that was wrong but that wasn't the general opinion in St. Tammany Parish. It was probably illegal even then.
And so before the election they called us all into the auditorium and they said, 'We just want you to go home and tell your parents what the election is about because if Johnson gets elected then the Negros are going to come to our school. But if Goldwater gets elected they won't.' And then just to make sure we got the message they said, 'So, how many of you are going to tell your parents to go and vote for Goldwater?' And almost everybody raised their hand. And then they said, 'How many of you are going to tell your parents to vote for Johnson?' And I raised my hand, and this little mentally retarded boy Johnny who did everything I did, he raised his hand. And we were the only ones.
And then after they let out, there was recess, and the kids took us behind the school by the garbage container and beat both of us up. I didn't realise I was doing anything brave when I raised my hand but... So that was my first experience with politics. And I was very surprised by it and I think Johnny was too. So... But it made me even more determined about my position at that point.

Then we went to Africa. We went to the Congo. And things were a little bit too hot in the Congo so we waited in Kenya while my father went out and my mother was very worried. But eventually we decided things were okay and we went into the Congo and that was one of the most glorious times of my life. I've never felt so close to a place as I did living on Lake Kivu. Really out in the middle of nowhere.
The... I went to a missionary school, a Belgian school. The school was horrible. I had a terrible Belgian teacher name Madame Dujacquier and it was all in French and I didn't speak French, or not very much French. And again, we sat in like double seats that had ink wells in them. For, you know, dipping pens. And... which they still had back in those days. And there was all the kids in the school were African, were Congolese, except for there was one little girl, Rachid, who was Belgian. And she sat right in front of me. And she had long blond braided... And I would just sit there thinking about dipping her hair in the inkwell. Which I never did.
But every time I mispronounced a French word I would have to hold out my hand, and Madame Dujacquier would take a ruler and slap my hand. And so to this day I cringe whenever I try to speak French because I still remember, you know, that slap of mispronouncing a French word. And it's really a block for me. I've lived... I've lived in Paris twice now and I really have difficulty getting a French word out of me because I still get that cringe.
But I spoke French well enough to go to school, and every day I would walk to school through the jungle, our house was about a mile and a half away from the school. And it was... some of it was through kind of woods and fields, and some of it was through little villages. And we'd stop and watch, I remember watching a goat getting born. I remember there was this one area where there were giant spiders between banana trees, that made these huge webs that would actually catch small birds. And, you know, amazing snakes and all kinds of animals and the children that didn't go to school and who I would play with on the way.
And my parents would let me walk to school and I would bring my little brother with me. My little sister was too young to go to school but... And take him through the jungle, I was supposed to take care of my little brother. And I remember a great sense of responsibility, walking through. But you know, this was like a war going on. And they would let me, as an eight year old, take my little brother off there.
And when I looked back at it I couldn't believe this was true. And I always wanted to look to see if the school was really as far away as I thought. But it's an area that was often cloudy, and so when Google Maps came out I would always look for that area but it was one of the last places on earth that they got an uncloudy shot of. And then finally after years of it being up they managed to get an uncloudy shot of that area and I can see my house, I can see the school. And I really... And I saw all the things I walked by and my memory was not exaggerated. It really was a long walk. But in those days that's just what kids did, they walked to school.

I had very, very fond memories of walking to school or we lived in the jungle where everything grew. We had dozens and dozens of gardeners whose job was just to chop back stuff  from our yard to keep it from...They would mow the lawn with machetes, cutting with machetes, and sometimes I would go to the machete shack and get machetes and I wasn't really allowed to but I would go cut my own path. I remember cutting my thumb. I've still got a little scar from cutting my thumb with a machete.
I remember climbing up in the guava trees and eating guavas, watching... The guava tree was right next to the road, watching people walking by in the road. They didn't see me up in the guava tree, and eating guavas.

And I had a friend who was a pygmy who lived... We sort of had jungle and I had... He was a very little tiny man, he was like my size. And I don't know what language he spoke but he lived in our yard. But in a hidden way. And we had plantans and he made a little fire and he taught me how to... He would cook plantans in the fire and open the up and taught me how to do that and eat them. I would go visit him and he would teach me little things about the jungle.
And then I would always talk about my little friend. And later I found out that people didn't really believe in my little friend. That there was just a little man living off of the jungle. But he made little charms for me and I would catch lizards and these beautiful multi-coloured iguanas and things like that and he would make little charms out of feathers and lizards and things like that which were very frightening to the other people around. I remember bringing one of these into the house and having like the cook and the – had lots and lots of servants in the house – and them all screaming and running away from my little charm that he'd made for me. So he, yes, he had some kind of magic ju-ju that made them very frightened.

So it was just beautiful. And when we... Everything grew. Our bedrooms opened out into the yard and we would sneak out at night and eat strawberries and peaches and things like that that we'd just have little picnics outside. And the floor of the jungle would glow with some kind of fungus or something like that. It was just the most beautiful place I've ever lived. And of course we were always trying to fight back things growing. So I remember once the gardeners, they tried to get the gardeners to make a fence so they cut sticks to make a fence, to fence off the vegetable garden. And then the next morning we came and the fence had sprouted blooms. All these sticks had taken root. I still remember the smell and of all the places I've lived on Earth that was one of the most wonderful.

I also... It's a little bit frightening because there was a war going on and there were several times where somebody would come driving down the dirt road, usually a Land Rover which was the preferred vehicle... We had a little VW Bug, a Beetle. But other people had Land Rovers. And they would come down and run into the house and talk to my parents and my parents would say, we have to evacuate, the soldiers are coming. And we would drive across the border to Rwanda, Burundi, sometimes all the way to Kenya, and wait it out. And then would come back after things were a little bit better.
And that just became kind of a habit. But my parents were very worried, they didn't tell us much about it. And then I remember the last time that it happened I kind of realised it was the last time. My parents I think were more frightened and they were like... I think they maybe told us just grab... Because they said, get in the car right away, and we had these little cardboard suitcases. And I remember looking around and realising this is probably the last time I was going to be in this beautiful place that I loved so much. And the place was near enough to these volcanoes in the Rwenzori that you could see the volcanoes glowing at night sometimes and there was lava all over the place. So I picked up a piece of lava off the driveway and I had a pet chameleon. And I picked up my pet chameleon and I got into the car with my chameleon and my lava. And my brother and sister got in the car, and I remember knowing like we were leaving forever. We had all these beautiful things that people had made for us in the jungle, all these toys and things like that, we just abandoned everything.

And we drove out of the country and all of the road blocks that normally are like at the border and things like that, people had abandoned them. And we drove across to Rwanda, or to Kigali Airport, and arrived at Kigali and there was one plane, one little Cessna sitting on the runway. And my parents talked to the pilot of the plane who was about to fly out of there, and the pilot said, 'I can't take you all. You know, there's not enough room in the plane. I can only take four people. And I'm one of them.' And my parents begged with him, that my little sister was very small, that my sister could sit on my mother's lap, and my brother... So they convinced him to put five people on the plane because my sister sat... And so we left behind my father.
And I sat up next to the pilot and as we took off that little runway in Kigali the pilot started swearing. I'd never heard swearing like that, I didn't know what the words meant but I could tell what was going on. And he was so angry. And I didn't know why. Because he'd sort of had this argument about taking people, you know, fitting an extra person in the plane and things like that. So I didn't know why he was so angry. But the idea was he was supposed to fly us to Bujumbura and then go back and get my father. Well, we flew out, and then when we landed in Bujumbura he pointed to the plane, there were bullet holes in the plane. So when we had taken off, I hadn't seen it, but there were people with guns shooting at the plane as he took off in the airport, that's why he was swearing. And so he refused to go back to get my father. And I guess we had known that my... He might, you know, not be able to go back to get my father because we'd worked out that my father was going to go back to the consulate in Bukavu and stay there with some people that we knew.
And so my father did take the VW back across the border, went back to Bukavu where the consulate was, which turns out was the CIA. I didn't know that at the time. I don't know if he knew it or not, but he probably did. I don't know. But the CIA was heavily involved in the Congo at the time. And then we went on to Bujumbura, and by the time we arrived in Bujumbura everybody had abandoned Bujumbura. So we were... The house we were supposed to stay at, the people had left. So we broke into the house, literally broke in to stay in this abandoned house while we waited for my father. And my mother was very upset. And you know, she... Of course I didn't really... I wasn't really frightened that my father would not be okay because your parents are immortal when you're eight years old. But my mother was, I think justifiably, worried that we didn't hear from him.

And then at some point we got news that my father... That the people that my father had gone to stay with had been killed. That they'd gone and they'd try to talk to one of the tribes that was friends and they had gotten killed. Or at least they'd disappeared and they'd found their passports with blood on them. And in fact they had gotten killed. But we didn't know where my father was, but yes, we got word that the people he was with...
So my mother was really worried. And she... So I felt like my job was to keep my brother and sister calm and take care of them, but at some point there was a lot of tension. My chameleon who I used to go out and catch crickets for, I couldn't find any crickets in Bujumbura, it was very... So I let him wander around trying to find his own food. And I fell asleep and he disappeared. And so I lost my chameleon.
And then my brother and sister were... We were in this empty house and we were very tense and my brother peed in his pants. And my mother got mad at him because she was very tense. And she took him into the bathroom to wash him up and was yelling at him and she was... And he was crying and I was with my sister, and just trying to keep my sister calm while my mother was freaking out basically. And so we hear my mother and my brother fighting. Or yelling or... And then the toilet flushes and everything's quiet. And my little sister looks up at me and says, 'Did she flush him down?' So I started laughing at the idea, my sister thought that my mother had flushed him down the toilet. So I was laughing. And my mother came out furious, and I was laughing, and she got mad at me for laughing. But it was a very tense time.

And then eventually my father never showed up at Bujumbura. So we went to the next biggest city which was Kampala. I don't know how we... I don't remember how we got there but we went to Kampala where there were lots of people.
And Kampala was a very civilised place. It was real city with real people in it. And you know, not evacuated. And somehow the... I don't know, the consulate took care of us or something like that, we got an apartment. And then I remember weeks later my father arrived and he was very, very sick because he had had a drink of water along the way that... But he actually managed to drive out across the border and he was all right. And I remember him walking in on us being so happy that he had arrived, and him just being so sick that he gave us a hug but it was... And being so disappointed that he didn't pay attention to us, he just fell asleep.  But he had a pretty harrowing trip out of there. So we didn't go back to the Congo which was very sad because I loved it. And I remember when we were there for instance there was a... There were a bunch of captured... Well, first of all there was a research centre called IRSAC Lwiro  which I would wander around which was this beautiful old abandoned research centre from the Belgians which had giant libraries and huge elephants on the wall and lots of skeletons from different animals that had been collected and it's like, you know, being in an abandoned museum. It was extraordinary. I remember the biggest elephant tusk that I've ever seen were there. I think maybe the biggest elephant tusks ever. I remember them as being like 15/20 feet long. A pair of crossed tusks. And just that was a fantastic place to hang out in.
And there was also a primate centre there which had gorillas. And we would go visit the gorillas. And there was one giant mountain gorilla named Sultani  which was huge, and so you would go by and you would see all the other gorillas and you'd feed them, you had to climb up a ladder because you sort of walked along the wall between the gorillas. And you would throw them bananas. And they would take the bananas and they would break them off like a person. They would peel them and they would eat the banana and then they would eat the peel, which I always thought was funny. And then you would get to Sultani, and Sultani, there was tree at the end of the walkway, and Sultani would jump up at the tree and he was like so much bigger than all the others. And you'd put a bunch of bananas like on a stick and Sultani would grab the whole stick and he would just eat the whole bunch of bananas like it was an apple. Just get it all. And he was huge and imposing and fat and... And when we were there Sultani actually got sick. And my father went to try to save him, he got pneumonia. And so my father, you know, they had him sort of anesthetised so that they could try to treat him and I was very afraid my father was going in and actually, you know, in the room with Sultani who was so groggy, trying to treat him. But not successfully, he died of pneumonia. I think he's probably sitting stuffed in Belgium some place. I think he was the largest mountain gorilla ever. But he...
Anyway, there are all kinds of things like that, that were just wonderful about the place. I mostly just remember the smells and the people. The people were just so friendly, the children. We'd go into villages and they'd never... Many of the children had never seen white people before. And they were kind of afraid of the adults. But they weren't afraid of me, so they would always come and play with me and they would always touch my hair. I had hair back in those days. I had a crew cut. But they loved touching my hair. And the women would come and touch my hair too. So I was always the celebrity when I went there but everybody was so kind to me and took care of me. And I never felt at all frightened, you know, walking to school, because I knew if anything happened they would have taken care of me. So it was a wonderful, very innocent time there. And part of me has always wanted to go back because I have such wonderful memories of it. But part of me has also realised that it can't possibly exist anymore.

There was a moment when we were in Bujumbura, I remember, I wandered back into the yard, I looked in the bushes, and there were orchids blooming. Just... They hadn't even been planted there, they had just taken root themselves. Parasites, I guess.
And just looking into the orchid and thinking, wow, this must be what it was like for Alice to be in Alice in Wonderland. And that's how the whole place felt, there was a kind of magic about it. And so I've always wanted to go back but I'm always frightened to go back because it can't possibly be as wonderful as I imagine it. But still to this day when I meet somebody from the Congo I instantly recognise that they're from the Congo and I feel a sense of connection with them. And quickly start talking to them. Usually end up hugging them pretty quickly. You know, it's... I feel such a sense of connection to the Congolese.

But we got to live in lots of other places in Africa when we evacuated. Safe places like Kampala. And then eventually we went back to Louisiana when it became clear that we couldn't stay in the Congo. And then I had another session in Louisiana. It may be that the election happened in that second session, I don't remember. And it was so strange going back from a place where all of my friends were black to a place where black people were totally separated from white people. And realising just how bizarre that was.
And so of course I made... In school we were, I mean, I had friend at home that were black, but you know, they were of a different social class. Everything was separated, everything was segregated those days in Louisiana.

Many years later when I was in my 50s and I was going through a divorce, going through counselling, one of the things the counsellor said was find a picture of yourself when you were a child. And so I wrote my parents and they sent me a picture of me in the Congo with my brother and sister. And I can see in the picture that I was very serious. And looked a little worried. And I... When I saw that picture I remembered how protective I felt of my brother and sister. That I felt somehow responsible for taking care of them. And that picture, you know, reminded me a lot of both the wonderfulness of it, but also the burden of it, which I had forgotten.
And the nice thing I was staying with Jeff Bezos and McKinsey Bezos and I showed them this black and white picture I'd taken. And talked to them about my childhood. And we put it down on the dining room table at their house. And that was years and years ago. And now every time I've visited them since then that picture always just has stayed in that spot. And it's not because they don't clean up their house, they just... So I've always thought that was sweet because it was a sense of connection of like who I am. And I think who I am got formed a lot there.

Then we went back to Louisiana and I remember being... When we went back, of course I had all these stories of Africa. And most of the kids in my school had never even been across the lake to New Orleans. And I had little carved things from Africa and they were all interested. And there was a poor kid who was friends of mine who wanted to trade something, he really wanted something from Africa. And I had a little carved wooden elephant with little ivory tusks. And so we agreed to trade something, and he got his treasure, and his treasure was a broken Etcher Sketch.
He had like the criss-cross piece inside the Etch A Sketch. Remember, Etch A Sketch was this thing that you turned with knobs that you could draw on a screen. And he didn't have the Etch A Sketch, it was broken, but he had saved from it a little part that draw, that criss-crossed. And so he brought that in. And I remember thinking: this isn't really a fair trade because this little broken piece of Etch A Sketch is not as valuable as this elephant from Africa. But also realising, well yes, it is... It's also not fair the other way because it's his most valuable possession and it's not really my most valuable possession. So we traded it, but I remember thinking about it wasn't fair but not being quite sure which way it wasn't fair. But he clearly wanted to make the trade. And so that began a series of moves.

The other place that left a big impression on me that we lived for a long time... We moved back to Baltimore, we lived in Texas, we moved... But the place that probably left the biggest impression on me was India. We lived in Calcutta for a couple of years. And that was when I was kind of junior... Probably eighth grade maybe. So 14, 15.
And India, again, was an incredibly exotic place but we were in the middle of a city in Calcutta, it was extraordinary, it was rickshaw drivers and every morning, literally... I mean, there were people that lived on the streets, every morning there was a truck that came and picked up the bodies of the people that had died during the night. And it was very, very poor. Lots of refugees from the country. All kinds of cultures of... I remember being struck by, you know, in America we think of ourselves as diverse but when you go into the bathroom everyone does the same thing. In Calcutta when you go into the bathroom everybody would do something different. It was...
And there were Hindu idols and malas calling people to prayer. And we went to a Christian church. But it was the most multi-cultural place I've ever been to. But again just so alive and so exciting. And going through the market places and again I felt perfectly safe wandering around the whole city. I really felt like the city was mine. I would ride the tram cars or take rickshaws and walk. And I just loved that city.
Again, the smells, completely different than the smells of Africa, but spices and of course humans. The people smell different. The Indians were very physically clean, even the people living on the streets would bathe every day in the water pumps.
And there we also ran into kind of a different kind of racism which is the British were there. And most of the swimming clubs they wouldn't allow Indians in the swimming clubs, only the British were allowed. And so the Calcutta Swimming Club or... Which we would go to sometimes with our friends. At that time wouldn't allow Indians. Maybe that one would, I don't know, a lot of them wouldn't. But so we joined the Tollygunge Club, because it did allow Indians. It was one of the only swimming clubs that allowed... Swimming Clubs were very important because it was very hot and we didn't have any air conditioning. And... But then we did... But then they decided that... I've got it backwards, no. Maybe it's the Tollygunge Club didn't allow Indians and the Calcutta Swimming Club did. I think that's right. We joined that. But the Tollygunge Club... we discovered this because when we applied they needed to meet us and kind of look us over before allowing us into the club. And we figured out that they were looking us over to make sure we weren't Indian.
So we didn't join that club that was closest to our house, we joined the Calcutta Swimming Club which did allow Indians, which was much farther away but had a better pool anyway.

It was also just wonderful wandering around. The Indians were so friendly, there would be weddings and people would invite us into their wedding and an Indian wedding is quite an extraordinary affair. I remember just being dragged in off the street to join a wedding. And people were incredibly poor but also just incredibly friendly and kind.
And I loved shopping in the markets, I loved bargaining with... You would bargain for everything. And it was very rude not to bargain, even though we had much more money, it would have been insulting not to bargain. So I got to know the city very well. We lived on Bright Street right near Tagore's old house. And I became a fan of the poetry of Tagore and I learnt how to write Sanskrit characters and I can still sound out Sanskrit and I read and write it. I don't remember the words but I remember the letters.
And we had... I had great friendship with my driver. Again we had lots of servants. That always made my parents very uncomfortable, they didn't like having servants. But it was kind of expected that if... The servants kind of came with the house. And if you didn't have servants then you would cause a whole bunch of people to lose their jobs and become unemployed. So our house came with a durwan who's like the guard, a dhobi who's the washer, a sweeper, a butler, a cook. An ayah is the one that sort of takes care of the children.
So the whole setup, dozens of people that were on staff, and it always kind of drove my mother crazy, she never was comfortable with the idea of servants, but that was just the way... So we had sort of the minimal set that we could get away with. But of course I became friends with them.

One that I became most friends with was our driver, Pratap, and he spoke six or seven Indian languages and would always get us out of any mess because, you know, whenever we travelled he drove. And driving in India is as much a diplomatic exercise as a road exercise because of course there's always traffic accidents and things to be negotiated along the way. So Pratap and I became great friends. And we got Pratap a little transistor radio as a gift. When my father would go back to the United States occasionally, and we got Pratap a transistor radio as a gift. And he managed to rig up a big battery next to it. So he had this little transistor radio and a big battery and Pratap was always very happy about that. I would go talk with him and I would go on adventures with him.

And he would take us to school every day. And the school was the international school of Calcutta which is all the embassy children and the children of all the spies who were stationed in Calcutta. And so like right across from us lived a Yugoslavian spy who didn't talk to us. This was kind of during the Cold War. But then his daughter became sick and he came and he knocked on my father's door, and the first thing he said is he said, 'I am a Yugoslavian.' And my mother said, 'Well, come in.' You know, it was a very odd... It was like a confession. And then he said his daughter was sick, and so my father took his little black bag and came and then took care of his daughter. And then we became friends with his daughter, and it was considered... And we actually became good friends with them but those were in the days... Later, in fact, they came to visit us in the United States, and when they called up they said, 'It's okay, it's all right to report us to the police, that we're coming.' And we're like, 'Well, I don't think the police are going to be interested in a report that we have a Yugoslavian coming.' But they had a very different perspective on things.

But there were all kinds of crazy expats and yes, there were people who I'm pretty sure were mafia people and some kind of criminals. Lots of diplomats, lots of spies. And they all sent their children to the same school. And so I got to the school which was run by the state department and the principal was a guy by the name of Mr Curry  who I now think was an ex-CIA operative who was an alcoholic. He was clearly an alcoholic. And he got posted to be the principal of this school which he clearly wasn't interested in doing. But that was his job.  And I got to the school and the school was just a mess. And... But I somehow found out that the school had a budget for the student council which had never been spent for years and so it had accumulated quite a lot of money. And I... So I said, 'We should have a student council', there wasn't one. So we had elections and I ran for president and my brother ran for treasurer and my best friend ran for vice president. So we had the complete slate. And so we took over the student council. And we had a pretty big budget and a principal who really didn't care about anything. So I decided to paint the school blue. So we bought blue paint and we painted the school blue. And he was fine with that.

And then we decided to have a science fair. Because I'd always wanted a science fair and I'd never lived in a place that had a science fair. So we organised a science fair. And we had a very good science teacher, Mrs Sinha. And so she was supportive of this, and we had fantastic laboratory, a fantastic chemistry laboratory. And you know, it was really great equipment in the school, not very many teachers used it. But Mrs Sinha was very happy to let us use the chemistry lab. So I went and started experimenting with all the great glassware in the chemistry lab. And one thing I found was this great sulphur dioxide generator. I don't know how I figured out what it was. But you put iron sulphide and sulphuric acid in it. And if you arranged it right you could just turn on the spigot and it would let the sulphur dioxide out which you could use for analytic chemistry.
And then it would raise the sulphur dioxide to the level of the iron oxide and then generate some gas and push it back down. So it was a great system that would generate sulphur dioxide whenever you needed it. And this wonderful teacher actually taught us analytic chemistry from this. And so we would get substances and we would have to analyse them, it was really fantastic chemistry education. And... But I decided to hook up the sulphur dioxide generator, but I hooked it up upside down with the iron sulphide on the bottom, I didn't quite understand the principle of it. So you couldn't turn it off. So we had to evacuate the entire school because it smells like rotten eggs. While they ridded of the sulphur dioxide generator.

We had the science fair. And I was very interested in computers. I'd never actually seen one but my mother arranged for me to see the IBM 1401 at the Indian Statistical Institute. And I remember crawling inside it, they let me go inside it and it had a core stack. And just being fascinated by it. And I went to the British library which was the only English library at the British consul and it was not a lending library but I got special permission to go in and read the books.
And I found this book called Laws of Thought which I thought was very exciting, by George Boole which turns out to be one of the great classic books, but I didn't know that, it was in the library at Calcutta. And I read it and it was all about logic, of like ands and ors and how you could combine things and... So basically the principle of how computers worked, although it wasn't put that way because it was all before the days of computers. But I remember seeing that and realising the connection and getting very, very interested in wanting to build a computer.
But I was in Calcutta and you couldn't even buy a transistor or switch or anything. So I decided that I could build a computer, but I would have to build relays for memory. So I got wire and I made little relays with magnets, I made memory devices, I made a magnetised PN so that when the relay went down it would stay and then you would reverse, it would open. So that was my first memory bend.
But then I made switches, and the way that I would make switches is I put a nail into a board and then I could get screen, like from a screen door. And you would poke the nail into the screen to make contact. So I would put a wire to the screen and a wire to the nail. And I could make multi-throw switches by having several nails. And so I could build switches. And I could get lights from flashlights. And I had a soldering iron so I could solder wires together. And so I built a computer that played Tic Tac Toe, or Noughts and Crosses as they called it in Calcutta. Where you moved the switches to play and the computer played and then you played and then the computer played and you played.
And that was my science fair entry. So I won the science fair and my brother came in second. We were kind of the only ones that took it seriously.

Then somehow we plugged into somebody... India had a science fair that the winner of different schools could go to the Indian Science Fair and it was the all India science fair was held in Calcutta. So I got to take my computer to the all India science fair. So people came from all over India from the schools with their things. And so I got to meet all these other nerdy kids from India.
And they ended up awarding me the special prize which was a great set of tools including like a much better soldering iron than I had. I was very excited. And it was presented to me by Jyoti Basu, he was the head of the communist party there. Because that part... Calcutta was under communist control at that time. And I think that Jyoti Basu, other people have said afterwards that he wasn’t so happy about giving a science prize to the Americans. And Jyoti Basu was the one that renamed the street that the American embassy was on, Ho Chi Minh Boulevard. So that was fun.

It was also fun for me because I discovered girls then. And that age I had like my first kiss with a girl, we played a game called 'True, Dare, Kiss or Promise' where you got to choose either to answer a question truthfully, a dare to do anything somebody dared you to do, or a kiss was to kiss someone. And we would play this by passing notes during class. And somehow I managed to... I had to trade all my losses for that I would have a 30 second kiss of Mary Flanagan  who I was very...
And Mary Flanagan, this was all brokered by Mary Flanagan's best friend, Glenda Porter, and so it was all arranged that I was going to go and kiss her in the chemistry lab, with Glenda Porter of course had to be the witness. That I was actually going to kiss her. And so I kissed Mary Flanagan in the chemistry lab, my first... My first romantic kiss. And Glenda Porter witnessing it. I don't think it lasted 30 seconds but... Years and years later when the internet came out, I got contacted by Mary Flanagan who also remembered the incident. And she was married and had kids, and I was married and had kids. But it was fun that we each remembered our first kiss.

But it was also an adventurous time. The science teacher was quite wonderful. She had a... She was married to an Indian and she had a tea estate up in Darjeeling. So she invited us to come to her tea estate in Darjeeling over the holidays. And so me... And I also had a friend, Bruce, who had been my friend in Baltimore, and we'd invited him out to come stay with us because I was lonely and I really liked Bruce. And so he came and stayed with us in Calcutta. And so Bruce and I went to visit Mrs Sinha  up in Darjeeling which was like a multi-day train ride from Calcutta. But we would always go out and ride on the trains by ourselves, different parts of India. And so Bruce and I went and got on the train at Howrah Station to go up to Darjeeling. But then along the way there was something called a hartal, a general strike, and there were different... I don't remember what the politics were, but different branches of the communists were striking against each other and so they called a general strike and so everything stopped. So the trains stopped and... So we stopped in the middle of nowhere, in between Calcutta. For days. And of course the Indians on the train were very nice to us.
And we stopped near a game reserve which was a place that had tigers. And so we decided that since the train was stopped anyway we would go and see a tiger. So we went to the game reserve and we had our money and our passports and we were probably 14 or 15 years old, me and Bruce. And we got to the game reserve and found out that the way that you... The only way to get into the game reserve as to hire an elephant. So we hired an elephant and went tromping off into the game reserve on the back of an elephant.
And at some point the elephant got really frightened and we realised the elephant had somehow got tangled up with a giant python down there, and it's sort of jumping around and it managed to get away from the python. And we saw all kinds of different animals but we didn't see a tiger and we kept wanting to see a tiger. And the elephant driver took us out and we looked and he was armed with a rifle. And then it finally got... It was starting to get dark and we still hadn't seen a tiger and we were arguing with him to stay out a little longer, we wanted to see a tiger. And he was like, no, it's dangerous. And it was hard because we were sort of trying to talk Hindi. He didn't really speak English and he didn't speak Bengali which was... He spoke some other language. And finally he insisted that we go back in because it was getting dark. And so we went back to the village.

And when we got back to the village to pay him the amount that we had negotiated, Bruce had been in charge of like holding the packet which was our wallet and our passports and our travel... You had to have special travel permits because it was near the Chinese border, and all our money. And he had stuck it like under the belt that holds the elephant. And he'd lost it.
And by then it was dark and he tried to explain this but because we'd been arguing about seeing the tiger the guy thought that we wouldn't pay him because we didn't see a tiger. He didn't understand that we had lost it because we were like trying to go back and... And so he got really angry at us. And so it became sort of scary because he was yelling at us. And then the whole village sort of joined in. All the elephant drivers. And there were other people that came off the train. And then we had... There was somebody... There was nobody that spoke English and his language, but there was somebody who spoke his language and Oriya, and there was somebody who spoke Oriya and Bengali, and there was somebody who spoke Bengali and English. So through this chain of people we managed to communicate and straighten it out. And of course the whole village is involved in this discussion of what to do about it and so on.
So everybody decides that we have to go out and find the wallet, but it's dark now in this place where there's tigers. And this whole village has lots of elephants so everybody gets up, this whole train of elephants from the village gets up, and we all get on the backs of elephants. And of course there's no flashlights so we all make torches out of grass dipped in kerosene. And so we have this parade going off into the jungle of torch lights, this train of elephants going to look for our wallet in the dark in the jungle. And I still don't know what happened but somehow... I don't know if somebody saw it or if they just explained to the elephants that we were looking for it, but from my standpoint what happened was that at some point the elephant stopped and the elephant picked up the wallet and handed it back. And by some miracle... it had been in the area where the snake had gotten it, but by some miracle they found in the dark, with the torches, and the whole village was so happy and everybody was cheering and we went back and we paid our bill. Saved by the elephant. And I've always had a fondness for elephants, ever since that.

So then eventually after a few days... Of course we had no way of contacting the people at either end, so my parents knew there had been a hartal, they knew that we probably hadn't made it to Darjeeling. The people in Darjeeling knew that we hadn't shown up, they probably didn't know about the hartal. So we just disappeared for a few days but that was kind of normal in India. So eventually they... The hartal got over and the train started running again and we showed up in Darjeeling and went to the tea estate. And then had a wonderful time hiking around the tea estate where there were also tigers, and we really wanted to see a tiger. So we would go hiking.
And at one point we got on a hike that was sort of too long and we were worried it was getting dark. And... But we could see the tea estate. And so we decided to take a shortcut just to go straight toward it which was a big mistake. And it got steeper and steeper on the hills. And eventually it got so that we couldn't... You know, we let ourselves down, we couldn't go backwards, so we had to keep going. And eventually we got to this area of rock slide and when we tried to go across them the rocks started sliding.
So we got in the middle of a rock slide and whenever we moved the rocks would slide. And fortunately somebody saw us and we were really stuck. But they... A whole bunch of people came and they made this kind of human chain and they went and they very, very carefully walked across the rock slide, it would slide a little bit, and they got us and they pulled us off of it like, you know, people as the rocks slid away. So that was actually the closest we probably came to getting killed on that trip. And so we went back with a lot of exciting stories.

So India was really a wonderful place. It was also... We were old enough that we were able to have adventures of our own, but young enough that we didn't feel responsible for fixing all the wrongs, because, you know, there's clearly things that if I'd seen them first as an adult would have been really upsetting. As a child you just accept them.
And so I think about India that I have maybe an attitude about India more like somebody who was born in India. In a sense that you accept certain things, it's the way they are. In a way that I probably wouldn't if I just saw them first as an adult. So I think I have maybe a more Indian attitude about India. But I've always loved it. And I always thought it would be like a great centre of computing and science because the Indians are very intellectual, particularly the Bengalis and they always thought that computers were going to be very, very important for India. Indians were going to be very important for computers, and indeed that's turned out to be the case. And I still have a fondness for India which is why I named my daughter India.

I loved Africa from the very beginning of my arrival. I still remember getting off the plane. A DC3. And we flew in with people that had chickens and bananas and things like that that they were bringing as gifts into Kinshasa from Kenya. And landing in Kinshasa and the smell of the smoking fires when we stepped off the plane. And we were supposed to stay at a hotel, and when we arrived at the hotel which was the fanciest hotel in town, maybe the only hotel in town, they didn't have our booking which was not atypical for Africa. And there were no rooms. There was the African National Congress or some group of African diplomats were all staying there.
And so we didn't have any place to stay, so we laid out the suitcases for us to take a nap, we were very tired. So the kids were lying on the suitcases in the lobby of the hotel as, you know, this diplomatic party was going on. And the... It was a formal affair. All the diplomats were in tails. And at some point the Senegalese ambassador came down from the party and sees us there, lying on the floor, and asks what's happened. And we tell the story that, you know, there's no room at the hotel. And says, 'Oh well, you must come stay, we're constructing a new Senegalese embassy, you must come, be my guest at the embassy.'
And so we were very happy to take him up on this offer. But the party was still going on up on the roof. And so he shouts up to his wife to please throw down the car keys that he'll have the driver take us to the embassy. And so his wife leans over and throws the car keys down but they drop them in the grass. And so the car keys disappear. And so all the diplomats come down in their tails, all these black African diplomats in formal wear come down. And of course there's no flashlights, so they make torches out of grass and kerosene which is sort of the standard procedure. And start looking through the grass around the hotel. So my first night is this scene of, you know, all these distinguished African diplomats in formalwear carrying torches, looking through the grass for the keys. Which of course they eventually find and take us off to the Senegalese embassy. But that was my welcoming to Africa. Every place we went people treated us so well. And often the other African diplomats would treat us well.

A lot of times there were droughts or there were food shortages. It was very hard to get food. And for instance once you went to the market and you just got whatever you could, and once we were very excited because my mother found at the market a watermelon. And she came back with a watermelon, we were so excited that we were going to get to eat this watermelon. And we were just sitting around with our mouths watering, and she sliced open the watermelon, and we all suddenly realised that she'd just gotten this giant cucumber. But it was so disappointing.
But once we went to one of the consulates of one of the other... I think this... I don't remember which consulate it was. But they hosted us for a dinner at a time when it was very hard to get food. And somehow she had managed to get a chicken, which was a big deal. And so they came in to present the chicken before slicing it. Because it was like such a huge thing that they had gotten this chicken. And they brought in this chicken on this platter. And then on the way out the guy tripped or something and the chicken fell off and slid across the floor. And we were all just shocked because, you know, this was the great pièce de résistance of the meal. And there it was like lying on the floor. And the ambassador's wife said, in English, 'Oh, that's all right, we'll just have them go get the other chicken.' And then said something to them in the native language and they picked up the other chicken and they... And of course we all knew that there was no other chicken. But I remember as a child just thinking, 'Wow, now that's a diplomat's wife, right?' She knew exactly what to do in that situation, without skipping a beat. And we all sort of went forward with the fiction that this was the other chicken.

One thing I remember, because people were very... With the children, they were very warm and they would hug us, they would hold us. And particularly, you know, the women would hold us with their children, or the children would also hug us. So they were very... It was a very huggy, close culture.
And people didn't bathe. So they had a smell. But it was a very human smell which I've always loved, that smell. Because I associate it with sort of warmth and it doesn't... It doesn't smell like athletic sweat to me or something like that, it just smells like Africa to me. And I can still conjure up that smell, you know, whenever... Sometimes I do smell it and it always makes me feel sort of warm and comfortable.

I also have memories that are of Africa that almost go off into... I can't even quite remember if they were real.
Like finding crystals of amethyst which I can't... I had a piece of amethyst that I must sort of have imagined finding this, but I had a piece of amethyst that I brought back, it was a crystal, but where would I have gotten a crystal of amethyst?
I have another story which can't have been real but I remember enough about it. Which is remember I told you my little man, that part was definitely real, but the... My little pygmy friend. And he definitely would make these charms which would frighten the other servants. But we would get stopped at roadblocks, that part was definitely true. There were all kinds of roadblocks, some of them real government ones, some of them just hoodlums. And they would collect their taxes or whatever before letting you go. In fact, I was very surprised when we left the Congo the last time, all the roadblocks were abandoned. But I seem to remember like the... And maybe this was just a fantasy but of them opening up the trunk and being frightened away on seeing one of the charms that my pygmy friend had made. Being frightened away. I don't know if that was just a fantasy or if that really happened. But it sort of protected us. But I sort of imagined him as kind of having protective magic of us. And it could have been true. I mean, there was a lot of superstition, a lot of... But I definitely felt that people were so benign and loving and friendly and connected, even though there was a lot of danger around, I always felt very, very safe. And taken care of.

One thing that was wonderful about India is there was always a festival going on. There was a holiday almost every day. And so there was a holiday called Holi for example where you got brightly coloured powder like tempura paint. And you threw it at everybody in the streets. So everybody was covered with bright paint. And it was... I remember as a child just going around being covered with all this paint and throwing paint at other people.
But the most interesting things were the pujas. The religious holidays where on every corner there were these clay idols. And the idols, they would turn over every year on... I think Diwali for instance was a time when you had the Durgas, which were the Kalis that had lots of arms. It was like Durga was I think... Or Kali was dancing on the dead body of her husband with all her arms, each with a weapon. And they would take those and they would put them on boats and put them out into the Hooghly River. And cover them with lights and lamps and candles. And so you would see all of these idols going out to be buried in the river.
Of course that's what they did with people, too. They would put the people on funeral pyres that would float out into the river. And so they'd put bodies into the river, burning bodies, out into the river. The poor people couldn't afford enough to actually burn the whole body so there'd be body parts around the river. But somehow it didn't seem horrifying.

But I remember once going to the village that made the idols and my mother packed me a lunch which had a boiled egg and some sandwiches. And we went off to this village which was out in the boondocks some place where they'd made the idols. And I remember, it's very funny, because you saw them making all these idols of the Durgas and the Ganeshas, the elephant. And the various other kinds. But then they would also make like they were making Elvis Presley dolls and other things like that.
And what they did was, this village was kind of interesting, which is that they worshipped... They had temples and they had... The worshipped the idols sort of in proportion to the number that got ordered. So I remember going into their temple where they had like Durga and Ganesha and Buddha and John F Kennedy and Elvis. And of course the Virgin Mary. All these idols which were all kind of the same to them in terms of... So...

And then that place also had a funny thing which is that they made eggs that... Beautiful little eggs that looked exactly like real eggs but they were made of clay.
And I'd bought one of these eggs, I thought it would be very funny to go back and bring back... So I switched out my boiled egg with the egg and it was just exactly the right weight. And I came back with my whole bag and my mother... You know, from this trip. And I said, 'Oh, by the way, I didn't eat my egg, would you like it?' And my mother said, 'Oh yes, sure.' And I handed her the egg thinking this is going to be a real joke. But I forgot that my mother occasionally did this thing of we used to take eggs and crack them on each other's head. And so she took this egg thinking it was a boiled egg and she reached over to my head and went, whack. Practically knocked me out. Because of course a real egg will just break.

Years and years later I went back to India and I won a prize called the Ramanujan prize, which was after the great mathematician, Indian mathematician, Ramanujan who... And the Indian Mathematical Society awarded me the Ramanujan prize and flew me out back to India, and I got to go back to Calcutta while I was there. And of course by then I'd lost touch with everyone in Calcutta. But... And the city had changed quite a lot.
But I still remembered it very well from having wandered around it so much as a child. So I wandered around and found the spots and went to the area near Gariahat Market where I lived and found my house. And then I remembered that there had... We had had some neighbours who were Parsis who had lived in the neighbourhood. So I wandered over and I found a house that I thought maybe was their house. So I went, you know... Of course the person I really wanted to see was my driver, Pratap. Because I'd always promised that I would come back to see Pratap.
But I had no way of finding him and it's not like there's a telephone director or that he would have had a telephone or... I was in this city of millions of people. But I thought maybe I had found a house that looked familiar and they maybe had been friends of ours. So I knocked on the door of the house and the person who answered could only speak Bengali. But so they went off to get somebody to speak English. And the person appeared who could speak English and he looked at me and he said, 'Danny?' And it was Pratap.
And he recognised me after all those decades, immediately recognised me. And I guess he... It wasn't entirely coincidence, he was working now for the people who'd become friends of ours. And so we had a wonderful reunion. And they were, yes, they knew we'd been friends so they gave him a couple of days off to sort of drive around the city with me and see all the old places. And so I had a wonderful reunion with Pratap. That was a nice moment.

I think I was very lucky that I got to live at a time when the world was still not connected. And where you could eat different foods and see different things in different places that people really didn't know about each other. When I was in Africa the only thing they knew about Americans was the Twist. And when we would go into villages they would shout, 'Dependence, dependence.' Which was a sort of rallying cry from Congolese independence. But they sort of got it wrong, they called it 'dependence'. But that was a sort of a cheer that they said. I'm not sure they knew what it meant.
But then they would say... Then they would start dancing the Twist and they would say, 'Twistay, Twisday, les Americans.' But that was about all they knew about American culture was dependence and the Twist. And of course now you go places and, you know, everybody is aware of the same things.

Just recently, about a year ago, I had the most remarkable trip. I thought that that world was gone, that disconnected world. But I got to go to Papua New Guinea. And up the Sepik River and to the Trobriand Islands and I had a friend, Courtney Ross, who was sailing around the world. And she was... She was going to go up the Sepik and like ask to join that part of it. And I got to see there's still parts of the world where it's like Africa had been. That we would go to villages that no white person had visited the village in living memory. And I would meet children who would want to touch my hair, my... You know, have the same interaction that I remembered from Africa. And of course we'd go into the village and always first it would be interacting with the children, the adults would stay back.
And I would have a trick which is I would... I had my iPhone and of course there was no cell coverage but I'd turn on my iPhone in selfie mode and all the children would gather around and I would take a selfie. And they would be amazed and horrified and excited at seeing themselves on the phone. And then I'd make friends with the children and then the adults would come and look at what was happening.
And so, and then we would usually bring a soccer ball with us, we'd give a soccer ball to the children as a sort of gift of arriving at the village. And that was always a successful gift, the children would start playing with the soccer ball and we'd get off to a good start. Which was a good thing because as it turns out there was a group that had gone in a couple of weeks before us, up the Sepik, and done kind of what we did of exploring villages and they went into the wrong village with the wrong guides and got killed with bows and arrows. So it was actually kind of dangerous, but, if you didn't sort of hit it off well with people. Each of the villages spoke a different language because the cultures were very isolated, had been cannibals until recently. And so, you know, the common language that they speak is this sort of pidgin Dutch English language. It's the only thing they can speak to each other.

When we'd first arrived, we'd gone to the national museum, and we'd seen this extraordinary pot. And I fell in love with this pot and asked where it was, and the director of the museum said, 'Oh, that's a village that, you know, we've lost contact with, you can't...' I was like, 'I want to get one of these pots.' He was like, 'You can't. It's, you know, it's a village that's disappeared and we don't, you know, we know the name of it but nobody's visited it for a long time.'
And Courtney, who I was with, if you tell her she can't do something, that's like red meat for her. So she's like, 'Okay, well we're going to find that village.' So the museum director who was Oxford educated agreed to come with us, to go on the search for the village. And he agreed to take us by his village. Which was a village called Kanganaman. And so we made friends with him and he showed us his crocodile scars because he was an initiate of the village and at the village one of the initiations that they do for men who choose to become initiates is they cut their skin, they scarify their skin, and they rub mud into it. And they keep cutting them until they pass out. And then they rub them with blood and they keep them awake for days and days and it creates these scars that look like crocodile scales. And crocodiles figure very big in their religion. So he showed us his crocodile scales. Lifted off... This is this Oxford educated museum director. And so he said, 'I'd love to go back to my village.' And so it turned out he was a fantastic guide. So we sailed up the Sepik River, and the maps were all wrong.

Eventually we gave up on the maps because our GPS system would show us like going across dry land and obviously the river had moved since the maps... And as we were talking about Kanganaman, it was like, I think I've heard of this. And I realised after a while, this is the village where Margaret Mead and Gregory Baitson met. And I knew their daughter, Catherine Baitson. And of course Gregory Baitson is the one that had told the story about New College Oxford which was so important for me, and the clock. So I felt a real sense of connection to them. And this was the village where they had met and eventually fallen in love. They didn't get together... They didn't like each other very much at first but they eventually fell in love.
It was a little village, a couple of hundred people. So we arrived at the village, but we had so much trouble going up the Sepik that eventually we had to abandon our boat but we managed to radio back and find an oil company that had a helicopter that they were willing to rent to us. So we got the helicopter, flew the helicopter into the village.
And you know, they had had runners... The river runs around so much that people can actually travel fast... News can travel faster than a boat can. And so they knew we were coming. Just by relaying, you know, word of mouth. And so they'd cleared off the area, but the area that they'd cleared for us to land wasn't quite big enough to land, and so we had an Aussie helicopter pilot, I used to fly helicopters so I knew this wasn't big enough to land but he went down into it really fast. And he was that far from one of the trees, of hitting it. So I realised he couldn't take off. Or at least not fully loaded. We landed, it was a big deal. And they knew we were coming so they had these puppets to greet us and so they dressed up in costume and then children came around the helicopter. And everybody was very excited of having helicopter land, that's a big deal. In fact, in the Pidgin language they call helicopters... So they use the word 'blong' or 'blong' to be apostrophe s as the possessive. So helicopters are called 'mixmaster blong jesus'. That's the... So the 'mixmaster blong jesus' landed.

And we were greeted by everybody ready, you know, knowing we were coming. And of course this guy shows up, his brother's there to greet him and there's a homecoming for him. And we just happened to arrive as this initiation ceremony is going on. The initiation ceremony where they're keeping people away, covering... You know, scarifying them, covering them with mud. And so they're a little bit worried because the initiation ceremony's happening in the men's house and they play these special flutes, this strange flute music. And they're worried because Courtney can hear the flute music. The women have to stay away because if you hear the flute music it will cause you to grow testicles. But Courtney decided to chance it.
And so we go visit the men's house and watch these people standing almost in a trance. You know, as they're going through the ceremony. It was one of the strangest... Just fantastic coincidence that we showed up there and the strange flutes, I have recordings of the flute music. And seeing them covered with this mud that's rubbed into their scars.
And when we went down in the village and there was... It just reminded me so much of Africa though, you know, it was a small village and everybody was so friendly to us and we went... And one of the things that was happening was a kind of a trial was going on because the way that they settle problems is everybody gathers together. And there'd been a problem because some of the children had violated taboo during the initiation ceremony, and some of the elders were upset about it. And so they were trying to decide what to do about it. But the way that they do this is everybody gathers together in the village and there's a chair called 'an orders chair' which is a carved chair that has a sort of a flat butt, and the chair has five leaves on it. And the prosecutor who's upset or the person who's upset gets up and he picks up the five leaves and he makes a point and he puts down a leaf and he makes a point and he puts down a leaf. And when he makes his five points he takes all the leaves, shuffles them together, makes a summary and puts them down. And then he has to sit down and then the next person gets up, makes their... It's like a PowerPoint slide, right? They each make their points. Then they sit down.
So it means only one person is talking at once and everybody sort of gets their chance to say what they were saying. It took us a while, at first we thought they were upset that we had violated some taboo or something like that but it had nothing to do with us. So we watched this trial. And eventually everybody reaches consensus and they decided, you know, to penalise the parents of the children somehow. And then everybody decided that was a good solution and they disbanded.
And we actually saw that happen a couple of times at other villages that we visited.

We got a rumour of where the village was that had the pots. And in the meantime on the boat we had a library of old anthropological books and I found a book that said that the village that had the pots had changed its name. So we had a new name for it. And then we found an old map that had the new name. But the river was no longer where the map showed.
So we had a general location by this sort of puzzle thing. So we took the helicopter and we started trying to land. And the first village we went to was totally flooded. So no way to land a helicopter. We landed at another village, turned out to be the wrong village. But our friend who spoke many languages, he was a linguist too, so he was able to speak with the people in the village and find directions to where this other village was. And so we went around with the helicopter trying to find it, landing in random villages. And of course it was a big deal every time we landed and a lot of fun.
But by the time we finally got to the right village it was almost dark and we were almost out of fuel. And so we landed in the right village but they didn't have the pots. They had some little ones which they sold to us. But we really... They had some big pots, they knew some people... They had some themselves they didn't want to sell, that they used, but they knew some people that lived outside the village that maybe had some extras. So they sent runners to people who might be willing to sell their pots. And so we waited and it started getting to be evening and the helicopter pilot was telling me, 'We have to get out of here after dark, you know, we can't fly after dark, we have to...' Because it really was pretty hairy flying the helicopters. And so just as we start up the helicopters we have to get out of there and Courtney's like, 'Well, we can wait a few more minutes, we can...' But finally the helicopter pilot's like, 'No, we have to start.' So we started the engines and just as we started the engines these three women come running with these pots. Which we immediately bought from them at whatever price they asked which was almost nothing, of course. And took them. And I rode back like holding the pot in the... We didn't have time to pack them up or anything.
And I've still got that pot downstairs. So we found the village, we found the pots. But most importantly, I found a part of the world that was still like Africa, and it reminded me that, you know, the memory I had of how people were with each other was real. And it still exists and it's still, I think, the natural way people are. So it was wonderful to see that still exist. I'd love to go back.

With Africa and with Papua New Guinea which is the sense money wasn't really important to them. Things weren't really important. And money was sort of a novelty. And we literally had an infinite amount of money compared to, you know, what we could spend on anything. So we had so much money compared to what anybody had ever had around there. They didn't even really quite know what to do with money. But they sort of liked the interaction more as a novelty of in Africa.
So I remember once in Africa, for instance, at some point they built these little bird cages out of pith from bamboo or something like that, from cane I guess. And we thought those were really nice and we bought them. We gave them a few coins for them. And then the word got out that we liked things made out of these pith things and so they showed up with more elaborate ones, and we bought those. And then they would show up with like bigger and more elaborate ones. And after a while it was sort of sad because they'd made these huge giant things just for us, we didn't feel like we couldn't not buy them. But we started accumulating way more of them than we wanted. But they basically cost nothing and people had gone to so much trouble to make them that we had to buy. We had to buy all of these things that they would bring us. And they would bring us things like... They would bring us elephant tusks which, you know, now it's sort of horrifying, the idea of carrying ivory out, but in those days it was just like one of the many things. You know, they would bring stuff and we were the only market for them so we sort of felt obligated to buy anything they showed up with.
And we actually took those back, which was probably in retrospect illegal even then but we didn't think about stuff like that, so... I remember very crudely carved elephant tusks. Yes. And it was like that in Papua New Guinea. Really, the amount of money you had was so much compared to what they had that it always felt bad to bargain but it was always insulting not to bargain. So it was a very funny relationship with money. But it makes you realise too how arbitrary money was because they clearly didn't use much money internally. And it made me realise that the whole idea of buying things and possessing things is kind of a modern invention that came with agriculture. It wasn't a natural state for humans.
But it was more the natural state is more like a family. And a village is more like a family, when somebody needs something and somebody has something, of course you share it. And that's what these villages of a few hundred people were. They're much more like a family. When people own something they own something in the way that you own something within a family. You know, you own it because you use it and it's yours. But if somebody else needs it, of course, they have access to it.

[Q] Why would that change with agriculture?
I think what happened with agriculture is you started having specialists. So you started having jobs like guarding the grain which were kind of boring, and you needed to coerce somebody to do. Before agriculture everybody did everything. And so we were all generalist. But as soon as you had specialists then, you know, you had different jobs or different desirability. You could also save wealth. And so money is really in some sense wealth saved future. So as soon as you could save grain you had capital. It changed things completely.
So wealth became kind of an obligation for the future. Debt got invented. And so I think money came along with all that. It's not a natural thing for humans. Jobs... The idea of a job I don't think is a natural thing for human society. I mean, your job is just to be human. I mean, maybe a few people like the witch doctor or, you know, had special functions in society, but mostly everybody kind of just lived in the same way, everybody was a generalist. And some people were better at fishing and some people were better at hunting or planting. But everybody was expected to do everything, make their own clothes, cook their own food. So there really weren't specialists. So the idea of employment, I think, came along with agriculture.
[Q] It's really interesting.
So when people say, 'What happens when the AIs eliminate jobs', I say, 'I'm all for it.'
[Q] You'd be human again...

One of the most wonderful things about living in India was the trains. And so I can go off and go out to the country on the trains. And people would jam into the cars and you would try to get first class tickets but usually those would be sold out so you'd end up having to ride second class, or even third class I think there was where you were just jammed in, packed into open train cars. And of course the trains were always late but they went everywhere. And it was fun to go out to villages.
I remember once my father went to Nepal and he came back and he said, 'We have to go to Nepal.' And so I went with my mother and my brother and my sister. And we got on the train, we figured out that there was a train that went to some city in Northern India that was only a couple of days train ride and then there was a plane that went once a week up to Kathmandu from there. And so we decided to take the train. And being a sort of normal Indian train it ended up being about three days late arriving. But we figured that the train was late, but probably the plane would be late too. So even though it was the day after the plane was supposed to have taken off, we decided to rush to the airport as soon as we arrived.
And so we had it all worked out of who was going to get the bags out of the car and who was, you know, going to get the taxi. And my job was to go and get the taxi cabs to take us to the airport. So we pulled into the city and I jumped out and ran to get the taxi cabs and discovered there was a flaw with the plan which is the city didn't have any taxi cabs, it only had like hand pull rickshaws. So I commandeered a whole line of rickshaws. And my mother showed up with the kids with all the luggage and like, 'Where are the taxi cabs?' And I said, 'I got all these rickshaws.'
So we loaded the rickshaws with the bags and get in this train of I think five rickshaws. And these were the hand pull types, not the... It was before bicycle rickshaws. And I guess there were such things but this city didn't have them. And off to the airport. But rickshaw drivers... and I'd negotiated a price with them, which you do with rickshaw before you get in, but I guess I had paid too much because they decided that they were going to give us a tour of the city. And we sort of realised after a while that they're taking us around, giving us a tour of the city. 'No, no, no, we want to go to the airport, we want to go to the airport.' So we finally convinced them, and they thought they were doing us a big favour, taking us to see all the sights on the way to the airport.
So we finally made it out towards the airport and just as we're getting to the airport we see this DC3 taxiing down the runway. And we realise this must be our plane because there's only one plane that leaves every week. So instead of going to the airport... I'm in the lead rickshaw, I'm like, 'Go to that plane, go to that plane.' And this little argument... So eventually they do what I say, so we go out onto the runway and he's taxiing up, and we go like chasing this plane in our caravan of rickshaws. And so our five rickshaws go chasing out and they see us coming out of the runway. And then they lower the stairway, keeping the engines running. And we get out of our rickshaws and load our luggage in and start climbing up.
But then all these army Jeeps start coming. We'd sort of forgotten that this is an international flight and we had neglected to clear customers or anything like that. So these Jeeps come out and they stop the plane. Make them turn off the engines while we sort of work all this out. I'm sure we paid some special exit fees. Eventually they let us back on the plane and we flew off and we took the rickshaws off the runway. But I still, you know, always have that image of us chasing the DC3 in there, in a parade of rickshaws. That was India.

Years and years later I went back to India with a friend who had a Gulf Stream and we got permission to go into Aurangabad to see the Ellora Caves which is a remarkable mountain that's been carved over centuries. And I'd always wanted to see them. But they're hard to get to. So we landed in Aurangabad and the only airport is an army base. But we arranged to fly in with the air force officer. I mean, we got in and we toured the caves. But then when it came time to leave they announced to us that there was an air strike and that we might be stuck in Aurangabad for weeks and weeks. And my friend who had the plane, of course, was very upset about this, and I was like, 'No, no, no, you don't understand. Ask them how much it would cost to settle the air strike.' And he's like, 'What do you mean? He's like, they're all... All the air controllers are on strike.' And I was like, 'Yes, but ask how much money would be required to settle the strike.' And so we sent out our Indian air force officer to negotiate and he came back and it turned out that it would cost $500 to settle the strike which is almost exactly the same as the landing fee for Gulf Stream in an American airport. And he was quite relieved to discover that we were not, in fact, going to have to spend two weeks waiting for the strike to get settled.

After India we returned to Baltimore. Baltimore was always kind of home base because my father was based at Johns Hopkins. So we went back to Baltimore. But the '60s had happened. I mean, we went back to Baltimore maybe 1969/1970. And it was a different country than what I had left. I remember being very shocked coming back to America. Actually shocked first coming back to... We landed in Hawaii first, and seeing all the green grass with nobody living on it. And just thinking what a waste it was. And seeing people throw things away and having nobody scavenging. And just being kind of overwhelmed and shocked by how wealthy everybody was in America, after having lived in India.
And being so really kind of offended by the waste of everything. You know, people would run perfectly good drinking water all over lawns just to grow grass, to cut the grass, to throw it away, to... And it was much more of a culture shock to come back to America than it was to go to India.

So when we got back to Baltimore I lived in suburbia in Towson. But I was showing up with the kind of mid-1960s mentality about America and hippies had arrived and the Vietnam War was on. People were wearing bell bottom jeans and tie-dyed t-shirts. And I was in a crew cut and completely out of it, you know? I knew who the Beatles were but that was about it. And so it was very hard for me to fit back in.
But it was also around suddenly I was around technology, there was something called Radio Shack where you could buy transistors and you could even buy pieces of computers. And I was so excited about that, I really wanted to make money. And at that time a kid could make money by being a paper boy. And you weren't really an employee of the paper, you were... You bought the papers from the Baltimore Sun and you delivered them and you collected the money. So you were sort of an independent agent. So if you didn't collect the money you lost money.
So I got a paper route and then I got another paper route and in fact I eventually got three paper routes. I would wake up at four o'clock in the morning and if I collected all the money I would get paid 3c a paper. So I had several hundred papers that I would deliver. So I could make like $5 a day which was a lot of money in those days. Which I would then spend at Radio Shack. And buy computer parts. And I had this idea to build a computer. And finally I had access to electronics. But it involved waking up early in the morning and I'm not very good at waking up. So I got... So I would sort of do the paper route in my sleep and then fall back to sleep before school. And I could never even remember if I had done my paper route except that my phone would be ringing off the hook if I hadn't. So any time I missed a paper people would call up and complain about it.

I used that money to both fund my electronics hobby, I tried to build a robot, I tried to build a computer. I got like a suitcase, I was going to build a portable computer which was an unheard of concept. But I figured you could do it. This was before microprocessors so I was going to build it out of logic gates which I could order through the mail from Poly-Pac.
And I didn't have anybody really teaching me this stuff. So I had to figure it out from reading books and I had nobody who'd explained it, answered my questions. But I learnt how to make printed circuit boards. But I kind of learnt the hard way. For instance I could buy the etchant at Radio Shack for etching printed circuit boards, and I could buy the bare boards and you put like tape over the boards. And then you etched them in ferric chloride. And the instructions said you were supposed to use glass tanks to etch them in but I couldn't afford a glass tank so I got like aluminium turkey basters which, amazingly enough, worked. I think because they had little oil on the aluminium. So for a long time I used aluminium turkey basters for my ferric chloride until one day I scratched through the oil or something like that and the ferric chloride touched the aluminium and it went [whoosh]. And I got ferric chloride all over my room, my room smelt like ferric chloride from then on. But I actually made printed circuit boards, I made little circuits. And I taught myself logic and I still remember like all the pin outs of the integrated circuits of end gates, and the end gates I could still draw you, you know, which input and output is connected to which pin. The 7400 series logic. And I ordered from Intel a little 64 bit memory, Intel's first chip that they made. And I was busily trying to build a computer.

I was also very interested in chemistry, I had chemistry sets. In those days you could buy chemicals and I was trying to make a rocket engine. That was my big project. And I would basically make gun powder to make a rocket engine which is kind of amazing I didn't kill myself. It's very dangerous. I would pack this gun powder with aluminium, aluminium seemed to help it. So I had aluminium powder and would pack it in and try to make rockets.
And I remember once, fortunately I had very good remote ignition technology, electrical. It had batteries and nichrome wire to remote detonate it. But at one time I had this batch of rocket fuel that didn't seem to be working. And so I kind of gave up on it. But I had this model boat, model pirate boat. So I decided to pack all my dud rocket fuel into the boat and float it in the bird bath and blow up the boat. So I got back a distance and I detonated it and got a way bigger explosion than I'd ever gotten before. And pieces of the bird bath flew past me and I totally destroyed the bird bath.
So that... I was just lucky nothing... Yes. I didn't get hurt, but I scared myself. And I got more careful after that. But my parents never noticed that I took the pieces of the bird bath and I kind of hid them and threw them away. And my parents didn't notice the bird bath was missing for like months and months, and then at the dinner table somebody said, 'Didn't we used to have a bird bath?' And I just kept my mouth shut. But years later I met someone who lived down the hill from me and I said where I lived and they said, 'Oh, did you live up next to that kid that was always making those explosions?' I was like, 'No, I was that kid.'

I really wanted to learn about computers and I had the next door neighbour had a friend who worked at Johns Hopkins and so he introduced me and got me a job down at Johns Hopkins at the chemistry laboratory. And the guy down in Johns Hopkins we called Dr Kowsky I think his real name was Kristiakowsky. And I think he had been the Kristiakowsky who was the head of the science... The head of the chemistry division of Los Alamos. And had been the science advisor. He was really a very smart guy. And he had a picture of the Trinity explosion up on his wall and so I think I was very, very lucky. I had no idea who this guy was really but he was very nice to me and he said... He was a chemist and he was trying to build a mass spectrometer. And he could get anything he wanted surplus. So he wanted to have this mass spectrometer controlled by a computer. And so I said, 'Oh, I can do that.' I'd never programmed a computer, I'd never done anything.
So he got me surplus, he got me a Minute Man missile computer which was this big round thing that you take control of a missile. And it had instructions like a square root instruction for computing your distance to Moscow. So I kind of got that working. This huge... Which it's kind of remarkable. But there was a titan missile computer he also got me and the titan missile computer was even better, it was a little... It was really remarkable for its day, it was only this big. But it had racks and racks of equipment for putting information into it and so on. And he got those. So I built these racks and racks of equipment and I connected up... It didn't have any way to talk to it. But I found this old thing called a flexowriter which is kind of like a teletype. And I built circuits to have the flexowriter controlled by the computer. And so that it could actually type things out and I could type into it.
And it was really kind of remarkable, I got... And of course I didn't know anything about programming so I invented ways of writing programs. I invented an assembler so that I could write them in this kind of... I could type them into the typewriter and it would convert them into the codes. But I didn't really know anything about programming so I didn't know about the idea of a relative jump, a symbolic jump. I didn't invent that. So whenever I wanted to make a patch all my jump instructions would be off. So I invented this thing where I would have ten instructions and then it would leave... It would jump over a little empty space of code, and another ten instructions. So that if I wanted to put some new ones in I could put them in between. And that was my solution to that, so that I could add things. Anyway, I put together this really kind of remarkable system that controlled this mass spectrometer.

And I was in this chemistry building and I was... The room that I was in, everything on the shelves was incredibly poisonous. And I couldn't figure out, and occasionally, you know, some strange smell would appear and the chemist would come in and smell it, decide if I needed to evacuate or not. But everything was poisonous except for one thing which was this heavy water was... There was deuterated water, which I later found out is very subtly poisonous. But I finally asked, like, 'What was the guy that used to be here?' And it was like, 'Oh, he was a toxicologist that spent his whole life looking for the perfect poison. And then when he finally found it, he took it. And killed himself.' And that was the guy whose office I inherited with all this chemicals.

So that's where I built my computer, and I got my computer to work. And I was very excited about it and very proud of myself. And there was a graduate student who was a chemist who wanted to use this mass spectrometer and needed to use my computer. And I was a young... I was a high school student, but quite taken with this female graduate student who wouldn't give me the time of day. And I felt she should be very impressed with this thing that I had built for her.
And she was just like, 'Oh, just tell me how to turn it on.' So that sort of annoyed me. So I could make up anything I wanted about how to turn it on, so there were all these racks of equipment, so I gave her a list of instructions which involved her sort of climbing up and flipping on that switch and bending over and flipping on that switch and so she had to come into my office and sort of perform this ritual that I knew that I'd just made up. It was sort of my revenge of her not paying any attention to me. I sort of wanted her to hang out so I had this instruction. And then to sort of get her attention I put into the code this random number generator which one out of ten times she'd go through this whole ritual and the computer would print out, 'Sorry, honey, I have a headache', and it would turn itself off. And then she would have to start over again. And she was really annoyed at me about that but she couldn't do anything about it. So that was my little power trip, my little nerdy power trip.

Years later when I was at MIT and knew how to program computers I got a call from the chemistry department. And they were still using this thing. But what had happened was I didn't really know how to make a random number generator, I just made it up. And so I had written it in a way that it finally got into a loop where it kept generating the same random number over and over again. And so every time they tried to turn it on it said, 'Sorry, honey, I have a headache', and it would turn itself off. And so I felt very guilty about this so I volunteered to go down to fix it. But of course I hadn't documented anything. I had no idea how this thing worked anymore. All I had to do was find the part where it did that and sort of skip over it.
But I didn't have any listings of the code, so what I would do is I would put a halt and I would put a halt instruction and start it up and see if I could get to the halt instruction before it got to that. So I would sort of by binary search find the place where it did this. But so it means that I had to over and over again start up this computer. But I didn't really remember how to start the computer and all that was left was this set of instructions that I had left for this graduate student which everybody had been following since then. And I knew that most of them were just silliness, causing her to jump through hoops. But I didn't remember which parts were. So I was sorted of hoisted on my own petard. I had to over and over again go through this list, I didn't have time to figure out which parts of it were real. Over and over again turn the machine on and off until I found the instruction to fix.

I was a student but I was also very much a hippy. I became a hippy. And I was the head of the Coalition for Peace and Justice which I started. And, you know, there was a very active anti-war movement and I would bring anti-war movies to the school and, you know, show movies about the Vietnam War and how horrible it was, and go to war protests and things like that. And so the high school, like many high schools, was sort of divided into the nerds, the jocks, the hippies, the... I was mostly a hippy. And was always fighting with the administration.
So for instance, there was a student election and I ran on the anti-war ticket, and the reform ticket, and the principal insisted when he heard I was running that they got to censor our speeches. So he censored out all of my speech, basically, I wasn't allowed to say anything. So we got up before the student council, the student body, to make our speeches, and I said, I'm not allowed to... My speech has been censored, I'm not allowed to do it, but I have three minutes. So I'm going to use it. I took out an apple and I ate the apple for three minutes. And everybody was cheering. And then the principal suspended me for eating outside the cafeteria. That was the sort of battle.
And then they had the election, and I had people that were counting the votes who said that I was winning. But then the principal announced that I had lost, which I'm pretty sure was a rigged election. But that was, you know, the way things worked in those days.

I also got into a lot of trouble with the chemistry teacher because I'd had this great chemistry teacher in India and I knew more chemistry than the chemistry teacher did. So I remember, on the first day of chemistry Mr Daniels, who was the terrible chemistry teacher, he was showing us that... doing experiments showing liquids can turn into solids and solids can turn into gasses and so on. And he had a white lab coat on and a little pair of round glasses. And we were standing around and he was doing these demonstrations, and we had for instance the Bunsen burner running to boil water and one of the things he did, to show that solids could turn into gasses is he put a bit of aluminium carbide into water and it started bubbling. And he said, 'So you see it's making CO2.' And I knew that that wasn't... That doesn't make CO2, that makes acetylene. That's how carbide lamps work. So he had a balloon on the top of the test tube and it was blowing up and he's explaining how this is making CO2. And I said, 'That's not CO2, that's acetylene.' Then he said, 'No, it's CO2.' I said, 'No, it's not, it's acetylene.' And I took the... I took the balloon and I stuck it over the Bunsen burner, it goes: kaboom. And what I hadn't countered for is that it burned all the rubber from the balloon and so Mr Daniels was like covered with soot from all this acetylene and rubber burning. And he takes off his... His glasses were covered with black soot. And he takes off his glasses and there's like these two little round holes where he's not covered with soot. And the whole class starts laughing. And he gave me a D in chemistry even though I knew way more chemistry than he did. I just did not get off to a very good start with him. So I was always kind of in a battle with the administration in high school.

So for instance, one thing is that because of the protest against the Vietnam War I refused to say the pledge to the flag. And the principal would call me in and tell me he would expel me, I was like, fine, expel me. I have the right to... You know, it doesn't mean anything if you're forced to say it. And he said, 'You know, sometimes the FBI comes by and asks me about people, and if they ever ask me about you I'll tell them that you wouldn't say the...' I was like, 'Fine, you do that.'
And in fact, years later when I was on some commission appointed by the president to do something they were doing a security check on me and they said, 'Is there anybody who will say anything bad about you?' And I said, 'Yes, actually, you can go back and talk to my high school principal and he'll tell you how unpatriotic I am.'

I stopped going... I mean, I would spend less and less time at high school and more and more time in Johns Hopkins where I was learning much more. And in fact I eventually went down, I went to a church down in inner city, my parents had started going to when they lived in the inner city Baltimore. And that whole area was all black by then and there was... So it was a historically white church in a totally black neighbourhood, was trying to become a black church but... And it had college students down there that lived next to the church, kind of doing social work. So I kind of moved in with them. And so I lived down in the area. Right in north in St. Paul Street. During a time when it was pretty racially charged.
And I remember once on New Year's, I had a girlfriend who was one of the college students. So it was kind of a big deal, I was a high school student and I had a college student girlfriend. Charlotte. And so Charlotte and I were going to take the bus out to the suburbs to have dinner at my parents' house or something like that. And so we were waiting at night on Green Mount Avenue and North Avenue for the bus that would go out. And some people came out of a party in the area and pulled my hair and kind of got into a fight with me and they started giving Charlotte, who was blonde and white and... giving her a lot of trouble. And I started defending her and they beat me up and they stole my wallet and some of the neighbours called the police. And the police showed up, and we had seen the house that they'd come out of. And so we told them what house they'd come out of, and the police in those days were all white. The neighbourhood was all black.
And the police went in, they arrested everybody in the house. And then came in and said to us, it's like, well, 'It feels good to clean out a nigger's house once in a while.' I was so angry. It was just such... They were so blatantly racist. And they were so... It was so wrong. And I was furious about it, and they took us back to the police station. And he showed us these pictures and he laid out a bunch of pictures and he pushed one forward and he said, 'Can you identify the person that mugged you?' And I said, correctly, 'No, I can't. It was dark.' And he pushed one a little farther, he said, 'You sure you can't identify?' I was like, 'No, I can't.' He said, 'You're sure it's not this one?' And I said, 'No, I can't identify.' He said, 'Well, it's this one.' So this made me even more angry.

So there was a trial in a couple of days, I went down and I was okay, my wallet was missing but... So I was really angry about all of this and I was ready to tell the judge that I couldn't identify them and the police had no reason to believe this was the right guy and they'd just arrested this man. So I showed up to the courtroom and they brought the guy in in handcuffs. His name was Terry Ride. They brought him in and they came forward and the public defender was obviously drunk. He could barely get his words out.
And the judge says, 'I think I understand that you're asking to delay this for a jury trial.' Motion granted. It was just a way of delaying it because the guy was clearly not capable of defending this guy. And I didn't get a chance to say anything. But a jury trial takes a long time to set up. So it's like three months this guy was in jail. So the guy was sitting there for three months, finally the jury trial comes up. They bring him in in handcuffs again. And this time I wasn't going to let... I mean, I hadn't gotten a chance to say anything before.
So this time, as soon as they brought him in, I stood up and I said, 'Judge, I'm the victim here, and I don't even know if they've got the right guy, but in any case he's just spent three months in jail, why don't you let him go?' And it was before anybody had had a chance to say anything. The DA hadn't said anything, the public defender hadn't said anything. And the judge says, 'Well, that sounds good to me, does anybody have any objection to that?'
And they looked at each other and they're like, 'No, your honour.' He says, 'Case dismissed.' So then they take, right then and there, they take the handcuffs off of him and they let him go. And so his family comes up to me and they were in the courtroom, I didn't know this, and they thanked me, they're so grateful, I'd gotten him off. And he's so grateful and he's so appreciative. And they invite me back to their house to celebrate. So I go back to their house and the guy says, 'I'm so sorry I mugged you.' Turns out he was the guy. But he says, 'But I'm going to make sure you're known on Green Mount Avenue, this will never happen again.' And sure enough, it didn't. He like introduced me to a bunch of people and I was known in the area then.

So apparently I guess I must have given him my phone number or something, but that summer, again racial tensions were very high in Baltimore. It's getting hot. The previous summer there had been race riots. I get a call at my work, at Johns Hopkins, from this woman who says, 'You've got to come down, you know, they're trying to arrest Terry.' I'm like, 'Who are you? What...?' And she's like, 'I'm Terry's mother. Don't you remember? You got him out of jail.' Like, 'Well, why are you calling me?' 'Because the police are here, they're tearing everything apart.' And I'm like, 'Yes, but why are you calling me?' She's like, 'You're the only white person we know.' I said, 'Okay, I'll come down.' And I arrive and there's the whole neighbourhood is around looking at this house and there's all these cop cars in front of the house and the police are all white and they're in there, and the door is open, and you can see they're tearing the place apart.
They're dumping out drawers, they're... And so I go and I still had this memory of everything that's gone on and I'm just shaking. I show up, I'm kind of the long-haired hippy and I show up and I go up to the door of the house and a cop comes up and I say, what are doing here. And they say, 'We're arresting...' And I was like, 'Do you have a warrant?' And like all the neighbourhood people say, 'Yeah, yeah.' And so the guy stupidly enough goes back and he gets this warrant and he shows it to me. And I look at it and I remember him handing it to me and I'm just shaking I'm so angry at the sort of injustice of all of this and I take it and I check it and I manage to read it and it's an arrest warrant. And I say, 'This is an arrest warrant, it's not a search warrant. It doesn't give you the right to dump out drawers and...' And like all the people around me are like, 'Yeah, you tell 'em.' And they start shaking the... I'm like a riot is starting. But everybody's behind me and I'm kind of emboldened by this and they're shaking. And so they go in and get the supervisor which probably they should have done in the first place. And the supervisor comes out and by now I'm feeling kind of, you know, I've got the people behind me. Literally. And so the sergeant or whoever the supervisor is comes out and we're doing all this on the front step in front of everybody. And he says, 'Who are you?'
You know, I say, 'Well, I'm Danny Hillis.' He says, 'Well, you know, what do you have to do with this?' And here's where I make my big mistake. I say, 'I live here.' Trying to establish that I have the right to ask for something. And everybody goes silent because everybody knows I don't live there. There's no white person that lives any place near there. So the crowd goes silent and the cops go silent and then there's sort of a pause and then the crowd like goes wild, like, 'Whoa! Hey, brother!' They start shaking the cop cars and everybody just goes wild with this sort of crazy idea that I live there. It's like I feel like I'm Kennedy saying, 'I'm a Berliner', you know? And then... So I'm feeling really high on, you know, the peak of my popularity here in the neighbourhood, and you know, everybody's behind me and they're all cheering that I say I live there and things like that. And the cops do what at the time totally surprised me, I didn't see it coming, but in retrospect it was a brilliant thing. Which is they arrested me. They handcuffed me. I'm like, 'Why are you arresting me?' And they're like, 'Well, you live here. The address says we're supposed to arrest...'

But actually they were like at that point worried about a riot starting because their cars were getting shaken and people were gathering and it's hot summer and they're kind of surrounded by this pretty upset crowd. But as soon as like they arrest me the crowd kind of goes silent. They're completely confused, like, 'They arrested the white guy?' I mean, nobody knows what to do with that. So everybody's shocked and confused and they take me and they quickly get me into the cars and they sort of beep and the crowd kind of clears and everybody's totally confused that they arrested the white guy.
And so they get me out of there and they get out of there and they throw me in jail. And of course I'm fuming like, 'This is false arrest, this is ridiculous, I'm obviously not the person whose named in the warrant.' You know, I'm not... It says a black male, I'm obviously... You know? So I'm spouting and they just leave me in jail and they go away and I say, 'Hey, you know, I get a phone call, I know my rights, you haven't Miranda...' They just walk away. Then after about an hour of my ranting, nobody's listening, you know, some supervisor comes in, he says, you know, 'Hey, what happened?'
He starts talking to me, he's like, 'Well, you have to understand, you know, their buddy just got killed. You know, it was a police officer got murdered. Somebody had identified this guy in a mug shot.' And then they kept me there and they sent in sort of more and more people to kind of calm me down. And then eventually what happens is he hears that they're looking for him, he wisely turns himself in to a different police station. And it turned... They establish that he has a perfect alibi, he was actually at work and there's witnesses. And so they realise it's a case of misidentification.
So then once they realise that they've sort of got this problem of this upset hippy whose flashing his ACLU card and so eventually I insist on filing a police complaint and then by then it's midnight or something like that, and I'd call up my parents and have them come down to the police station to pick me up, which they do without complaint. And I tell them the story of what happens and they're very supportive of it. And then the next Monday, I guess this was over a weekend because the next Monday I call up to check about my police complaint and they say, 'Well, you know, it's funny, we've kind of lost all the records of... You know, we've lost the police complaint. But we've also lost the records of your being arrested, and maybe it's just as well for you because you really don't want an arrest for accessory to the murder of a police officer to come up every time you get pulled over. But if you want we can refile all the charges, you know? We can... You can refile your complaint and we can, you know, make another copy of the arrest.' And I think about it a little while and I think, maybe it's just as well they lost everything. So that was the end of that story.

So, one of the advantages of living all over the world was that I got to try out every different kind of school. I got private schools, public schools, religious schools, home schooled. And one of the things I came to realise is what really matters is not so much the school but the teacher. And I had some great teachers, really fortunate. I had some terrible teachers. And one of the things I felt about school is that in general I felt it wasted my time. I spent so many hours of the most precious years of my life sitting in a classroom listening to teachers talk often about the same things over and over again.
And I remember sitting as a child and saying, 'I'll never make my children do this.' And I didn't. I home schooled my children. And I think from the very beginning I had a little bit of an adversarial relationship with the administration of whatever schools I was at. And I remember in kindergarten there was... We had these water fountains which were pipes that had holes drilled in them. And they turned up the water fountain and all the kids could drink at once. But they only turned it up a little bit so the kids actually had to put their mouths down on the pipes and I remember thinking that was really unsanitary. If they just turned it up a little bit more it would squirt up higher. So just as we were waiting for... To be picked up at the end of the day once, I went over and adjusted the water fountain so the kids wouldn't have to put their mouth down, and I adjusted a little bit too much and I ended up spraying all of the kids just before their parents arrived. And the teachers were furious at me, they thought I had done it on purpose. Whereas actually I was just trying to correct an obvious problem and what they had done. But so I often had problems with the teachers or the administration when they did stupid things.

The worst I ever had was in fourth grade. I went to a very good school which was called Lida Lee Tall Elementary School. But I had a teacher named Mrs Hughes who I was constantly getting into arguments with because she was constantly wrong and she was trying to teach people wrong things. And I would correct her. You know, she'd just... You know, had facts of history wrong, her geography wrong. And she didn't like me very much.
I remember one thing is... Because it was an experimental school we were allowed to build something and I decided I would build a magazine rack. And I designed it, really kind of interesting design for a magazine rack. And she said, 'That's not what a magazine rack looks like, you can't build it that way.' And I was like, 'No, this is the way I want to build it.' And I got into a big fight with her. And she said, 'Okay, well we'll have the carpenter when he comes, he'll tell you how a magazine rack is really built.' And so the carpenter who was supposed to teach us showed up, and he saw my drawing and he said, 'Oh, this is a brilliant way to build a magazine rack.' And I felt so vindicated and she was infuriated. And I built the magazine rack and she wouldn't let us keep it in the classroom, so they took it in the library, Mrs Wilner, the librarian, took it, and it became the magazine rack in the library. Which made me very happy but did not make her very happy.

We had an election for class president. And when I won Mrs Hughes decided that a girl had to be class president and that we would have to rehold the election with only girls running. And she would do things like that to me constantly. It was so bad that actually one of the students, I later found out, withdrew from the school because she was so upset, she would go home and tell her parents the stories of how mean Mrs Hughes had been to me. And she actually went to a different school because of that. But I would get into a fight.
Finally my mother went in to the principal with me and Mrs Hughes and we had a meeting and the principal says, 'What seems to be the problem?' And I just waited for Mrs Hughes to say something, and she waited for me to say something, and my mother said, 'Well, they get into these arguments.' And the principal said, 'Well, for example, what?' 'Well, they were just arguing about tadpoles.' And I said, 'She says that tadpoles eat their tails. They don't eat their tails, they absorb their tails.' And Mrs Hughes says, 'Absorb means eat. And they consume.' I said, 'They consume their tails'. 'Consume means eat. It doesn't mean absorb, it means eat.' And we started like getting into this argument. And finally the principal said, 'I think I see the problem.' And of course Mrs Hughes was just wrong. That was the problem. So they moved me to a different class which was... That was the most terrible teacher I had.

But I also had the best teacher, I think. Well, I had a lot of good teachers, but one of the wonderful teachers I had was the librarian at that same school, Lida Lee Tall. And I would go into the library and she... I would always ask for books on rocks because I loved collecting rocks. And, but she would bring me other books. So she brought me my first book on electricity for example. And she brought me my first science fiction book which was a book called, The Wonderful Trip to the Mushroom Planet. And so she introduced me to two great loves of my life.
And later when I was... Years and years later when I was at MIT I started thinking about how important she had been to me and I decided to go back and see if she was still there. And I was like, you know, this was from fourth grade to MIT. So it was certainly more than a decade. Then I went back by the school, I went back by the library, and I walked in. And Mrs Wilner looked up and said, 'Hello, Danny.' Kind of amazing. That's how well she knew... And she had had so many hundreds of students since then. And I thanked her for all of that.
And then actually years later, Time Magazine was doing something on education and they interviewed me. And I told this story about how Mrs Wilner had introduced me to electricity and I said, you know, 'If you tell the story, would you use her name?' And Time Magazine did tell the story and they did use her name. And I thought, I wonder if she still... You know, could be in contact. And so I looked up on the internet and I found a story of a church she had been to, a church newsletter that said she'd moved to a certain town. And I looked up the town and there were only three people named Wilner. Of course I didn't know her first name. But there was an Isabelle Wilner and so I called. And the first one I got, I said, 'Excuse me, but did you used to be a librarian at Lida Lee Tall Elementary School?' And she said, 'Yes, I did.' And I said, 'Well, I just, you know, I was calling you up because I wanted to tell you, you know, how much it had meant to me.' And she said, 'Well, of course I remember you.' And she said, 'But not only that, but you know, you mentioned my name in that article and lots of people have been calling me. And it's really, you know, makes me realise I was appreciated.'
And indeed, it turns out, you know, she had that effect on a lot of other people's lives and I later, you know, heard from other people that, you know, she was a student that really got to... She was a teacher who really got to know each student individually and treat them individually and cared about them. And you know, she was remarkable and really make a positive contribution. As did many other people. There were, you know, lots of science teachers I had who were just fantastic and encouraging and, you know, there were some who were threatened, like Mr Daniels. But there were others that I had in junior high school that were just incredibly supportive and, you know, let me go as far as I wanted and really tried to help me in every way they could.

I think when I really opened up to teachers was when I went to MIT. So I had... I had read a science fiction book called Have Space Suit-Will Travel by Heinlein. And in that story the kid wins a space suit in the lottery and gets to go to space and he ends up saving the world and getting the girl and... And as a prize for him saving the world they give him a scholarship to MIT. And I didn't know what MIT was but I decided that's where I wanted to go, if that was, you know, the prize that you got for saving the world.
I didn't even know what MIT stood for but when people said where are you going to go to college I just said MIT. I never thought about going any place else. And I didn't even apply to any place else. And you know, fortunately I was lucky having Kristiakowsky as my... You know, I worked for him. And in retrospect, you know, a recommendation for him pretty much guaranteed me to get in. I didn't know any of this. And I had a really great science teacher and she wrote me a recommendation. So I had good recommendations and so I got into MIT early admission. And then I realised, really there there's no point in showing up to high school anymore. And so I didn't. So I never showed up for my high school graduation, I never graduated, but...

And then I came up to MIT and that was an amazing moment. Have you ever...? In Alice in Wonderland... Not Alice in Wonderland, in the Wizard of Oz, there's this movie I finally got to see in colour. It all starts out in black and white. But when she opens the door in the land of Oz everything turns into Technicolor. That's what MIT was like for me. It was like it opened the door and I saw this whole other dimension to the world. I met all of these people who knew about everything and who were excited about ideas. And so the whole world kind of opened up for me amazingly. MIT was the perfect place for me.

I remember the first night I arrived I had been... I was very interested in neurobiology. As a kid I had actually... My father had helped me tissue culture a frog heart and I remember looking under the microscope and seeing those frog cells beating, I was growing frog cells and they continued to beat, and I got very interested in neurons and neurobiology. And that was sort of the connection between biology and computing.
I thought I wanted to be a neurobiologist and we had these papers, and I'd read this amazing paper called What a Frog's Eye Tells the Frog's Brain, about the processing and the retina. And I came to MIT and my first night at MIT there was a party held by the house master in the dorm that I was staying at. And I remember thinking of this guy as like a 300 pound Jewish Benjamin Franklin. He just knew about everything and he had these funny square glasses like Benjamin Franklin. And he had this New York accent and had... He was obese. Very strange character.
But he sat there and he said to all the incoming students, he's say, 'What are you interested in?' And whatever they were interested in, he would try to talk them out of it. So I was watching this. And he says to me, 'What are you interested in?' And I said, 'Neurobiology.' And he said, 'That crock of shit. I defy you to tell me one good paper that's ever been written in that field.' So I was very happy, I'd just read this paper of what a frog's eye tells the frog's brain. So I started explaining it to him. And he said... He listened to me and he had never listened to anybody else much but he asked me questions and I thought, wow, it really helps to have your facts, have done your homework.
But then he starts asking me, 'Well, I don't understand, how do they measure that? Doesn't that...? How do you get the probe in the neuron the second time? How do you...? And doesn't this result contradict that result?' And he starts asking me all these questions that I hadn't thought about and completely tears apart the paper. And just makes it seem like nonsense. And after a while he says, 'Now I want you to... you know, is that an example of a good paper?' I was like, 'No, I guess not.' And he's like, 'Yes, and what about the person who wrote it? They couldn't have... You know, they must have either been dishonest or stupid, right?' I was like, 'Well, I have to admit, it doesn't sound like they really thought it through very much.' He was like, 'Okay, thank you, I... That's all I wanted to hear you say.' And he goes onto the next person.
Then people come up and pat me on the back and say, 'Guess who you were talking to? That was Jerry Lettvin, the guy that wrote the paper you were talking about.' That was my introduction to MIT. And the irony is that Jerry Lettvin and I became friends and he did convince me that I didn't want to go into neurobiology, I wanted to go into computers. And he said that I should go meet Marvin Minsky. Which is a whole other story.

[Q] Was there a point somewhere along the way that it occurred to you, you were probably much cleverer than most other people?
Well, I would say that maybe the most important thing I learnt in school was that an awful lot of adults actually didn't know what they were talking about. And it took me... It took a while to dawn on me. Actually, I mostly... I learnt that in church for instance. Because my parents were very religious and I always went to Sunday School. They were Southern Baptist. And the... I remember once... Well certainly I knew that they kind of evaded certain questions. Like we had to learn the ten commandments. And of course I asked, 'What's adultery?' And they looked sort of embarrassed and they said, 'Well, that's coveting your neighbour's wife.' And I'm like, 'No, it's not, that's covered up here in commandment number three' or whatever, they wouldn't have... You know? So I knew there was a bit of shuffling going on.
But there was a big moment for me when in the Southern Baptist that I grew up with believe that alcohol was evil. And they were tee-totalers. And we were taught that in Sunday School. And one day I asked, 'If alcohol is so bad, why did Jesus turn the water into wine?' And they looked a little confused and they said, 'Well, wine wasn't really alcoholic in those days.' And I was like, 'No, that's ridiculous. It says that the guests at the wedding were drunk and this wine was even better than the other wine, you know? Of course it was alcoholic. And then they were getting drunk.' And then they sort of hemmed and hawed around.
But what shocked me wasn't that they were sort of evading the question because I was kind of used to that from the ten commandments thing, but what really shocked me was I realised they had never even asked the question before. And when I realised that I started realising, you know, they haven't really thought this through that much. They really haven't thought about things that much. So that was for me a moment where I think I started doubting the things I heard from adults.

When I came to MIT everybody was so smart. And they knew so much. And I think all of us who showed up were suddenly around people that were really smart and knew much more, much smarter people than we'd ever been. But it took me a while to realise actually that a lot of the things that were... Seemed to be very hard for some of the other students didn't seem so hard. In fact, I had this funny thing because I went to... I went to work for Marvin Minsky very early on which is another story. But I'm in this environment where everybody's showing up, being very paranoid about everybody else being smarter than they are, and so that's the sort of background for this story. But I spent my first couple of years working in Seymour Papert's lab and Marvin Minsky's lab. And so I didn't really take the courses you were supposed to take. And at that time they let you, you know, plan your own courses, and there weren't many rules about what courses you had to take other than you had to take a certain number... A certain set of courses in order to graduate. And by the time I got to my junior year I realised I was not on the course to graduate. I hadn't taken nearly enough courses. I hadn't taken some of the basic introductory courses.
And so I decided to take one semester and catch up from my two years of not taking courses and just concentrate on that. And so I signed up for every course I was supposed to have taken. Which there was no way to even attend all the classes. But by then I'd been in the culture enough and I had learnt enough. I mean, it wasn't like I wasn't learning anything. I'd really been learning the stuff even though I hadn't been taking the courses. So it was for me, a lot of it was kind of review material and lots of things.
But so everybody knew that I had signed up for 140 units of courses which each unit is supposed to be an hour a week, right? So... of work. So there was no way I could do this if it really was that. But there was at that time no rule against it. So I signed up for it and I ran around and took all these courses. And the hard part was scheduling all the final exams because, you know, just being at the final I had to move when I took certain finals.
And after this entire semester of totally concentrating on this and so on, people watching to see if I would survive, the last course I had to take was actually the vector calculus course which I should have taken in my freshman year. And the course was such that you could do quizzes along the way. And if you had done well on the quizzes then you were sort of guaranteed a B in the course, no matter what you did on the final exam. And I knew this and I had done well on the quizzes. Not because I was so good at vector calculus but because I was really good at figuring out other ways of solving the problems. But you could usually figure out a geometric way to solve the problem or something like that. But I... So I got to this exam and because it's an exam that everybody has to take it was held in the gymnasium. And it's one of these situations where there's tables laid out so that people aren't sitting next to each other and pencils and everybody turns over their page at once and it's a giant course that everybody's in. So everybody shows up. We turn over our exam, and this is my last exam at the end of this very burn-out semester of taking courses. And I'm just sick of it by then. I'm just so tired of it. I look at the first problem and it's some horrible triple integral... And I just... I can't even look at it. And I just sort of turned to look at the next. And the next one is like something that involves cosec and sins and tangents... This is horrible. And I just paged through it to look for like an easy problem to start on. I page through and there's like 20 problems and they just all look horrible. So I just think, you know what, I don't care. It doesn't matter if I get an A or a B, I'm just tired of this. And about five minutes pass as I think. So I go up and I just take my exam book and I hand it in. And everybody looks up and they all go [woooh]... And they're all convinced that I've just like aced it, solved all the problems. That gives you an idea of the sort of paranoia everybody had about how much smarter everybody else was. So I got a kind of undeserved reputation from that.

But then the deserved thing, the one that I'm more proud of, you know, was I had a professor named Jean Carlo Rhoda who was quite a character. And he taught the probability course. And... Or as he put it, probability was common rhetorics divided by EM. And so he taught this course and he was very interested in this new formulation of common rhetorics where instead of sets you consider something called multisets. And a multiset is something you can be a member of more than once...
And so, you know, there's a kind of formula. If I have ten things, the number of ways of choosing three of them. It's called 'n choose k'. Well there's a similar thing for multisets. It's sort of 'n multiset k'. And when we were studying these I realised there was a relationship between two of these that was really mathematically very surprising. And this was something he had studied. So I went up to Rhoda afterwards, after the class... Now Rhoda knew me very well because this was the semester that I was taking all the classes. And so I was always late to his class because I had another class before it on the other side of campus. And so he would always be writing on the blackboard when I would walk into the class. But he must have had eyes in the back of his head because I would slip into the classroom and he would be saying, and so we have 'n choose k, summed over – and we notice that Mr Hillis has arrived late again – summed over the...' And then he would continue. And he would do that every time.
So anyway, I discovered this amazing relationship between these two mathematical things that didn't necessarily seem to be related. And so I went up to him afterwards and I said, 'Look, I've... Look at this relationship.' And he said, 'Oh, that is incorrect. Go...' And I said, 'Well, I have a proof.' And he says, 'Go and try a few examples.' So I had access to a computer which was a rare thing in those days. Remember, this is a time when MIT students had slide rules, not calculators. But I had access to a computer. So I printed out 10,000 examples on a big sheet. And I came back to him, went to his office and knocked on the door and said, 'I tried some examples, you see?' And he said to his graduate student, Dr Baclawski, he said, 'Dr Baclawski, would you please talk to Mr Hillis and find out where he has made a mistake?' And then he goes back to work. So I go over to Baclawski and I say, 'Look, I have...' You know, I showed it to him. He said, 'That can't be true', I said, 'Well, let me show you the proof.' And I show him the proof and Dr Baclawski says, 'Wow, that's really amazing.' And Rhoda who's been in the office but pretending to pay no attention slams down his pencil and says, 'Dr Baclawski, don't tell me that you've been taken in by Mr Hillis.'
And he goes, and he walks up, and he looks at the board. And I start to try to explain and he says, 'Hush.' And he looks at the proof. And he puts down the chalk and he goes back. He sits down at his desk and he picks up his pencil and he says, 'Mr Hillis, you are correct. I take my hat off to you. You may go now.' So I was very proud of that one. And then I thought I'd been... That he'd be a little bit dismissive of me, but then shortly afterwards I get an invitation to be an editor on his mathematics journal with people, you know, great mathematicians like Erdős and so and so. I got my name up on the masthead right under Erdős'. And so he more than paid me back for having surprised him.

When I was a kid... I think I realised that... Well, I was different in so many different ways because I'd also lived so many different places, I knew different things. I mean, I knew I was smart but I also was knowledgeable in ways that the other... You know, I knew about things that... And I was also very lucky that I had, you know, scientists as parents. And so I lived in a bigger world than most of the kids I was around. Literally. So that was maybe the big difference.
And then I think when I went to MIT, I think until that semester I kind of assumed I was pretty average at MIT. But then when I realised that actually taking all those courses at once really wasn't that hard for me and everybody else was really surprised by it, and they really did have to study it. And it began to sink into me that, you know, maybe some of these things were easier for me than they were for the other students. But that took a while to kind of notice.

I think one of the things that I came to learn is that there really isn't any such thing as smart. In general intelligence. Like that. I was around people who were much better than me at certain things and much worse than me at other things and I was better than them in some things. And what I've come to believe is that intelligence is kind of a catch-all word or what Marvin called a suitcase word where you throw in lots of different skills and so on. And so one of the great things about a place like MIT is there are a lot of people who are smart in lots of different kinds of ways.
And then, you know, I got to go to places like Disney where people are smart in completely other kinds of ways. And so I think smart has lots of different dimensions to it. And so I don't believe in this idea of IQ that sort of, you know, there's many ways of being smart and I'm kind of dumb in some ways and I'm smart in other ways. And different people have different mixtures. And, you know, I'm lucky I've got a fun mixture that works for me. But I need to be around people who are much smarter than me in other ways in order to exist. I would probably not be much use if you put me out in the jungle. I can think of some other people who would survive much better than I would.

So when I arrived at MIT, and Jerry Lettvin convinced me not to go into neurobiology, he told me to go and meet Marvin Minsky who of course I had heard of. And he was kind of, I guess, a hero. But I didn't imagine him being somebody I could actually meet. But he was over in the artificial intelligence laboratory which in those days was in Technology Square. So it was a separate building that you had to have a special key to get into any of the labs.
So I went over there and slipped in behind somebody else and looked around for Marvin and couldn't find Marvin. But I discovered a library there. And so I thought, well, I'll look in the library, I'll look at all their proposals and figure out why they might need me. And so I found one proposal that they'd made to the National Science Foundation that said that they were working on computers for children, which this is the day when computers were big, expensive objects. But they told the National Science Foundation that they believed some day every school would have a computer. And based on this sort of radical idea that we should start thinking of what to do with them.
And they said, 'One of the things we'd like to work on but we don't really know how to solve is how children who can't even read and write could use a computer.' And it was like, 'Ah, something they haven't solved. I could do that.' So I came up with an idea of how children could interface with a computer using little blocks with pictures on them and cards with pictures on them. And by arranging pictures they could talk to the computer. And that was enough to get me an appointment with Seymour Papert who was the co-director of the laboratory.
And he liked the idea and it turns out they had a graduate student who was working on something similar. So I got hired to make this thing called 'the slot machine'. So it's a bunch of slots that you put cards into it. And so I built this thing for programming which actually did work and what was amazing about it is that it was the first time we ever used a computer with autistic children. And there was this amazing magic that happened when we had autistic children that couldn't read or even speak, interacting with the computer. And somehow they related to it and connected to it and so that was very exciting. And it was the first time we'd ever seen it.

But while that was all fun, it was a bit of a distraction because what I was really trying to do was meet Marvin Minsky. And every time I would go by his laboratory... I now had a key, but every time I would go by his office he wasn't there. And I started asking where Marvin Minsky was, and they said, 'Oh, he comes in at night and he works down in the basement on this computer that he's building.'
So I used my key and I came in at night and I went down, and sure enough there was Marvin sitting there working with some of his students. And... but I was too awed by Marvin to actually go up and talk to him. So I just hung around and I looked at the diagrams of the computer that he was building, trying to see if I could come up with something clever to say to him. And I noticed that there was actually a bug, there was a design error. And so I thought, 'Oh, great, this is my entry.' So I went up to Marvin and I said, 'Excuse me, but I think there's a mistake here.' And I'm pointing out to him, he says, 'Yes, fix it.' So I fixed it on the diagram, I say, 'It needs to be rewired.' He says, 'Well, rewire the computer', you know? And so I changed the design of the computer and I... And then I found another one and then after a while I stopped asking him. I would just start changing the diagrams and, you know, redesigning this computer and rewiring it. And after a while Marvin just assumed that I worked for him.
And so that's how I met Marvin Minksy.

And then we would work late at night and there wouldn't be anything to eat, so he'd invite me over to his house. And that's how I met his daughter, also. And his daughter became my girlfriend after a while. And I eventually just moved into his house. And we cleared out the basement. And I lived in Marvin's basement while I worked with Marvin on this computer which was quite remarkable.
 

I kept working with Seymour [Papert] on Turtles. And Seymour tried to make... There was a company called General Turtle which Seymour had tried to start. And he was kind of a hopeless businessman. So I decided I could make these robot Turtles better so I started a company called Terrapin which made robot Turtles. So that was a fun thing and microprocessors were just starting to come out. And we had a computer language, we started making this logo computer language, Terrapin did. And I went out and there was a new magazine that started called Bite Magazine. And the editor was very excited about my Turtles and he said, 'You know, there's this guy making this little computer, you should go talk to him.'
So he set me up to go out to California to meet Steve Jobs and [Steve] Wozniak. And I really liked Wozniak but I thought Steve was a bit of a jerk. So I decided not to do anything with them. But then later Steve actually got kicked out of Apple later and he was really interested in making this other computer. But he literally wasn't allowed on the Apple campus. But he had a little group and I went out with Marvin to help him work on this little computer to get it to work, which was the Macintosh. And he was trying to design a custom chip for it. And it was behind schedule, and I knew how to design integrated circuits, I had designed chips. So he hired me to get the chip back on schedule. And I looked at the schedule and I listened to his release date and I said, 'You know, you will never get this chip done by the time you're expecting to release this. But you have this little 68,000 simulator, why don't you just use that as the product?' Which is actually what he eventually ended up doing, but at the time he really didn't like that answer and he got really angry at me. He's like, 'You're just not trying hard enough, you're...', you know? And I was like, 'No, it's not a matter of trying harder, you know, here's the schedule, you can't do it.' And he said, 'Well, if you're not going to do it to the schedule I need somebody who will.' And I finally said, 'Great, find somebody, and I quit.' And of course he didn't find anybody and he ended up doing what I suggested he had to. And that was the Macintosh.
But that was my first run-in with Steve Jobs. But we kept up. And we stayed acquaintances. I wouldn't say we were exactly friends but we respected each other.

A few years later I went to France and I was at the Centre Mondial which is a whole other set of stories. And Steve showed up, and since I knew Steve I got the job of taking care of him, to show him around Paris. And when he had arrived, Steve, on the way over he had fallen in love with the model that had ridden next to him on the plane. And she hadn't actually given him her last name or her phone number but she had agreed to meet him the next day, and she didn't show up. So he was quite sure this was the love of his life. And so he was obsessed with re-finding her. And I had... I was working for a big French official who wanted to keep Steve happy. So Steve... So he said, 'Well, just do whatever he wants.' And I said, 'Well, he wants to find this person.' So he hired a private investigator to try to get the list and search for this model. So we spent days looking for this disappeared model who hadn't shown up for breakfast.
And that was... Nicholas Negroponte was running this group and so I was getting kind of tired of searching for Steve's model. And then we were also buying a present for Lisa, it was Steve's daughter. And so... although at the time he sort of didn't acknowledge that. And... but he was obsessed of finding the perfect present for her. So I did a lot of shopping with Steve around and he would almost buy something and then change his mind. And finally he found this beautiful glass horse. And so he brought out his American Express card to pay for it. And that was the days when American Express was doing this ad campaign where executives would say, 'You don't know who I am, but when I use my American Express, then it says I'm...' So he brought out his American Express, Steve Jobs, CEO of Apple Computers. I was thinking, 'Oh, this is going to be just like the ad.' And he brought out his card and put it down. And the card bounced. So that made Steve furious. So he yelled at them and made them call up banks and like, do you know who I am? And made a big enough fuss that they finally cleared the card. And so he was really upset about that. So Nicholas Negroponte decided to take us all out to dinner. And he had a little car, I don't remember what it was, but it was a hatchback.
And so we all crammed into the car and there were six of us. Like I forget who all was in. But Steve and I ended up going into the back, into the hatchback, so that we were like right up against the window. So we're driving through the streets of Paris, Steve obsessing about the woman that we couldn't find. And as we're driving there with our faces crammed up against the back of the car, this taxicab driver drives up behind us, and it's this beautiful Parisian woman is the taxicab driver. And she thinks it's funny that we're smashed into this car. And she smiles at us and waves at us. And all of a sudden, like, Steve has a new love. So he insists that Dmitri, who's Nicholas' son, take his card which says, Steve Jobs, CEO of Apple Computers, and he writes his hotel number on the back of it. He's quite sure, of course, that she's winking at him. I think she's winking at me, but... So he writes his phone number on the back of the card and had Dmitri run around to the taxicab and give the card... And, you know, that was when he was over this other woman and never heard a thing about her again.

So Steve [Jobs] and I had an on and off difficult, sometimes difficult, relationship for years. For instance when I came out with the connection machine that was a perfect black cube and I showed it to Steve, Steve looked at it and said, 'A perfect black cube. Oh shit.' And I thought, 'Oh shit, he's going to make a computer that's a perfect black cube.' Which of course he did. That was the Next. And then he sort of implied that I had stolen the idea from him. But of course I had made mine a year before.
So we had little things like that that happened. But he tried to hire away some of my people and I wouldn't let him. And I actually met with him and said, 'I'm not going to let this happen because if you get... So just lay off my people.' And he tried to hire the person, but I made sure it didn't happen. So, and that person, was actually Brewster Kahle. And Brewster had made the first search engine on the connection machine. But I got Brewster to go and get Alan Kay to hire him because he wanted to develop the search engine, Thinking Machines wasn't really a position to do that. So Alan Kay did... And eventually Brewster spun out and started WAIS and started the first search engine company and then the internet archive. But that was all before the web.

The first search engine was actually at Thinking Machines before there was ever a web. It was called WAIS.
[Q] Yes, yes, of course, of course, yes.
And Brewster made it. And actually looked at files that were... there were RAW files that were published. And would look at Reuters' news stories and things like that. It was pretty exciting thing. I remember showing it to people and everybody was interested but they didn't really think it would affect them that much. I remember showing it to a vice president of AT&T and I said, 'You know, you should really pay attention to this internet thing, it's going to be important.' And the vice president said, 'Oh, yes, we've had people look at the internet. We've decided if it turns out to be important we'll just buy it.'

Marvin [Minsky] was an extraordinary teacher and a great mentor. And in fact really most of the people who became the heads of AI labs and leaders in AI were Marvin's students. And it was for a few reasons. Partly he was fun and he was funny. I remember once walking into his office and he would just roll up a piece of paper and he threw it into the trash can and he overshot the trashcan, like, way overshot it. He looked confused. And then he said, 'Oh, it's one half inches squared.'
But he always had... But he always had a kind of intellectual generosity. He was always happy to explain things. And he believed something... He taught me something which is you don't understand something unless you understand it in more than one way.
So I remember once when I was an undergraduate, I discovered... I found out about this thing which all MIT students get fascinated by which is if you take i, the imaginary number, and you raise e to the power of pi times i, it's equal to negative one. So sort of all of these magic numbers somehow come together in this amazing way. And I walked into him as a freshman having discovered this, and I said, 'Why is this true Marvin?' And he explained it to me in terms of the imaginary plane and sort of geometrically and I felt like I totally understood it. I said, 'Oh, thank you for explaining that.' And he was like, 'No, you don't understand it because you only understand it one way. Let me show it to you another way.' And then he used Taylor series and Taylor expansions. And showed it to me a completely different way and caused me to understand it a different way. And only after he'd explained it a few different ways do you really see, well, it sort of has to be true because you look at it from every angle and it's true.
But that kind of generosity as a teacher, not just answering my question but answering in a way that connected up all these different things, that was very typical of Marvin. And he would always challenge you of what you thought and he always loved it when you would challenge him or contradict him. So I would spend so much time arguing with him. And he really taught me to think. Much more, you know, I think literally true. He taught me to think.

It was fun because I was living in his house while he was writing Society of Mind. And that book, every chapter, he would stay up all night and he would write a chapter.
And the chapters are kind of only a couple of pages. And so I would wake up in the morning and I would go and I would see... He'd leave me the printout of what he'd written the night before. And then I'd read it. And then he would wake up later and I'd talk about it with him. And discuss it. And then the next day he would write another chapter. And I now read that book... I've seen that book since then, I can't imagine reading it through from cover to cover because it's just such a density of ideas. I can't imagine how you would read it without having a day-long conversation with Marvin in between every chapter. It's so many ideas in it.
And so that was pretty wonderful.

It was also wonderful because he was so generous. I didn't understand how extraordinary this was until I looked back on it, but he would introduce me to amazing people. So, you know, because of him I had Claude Shannon on my thesis committee or he got, you know, he introduced me to people like Barney Oliver or the... Really he would take me, whenever he went to a conference like NASA had a huge... They brought in a bunch of VIPs to decide what the future of NASA was going to be after the space shuttle.
And these amazing people showed up like Robert Heinlein and mostly people Marvin's age. [John] Tukey, that's where I met Tukey for example, was at that conference. The guy that invented the Fourier transform and a lot of statistics. And became friends with him. I met amazing people there. But Marvin brought me, as an undergraduate probably then, and I got to participate in this amazing conference. I actually got to... Since Heinlein was why I'd gone to MIT, I got to tell Heinlein the story of, you know, reading Have Space Suit - Will Travel, that's why I went to MIT. And Heinlein was a very kind of grumpy guy and he said, 'I'm not responsible for your life, kid'. I was sort of disappointed but his wife came up to me afterwards and was very nice to me and said, 'Don't worry, he's just like that'. And she was very nice to me. But, you know, that I could go to a conference like that was extraordinary.
So he made sure that I met these amazing people like Arthur Clark for example would come to his house, science fiction writers like Isaac Asimov and he would always be sure that I knew they were coming and introduce me to them. Ted Sturgeon was another one of my favourites. He loved science fiction writers. And he really, you know, was... Set it up so that they met his students. Really was pretty extraordinary, I think, to get a chance to know those people.

So Marvin would always pretend like he was very logical and unemotional. So he would never... In those days he would never express... I mean, he was obviously fond of me, but he had this sort of German, you know, treat your students like minions kind of thing. And, you know, later when he became older he actually became much warmer with me. But he obviously did care about me. And at one point I was going through a difficult time emotionally with something and... But Marvin wasn't one to talk to me about something like that. But he sort of perceived I was, and I remember he found some place a double concave lens. And he came to me and I was like sitting there sadly and he handed it to me and he said, 'Here, this makes things look smaller.' That was the closest he came to getting involved in my emotional life.
But I always appreciated that.

Every fourth of July we celebrated by making an explosion. And it was my job to make an explosion out of things lying around the house. Which actually is not so hard in Marvin's house because there were all kinds of interesting things lying around. So I would for instance be able to use a jar of magnesium powder, some ammonium tri-iodide or... It was very easy to make explosions. But one year I decided to get creative and make an explosion by filling a giant gas bag with hydrogen and oxygen which I would create by electrolysis.
And I was talking with Marvin and he was like, 'How are you going to make the explosion?' I was, like, explained what I was doing. I was saying, 'It's bubbling up right now.' He was like, 'How are you keeping the oxygen and the hydrogen separate?' And I was like, 'Well, I'm not keeping them separate, I'm just going to ignite them with a spark.' And he said, 'Well, they're going to self-ignite.' And I said, 'No, no, no, I think they need a spark to ignite.' And he said, 'Well, I actually think that...' And just as he was saying that there was a huge bang. I said, I guess you're right, Marvin.
Whenever Marvin got an exciting consulting gig like to work for Schlumberger and go out on an oil rig he would bring me along. So he would always make sure that they hired me too. And so we had all kinds of adventures together. Sailing out in the Gulf of Mexico, getting picked up by cranes and lifted up onto oil rigs. So we had a huge amount of fun together. And did right up to the end of his life. Actually, one of the blessings of moving back to Cambridge was I got to spend that last year or so with Marvin. And he was himself right up to the end, so it was really wonderful to get to spend the time with him.

When I was a graduate student I was very interested in making a thinking machine, artificial intelligence. But I knew that the computers that we had available at the time were not nearly powerful enough to do it. So I had to make a computer that was thousands of times more powerful. Actually it turns out I had to make a computer that was millions of times more powerful. But I started by making one thousands of times more powerful. And I knew that, you know, to get neural networks and things we needed much more computing power than we were going to get.
And so that's why I started making parallel computers, was to make a thinking machine with them. So that's why my company was called Thinking Machines. And indeed, eventually, that method did work. It turns out they needed to be even more powerful, but pretty much exactly the methods that we were trying for training computers with neural networks, are pretty much exactly the ones that are working now. And the parallel computers are pretty much exactly like the ones I made. But they just needed to be much faster. So technology had to improve another factor of a thousand before it became possible. But it's interesting how close the ideas are of how that works. Or how they worked, to what we were trying to do then.

When I arrived at the artificial intelligence laboratory... It was kind of the golden age of AI. Everything seemed possible. So we were just getting computers to pass the first IQ test, the first analogy tests. Or we were just getting the first computers to reason about structures of blocks and where they would fall over or doing the first language translation. Or playing, you know, they'd beat people at checkers. And we knew that they would beat people at chess.
And it was still a time when it wasn't obvious to other people that computers could be smart. So I remember there were a lot of philosophers, like a guy by the name of [Hubert] Dreyfus and another by the name of [Joseph] Weizenbaum who had arguments. I remember Dreyfus had this argument, well computers can play checkers because that can be done by simple mechanical means. But chess requires true intuition and intelligence. So a computer will never be able to play chess because it requires human intuition. And lots of people believed him. And of course we knew it was nonsense, but computers just weren't fast enough to play chess yet.
And I don't know what he ended up saying when, you know, computers became... Beat [Garri] Kasparov, but he probably shifted to, 'Oh, well yes, but emotions require human intuition.' So there's lots of things that, you know, people, when they don't have the imagination to see that the machine could do them, they imagine they have some magic human quality that allows them to do it. And so there's a kind of... It's very analogous to vitalism in life where there was a long time where people didn't believe that life could be made out of just organic molecules. They believed it had to have some special ingredient to make it alive. There's still lots of people who believe a machine can't be really intelligent, it has to have some special ingredient like consciousness or something that's some magic elixir that comes from the outside. But I think it's just nonsense. I think that special ingredient emerges from the interaction of all the interaction of simple things like life emerges from the chemicals, consciousness emerges from the computation. But at that time in AI there wasn't much evidence that that was true, but it was looking really good because everything that we were trying, like vision and speech translation and robots, it was all making huge progress very fast. And so there was kind of a sense that if we just worked on it a bit harder, everything would just work.

What we discovered was that the things that we thought were hard about intelligence like playing chess or solving calculus problems were actually really easy. It was easy to get the computer to do those. It was much harder to do the things that were so easy for us that we didn't even notice that they were happening, like recognising a face. And so the irony is the easy stuff turned out to be hard and the hard stuff turned out to be easy. But even the easy stuff that turned out to be hard we're really starting to do now because we've gotten the computational capacity to do that.
But I don't think we understood that when I first arrived at the AI lab. We did have this tremendous excitement that we were onto something. And we were also onto something about computers and the Internet and, you know, using computers. We were using computers to write our term papers. We called it 'the million dollar typewriter'. It was... Because a computer was a million dollars and using it to write a term paper was, you know, really not legitimate use of funds or we did things like some people had programmed a video... What we would now call a video game on the computer. Space War. So we would sneak in and work on video games and word processing and email systems and chat systems. And all of this stuff that we weren't supposed to be doing. That's the stuff that turned out to be, you know, billion dollar industries. Was all the things that we weren't supposed to be doing. And the stuff that we were supposed to be doing which was the AI is still kind of a research problem. But the things we were doing with it in the spare time, those were the parts of computers that took off because it turns out the same things that excited us about them excited the world about them.
And so, yes, I'd love to go back there and relook at, realising the things that we did that turned out to be important that we had no idea. I remember for example we would send email around but we realised that you couldn't really convey emotion in an email. And so there was this mailing list that we said, 'Well, you know, let's invent a smile. Let's use like a colon and a parenthesis. Let's invent a wink. Which is semi-colon and...' And we were discussing this. And I remember thinking, you know, wow, this is such a waste of time, we're doing all this silly stuff.
But in the end, you know, all that stuff really ended up mattering quite a lot to people. At the time I don't think we had much of a sense of how important it was.

We had this thing called the ARPANET which was the precursor to the Internet. And then when the Internet came out which was the ARPANET that we would let other people onto it was just as we were starting Thinking Machines. And I remember we introduced the 'dot com' convention and you could register things. And so I actually got to register the third domain name. The first one was BBNN, it was the people who developed the internet. The second one was Symbolics. And then it came time for me to register, and I could have any name I wanted. And so I picked 'Think.com' which is still registered as the third oldest domain name.
And I remember thinking at the time, I was like, wow, maybe I should register some others because people, you know, a lot of these others people are going to want. Maybe I should get some other, you know, good ones. And then I thought, oh, that wouldn't be very nice to register a domain name that I wouldn't actually use. So I didn't. But that was kind of, you know, the spirit of things back in those days. We were all trying to be nice to each other, we all knew each other. Which is also why the Internet is designed with the security flaws it has because we all did know each other, we kind of trusted each other. So it was designed to be a network among trusted peers.
And we all were pretty trustworthy. If somebody did something bad like used up too much bandwidth you'd talk to them and say, okay, well I'll do it at two o'clock in the morning when you're not using it. It was a small number of people. I mean, I still have my internet directory from, I don't know, actually quite a few years after it was going, my ARPANET directory and it's about that thick. It's that thick because it had the names, addresses and telephone numbers of everyone who had an email. And it was indexed twice. Once by the email address and once by the actual name. So...
And there were two other Dannys on the internet besides me. Danny Cohen and Danny Barbara. And I still know both of them. But, you know, that was... We all knew each other. So it was funny seeing it all grow beyond our wildest speculations and expectations.

And watching things like video games which started out as toys. And, you know, watching those become big industries and big parts of people's lives. Things like word processing become the linear or laser printers. You know, I mean, we had laser printers but they were prototype printers from Xerox Park and we could make very official looking signs. We could fool people by... For instance, in Tech Square, Tech Square had an elevator system. It was in a rented building and we weren't allowed to mess with the elevators. But I picked the lock on the elevators and I secretly wired in the elevators so that we could control them with our computers. And so that you wouldn't have to get up... You wouldn't have to go out and push the button, you could... From your terminal you could push the button before you walked outside.
So I hid the wires going up to it but I had to put a box in the elevator controller. And I didn't want anybody to be able to find the box. So it was box of relays. So I put it in plain sight but I printed on the laser printer a label that looked very official, and of course since people didn't have laser printers, they were very impressed with things that looked like they were printed. So it said, 'Warning, do not remove without authorisation.' And it said, 'Inspected by...', and then it had, you know, all of these little initials and dates. And so it looked like somebody... And so after a while the building management figured out that, you know, the elevators were being controlled by the computers and they sent somebody up to figure out how I connected them. And I was sure that they'd find my box but apparently they were intimidated enough by my sign. They left it in there. And it actually stayed in there until years and years later, they tore out the whole elevator controller and replaced it with a computer. But we had actually a kind of wonderful time hacking the system like that.

There was kind of a culture which I kind of learnt I would say from Marvin [Minsky]. And Marvin maybe learnt it from Claude Shannon. They both had it. They were always building things and inventing things and solving things in new crazy ways. But not necessarily important things but, you know, silly things like, you know, a new way of getting a drink out of a water fountain or a new way of turning on a light. And they were always building little gadgets. Marvin had a little machine shop in his basement and Claude Shannon was like working on a juggling machine or Claude Shannon had this machine that he had made out of relays that he called it Throwback One which it was a calculator. But it worked with Roman numerals. And you typed in Roman numerals and it gave you the displays in Roman... Built it out of relays.
So there was this sort of tradition of just building great things which I think I got from them. Claude was trying to make a robot juggling machine. You know, Marvin was always fiddling with his heating system, of innovative new ideas like he figured out a way of bypassing the interlock on the pilot light so that he didn't waste pilot light burning for the furnace all summer. But then winter came and I walked into his house and it was full of the smell of gas. Basically the furnace had come on, the pilot light hadn't been on. Marvin had bypassed the interlock. And the house was really about to explode. And I knew that actually Marvin had this... He had a piece of equipment with a neon light that would occasionally make a big spark. I knew if it made that spark the whole house would just blow up.
But he had all these wrenches in the living room, so I ran and got a wrench and shut off the gas supply and opened up all the windows, and I was sitting out on the front porch, having saved the house. Marvin came, said, 'Why are you out here in the cold? Why are all the windows open?' And I said, 'Because you bypassed the...' And he said, 'Oh, I guess that's why it worked that way.'
So he definitely, Marvin had a culture of building things and fiddling with things. Always trying out, you know, not all of them worked. But he was always constructing things. And I think he probably got that from Claude Shannon or at least it resonated with him like it resonated with me. So the three of us would sit around thinking of crazy things to build all the time.

The useless machine which I think, you know, I think that probably was Claude [Shannon]'s idea but Marvin [Minsky] built the first one. It was the, you know, the machine that reaches a hand out and turns itself off every time you turned it on. Ed Fredkin was another one. You know, he built the music synthesiser called the Muse. Yes, we were all building robot turtles and crazy kinds of robot. I was working on a robot elephant trunk.
In fact, that was another one of my elephant stories. I always got along well with elephants, but I was working on a robot elephant trunk which was controlled with wires because I thought it was really interesting how elephant trunks moved, sort of different way of building a robot. And I decided I needed to see a real elephant. And so I went down to the Stoneham Zoo and there was a baby elephant at the Stoneham Zoo. And I got as close as I could to it but I couldn't really see how its trunk worked. So I looked around and there were... I was in a pair of overalls and there was only this kind of ditch between me and the elephant and a very low wall to climb over. So nobody was looking, so I climbed over the wall, went down into the ditch and went up to the elephant. Which looked much bigger once I got next to it. Then I was a little scared.
And I realised I was there, in with the elephant. And so I sort of approached it like you do a dog, I decided to let it sniff me. So I sort of stuck out my foot so that he could smell me. And it stuck out its trunk and it started to sniff me a little bit. But then I didn't kind of realise it sort of has a hand on the end of its trunk. And so it grabbed my foot and it lifted me up in the air. I mean, I'm still jumping on one foot, it only had one. And then this whole group of school kids came along and the teacher said, 'Look at the man from the zoo playing with the elephant.' I was going back and forth between trying to keep my cool and wave at the kids versus saying: Help, get me out of here! But eventually the elephant let me go and I waited for the school kids to go away, climbed back out. But I was always good friends with elephants.

The other fun elephant thing I used to do... So I had a fire engine at MIT which... Because I'd always wanted to have a fire engine and I found a used one for sale. And it was a great car because I could park it anywhere. Very hard to park in Cambridge but my fire engine would never get ticketed or towed. So I would drive my fire engine around. And that got me lots of fun things. But one of the fun things with the fire engine was that I had friends who were clowns in the Ringling Brothers Circus.
And so when they came to town they would call me and say that, you know, they were coming to town. And they... The train came in on the Cambridge side of the river, but they performed in Boston. So there was a moment where they had to lead the elephants across the Longfellow Bridge. And so they always did it at night and it was a secret, they didn't want a lot of people to know about it. But since I had inside knowledge they would tell me when it would happen. So I would show up at like ten o'clock at night when the elephants were going to come and there would be police barricades and I would drive up with my fire engine and I would say, 'I'm here to lead the elephants across the river.' And they would move the barricades away.
And then I would go to the circus people and I would say, 'I'm here to lead the elephants.' So I think the police thought I was from the circus and the circus thought I was from the police. But nobody ever questioned me. So I would slowly drive my fire engine with the lights flashing with a line of elephants behind me, marching through MIT, you know, across the Longfellow Bridge into Boston. And the only difficult part was at the end when I would try to go away, the elephants would follow me. So it was sort of sticky getting out of it at the end. But... That fire engine got... I had a lot of fun with that.

There was another thing that happened with the fire engine which was... Well first of all I would take the clowns around too. They would climb on the back of the fire engine and I would run all the sirens and the lights. Of course I wasn't really allowed to run the sirens but I did because I figured getting thrown into jail with a bunch of clowns would actually be such a great experience. And so we would go by, we would go by police cars and the police cars would just wave with all the clowns on the back of it. So we would drive around and paint the town red like that.
But the other thing that we did was I remember Boston had its 350th anniversary. And the tall ships came to visit Boston. These are, you know, the big old fashioned ships with giant masts and the largest of which is the Spanish Tall Ship which I guess is a frigate. And... By the Spanish Navy. And I had a friend who came over on it, and he said... He invited me to a party where Harvard was hosting them. And they were being given the key to the city or something. So all the officers for the Spanish Tall Ship were at this party at Harvard. And I said, 'I'll provide the transportation back to the Tall Ship.' So I showed up with my fire engine. And it turns out that the time the party was over they were quite drunk. In fact, they sort of let them out holding bottles of whiskey. So they climbed up, again they were in evening clothes and things like that. They were in tuxedos, being fettered by the mayor, and I... So I had them climb onto the back. And they were really worried because it was past their curfew because the base closed at ten o'clock. I was like, don't worry, I'll get you on the base.
So they climbed on the back with their bottles, swigging their bottles. And I went to the army base, and as I come up to the door I turn on all the sirens and flashing. Of course they throw open the doors and I go through. And they don't notice until after I'm going through that the people on the back are wearing tuxedos and holding bottles of liquor. So I go in, stop in front of... I wish I had a... You know, if there was a moment in my life I'd love to have a film of, it would be this. Of pulling up in front of the Spanish Tall Ship with the officers, staggering off, and the crew standing there saluting, trying to keep a straight face as their officers stagger off a fire engine, up the gangplank.
And then I drove home. And they invited me to come to the party the next day. So the next day I show up again with the fire engine, this time with my invitation. I show my invitation at the door. And I go and I park in my usual spot in front of the ship. I go up to the party, which the party is like the mayor and the governor and everybody is on board. And then somebody comes and says, 'Uh, excuse me, is that your fire engine?' I say, 'Yes.' They say, 'I think you need to talk to the people outside.' And I go out and there's all these MPs, military police, who have my fire engine surrounded with their lights flashing. And I go down, and this military guy says, 'Is this your fire engine?' I say, 'Yes.' He says, 'You've got a lot of guts coming back here after the other night.' And I'm like... And he starts going into me about how they're going to impound my fire engine and, you know... And then the mayor comes out who everybody recognises and says, 'What seems to be the problem here, Danny?' And I'd just met him in the... And everybody stops and I said, 'Well, I think they want me to move my fire engine.' And the mayor says, 'Well, then you all get your cars out of the way so that he can move it.' And so the MPs pull their cars out, I take it off base, and escape.

When I arrived at MIT, it was still... everyone was still using slide rules. By the time I left, of course, everyone was using calculators. There was a nice intermediate time in between when people were starting to... the rich kids had calculators.
[Q] The HP-45s and...
Yes. But we all actually did learn how to use slide rules. I got to use my grandfather's slide rule at MIT, so that was fun. But that went away pretty quickly... that was a pretty fast transition once it started to happen. But one of the interesting things is we discovered all these universal principles and had fun with them. And so, for example, we kind of... once we realised about universal machines we realised we could make a computer out of anything and so my friend Brian Silverman and I decided to make a computer out of Tinkertoys. So we got 50 giant engineer sets and built a giant machine that played tic-tac-toe and it was... Then some museum in Arkansas wanted it and we did a cross-country trip taking this machine out and we installed it. But it didn't really hold up that well to the shipment, and so we decided to make a stronger one with a different design. And so we got another 50 giant engineer sets and we decided to put them together with these little high-precision nails called 'escutcheon pins', which you normally buy three of or something, and I went down to the hardware store in Boston and I said, you know, 'I'd like 4,000 escutcheon pins.' And the guy said, 'That's a hell of a lot of escutcheon pins.' And I said, 'I've got a hell of a lot of escutcheons.' And took it back and so that was the construction method for holding the Tinkertoys together for the second version, which then went back in the museum. The first version came back here and it went to the Computer Museum and I think it ended up at the Science Museum and I still hear kids talk about it. So it's some place that kids see.

My first electronic calculator I actually got right before I came to MIT, I got something called a 'Sinclair Scientific', which worked in scientific notation, that Clive Sinclair built. That was very exciting. It was a real scientific calculator. Terrible interface, but it was cheap. It was kind of a kit, I think, or something like that. I remember the first time I saw a calculator was when I was coming back from India. We went through Hong Kong and they had calculators made out of Nixie tubes, and I was just amazed by that. And that's what really inspired me to make a computer inside a suitcase. Then I would buy surplus Nixie tubes and, you know, try to figure out how to drive them with transistors. It was sort of a crazy project, but... but it suddenly all became possible to do around then. And then I got interested in a company called Wang, and I decided calculators were the way of the future, computers were the way of the future, and I took some of my paper route money and I bought a share of Wang stock, which tripled or quadrupled in value before I sold it. So that was my first investment.

It was certainly a fun time to be a student, because computers were just... the first microprocessors were just coming out. When I met Marvin [Minsky], he was building a computer, not out of microprocessors, because that wasn't quite ready to go yet, but he was building it out of logic and he was building a computer for kids, a personal computer, before such a thing existed.
Actually, Alan Kay had built one. Alan Kay had built the Alto, which was the interim Dynabook. And in fact, I remember we used to have something called a 'Distinguished Lecturer' series. And distinguished lecturers like Hamming would come and talk about the Hamming code, but the one that I remember the most was Alan Kay showed up to talk about the Dynabook, the idea that you'd be able to have a computer that was this big that you could put on your lap and it would be networked and have all these applications built into it. Of course, it's exactly what we have today, but it was a complete... sort of, it seemed an almost impossible dream at the time.
But what really impressed me about him is instead of showing up in a suit and tie like everybody else did, he showed up in sneakers and blue jeans and a T-shirt, and gave the distinguished lecture. And I remember looking at him, thinking, 'I think I want to do what he does.' And he was like the... before then, my only role models were professors, but he was something else, because he wasn't really a professor. He was at Xerox Park, but he was kind of inventing the future. And I explicitly thought, 'Well, that's kind of what I want to do.' And in fact, I applied to try to get a summer job at Xerox Park and Alan was too absent-minded and I didn't get it, so I was always sad about that. But then later, Alan worked with me at Applied Minds, so we did eventually get to work together.

One thing I did at MIT is I deliberately went to the people that I thought were great people. I didn't care what course they were taking. It was just the amazing people. So for example Philip Morrison I hung out with a lot, and he was really an astrophysicist, but he knew about everything. He was the most well-read person I ever knew. His house was full of piles of books and he wrote the book review column for Scientific American. And so he was fantastic to talk about anything with.
So he's an example of the kind of person that I went to. Salvador Luria, I hung out with, actually, Kuhn, like Structure of Scientific Revolutions, deliberately sought out to take his classes. I went... let's see. Susan Carey was a really interesting professor, Tommy Poggio, who had studied the neural systems of flies. He wasn't famous yet, but... and then of course, Marvin [Minsky] knew all these famous people that I got to know, like Francis Crick and people who have all... Ed Fredkin was another fun person to hang out with. He was always inventing things. Jerry Lettvin, of course.
So it was a pretty fabulous mix of... Victor Weisskopf. He was another interesting one. So I would just deliberately go and take whatever courses those people were taking. And mostly, the lab was also a place where interesting people came to. So you could also just sit in Marvin's living room and amazing people would show up. So that was... that was also a pretty great way to meet people, science fiction writers or scientists or even politicians would come through. So he had a steady stream of interesting and stimulating people. So it was a very exciting moment, it was a very exciting time.
I remember, for instance, Ted Nelson wrote the very first book about personal computers. He saw that coming, and he wrote a book called Dream Machines. Or I met Stewart Brand, actually, he came when the media lab started. That was a little later. But he came through and met me and we hit it off immediately and became fast friends from then on. And then people would come up from other universities. I remember, for instance, [John] Tukey would come up and visit Marvin sometimes, and he was actually the outside reader on my committee. And a lot of these people, I don't think I understood how important they were at the time. You know, since then... I knew about Tukey and the fast Fourier transform, but I didn't really know about his contributions to statistics until later. And I think there was... so it was wonderful meeting these people and realising they were interesting before you realised they were famous.

You know, one of the most interesting people I met was your father, Freeman, and I remember Freeman. I actually met Freeman at the same conference I met Richard Feynman at. That was a conference that Ed Fredkin had about digital physics. And I gave a talk about the idea that the underlying physics might be a cellular automaton, and it wasn't unique for that conference, that was sort of what the conference was about, but it was a way that it might happen and a way that gravity might emerge as an emergent phenomenon from the cells of space. And Freeman Dyson himself came up afterwards and said something very nice to me about my talk, and I was just blown away. I was so shy I never would have talked to him, but he came up and explicitly said something nice to me. And then the next speaker got up and he had a completely incomprehensible talk, but he enunciated everything very clearly, and then I noticed Freeman went up to him afterwards and said, 'You spoke so clearly.' And then I thought, 'Oh, what did he say to me?' And I couldn't remember what he had said to me. But then I was still too shy to talk to Freeman. But I had... I had with me a paper that Bill Gosper had given me on something called 'Q factorials'. And so at some point on the... we took a bus ride someplace and I sat down next to Freeman, but I was too shy to actually start a conversation with him, so I took out my paper and I opened up and I started to read it, and Freeman sort of looked over my shoulder and he said, 'Are those Q factorials?' And I said, 'Why, yes.' That was how I started talking with Freeman. He was quite wonderful.
And then, that was also when Dick Feynman came up and talked to me about my paper and that's when Dick and I started becoming friends. And so that was just... actually it was an amazing conference all around in terms of the people that showed up to it, but that was the thing about MIT, is you could run into people like that. And both of those are people that I've... you know, have really made a lot of difference to my life.

Dick [Feynman], yes, I sort of kept up a casual friendship with him, and when his son went to MIT, I sort of made... got him as a UROP student along with people like Brewster Kahle and so on. I had my little team of undergraduates that I worked with. And so I kept up with Dick through that. And he was... And I would go visit him whenever he was in Caltech and in fact when I started Thinking Machines, I knew I was going to start it and I went by and visited him at Caltech to see if I could any Caltech students to come to Thinking Machines. And so this was before it had started. And... and I went out to lunch with him. We always had spaghetti for some reason. And we went to this Italian restaurant and had spaghetti and I told him about this company I wanted to start to make a massively parallel computer. And he said, 'That's the kookiest idea I've ever heard, you're nuts.' And I was like, 'Well, maybe so, but I want to do it, and I was hoping maybe you had a student that you could recommend that I could hire as a summer student.' And he said, 'No, that's just too wacky an idea for any student. You know, most of the Caltech students are much too sensible for this.' He says, 'There is this one guy I know who doesn't really know much about computers, but he's nuts enough to do this and he's actually pretty smart.' And I was like, 'Well, would you recommend him?' And he was like, 'Yeah, I would give him 100% recommendation.' And I was like, 'Okay, great, that's good enough for me. What's his name?' And he said, 'Richard Feynman.' That was... That was how I ended up hiring Richard Feynman as a summer student.

We started the company that spring and at the first day of summer the company started and we had raised all our money and everything. And I hadn't really thought much about what we would do, and on the first day he showed up and saluted and said, 'Richard Feynman, reporting for duty, sir. What's my assignment?' And I said, 'Hmm, give me a minute here', and I went back to think about it and thought, 'Okay, how about using the connection machine to compute quantum electrodynamics?' And so I went back and – rare quantum chromodynamics, actually, which was a brilliant computational problem – and so I went to him and said, 'Well, can you figure out how to use parallel computing to compute quantum chromodynamics?' And he said, 'That's really the thing you want done on the first day of the company?' He said, 'Come on, what do you really need done?' And I said, 'Well, actually, we don't have any stationery.' And he's like, 'Great, I'll be in charge of getting pencils and pads.' So he went off to the stationery store and got all of the stationery. That was his first assignment. He was quartermaster for the stationery. And he did a good job of it.

There was definitely the old school, like Jerry Lettvin, who were still trying... still talking about McCulloch and Pitts. You know, they weren't there by the time I was there. But the AI people were kind of the new school. But one thing that became clear to me right away was that the things that we were trying to do in AI, the computers just weren't nearly fast enough. It wasn't like they were two times too slow, they were thousands of times too slow.
And at that time, the great... the most famous computer architect was a guy by the name of Gene Amdahl, and he had made a sort of mathematical proof that if you tried to make computers faster by using parallel... computers in parallel, that it would get more and more inefficient, as you made more and more of them. And everybody was very convinced by this proof, and in fact they had some empirical evidence that it was true: people had tried to make six processors together, and they weren't six times as fast. But I knew, because I was coming at it from neurobiology that neurons were very, very slow compared to transistors. They took milliseconds to fire. But humans were able to do these things like recognise faces, which it would take us a very, very long time to do on a computer, and clearly we did it just by having a lot of them, and by having billions of neurons working on the problem. And so I thought that, even if Amdahl's law is true for general computing, surely for doing these computations of artificial intelligence, you'd need something like neurons. And so you would need basically lots of little simple processing things that were connected in arbitrary ways and that that would be a good way to do fast computing. And so because I was interested in doing artificial intelligence and general intelligence, I realised you needed to build a machine like this.

We just had the ability to start making chips ourselves so we could make very simple computers, and I figured out you could actually make like 64 very simple computers on a single chip, which nobody had ever done before. The idea of putting one computer on a chip was pretty radical, but... so I started designing chips like that and imagining big arrays of these that you could have. A million of these was my initial thought. Later, I scaled it back down to 64,000 out of practicality. But the original idea was you could have a million computers and they would all have the ability to talk with each other and you could use them like neurons and you could use the kind of McCulloch-Pitt's learning algorithms and represent things in the computer.
And so I started working on that, but I never really intended that to be my main project. It was just sort of building a tool to get the main project done, which was AI. But, MIT being what it was, even though I was an undergraduate at first, when I started working on this, and eventually a graduate student, I could still hire all these other... I mean, officially they worked for faculty members, but I would go to Gerry Sussman or Marvin Minsky or something and say, 'I want to hire a UROP student.' And I would get these great MIT students like Brewster Kahle, for example, to come help me design the chips. And I'd get a lot of help from people that were around, like Tom Knight and Guy Steele and Gerry Sussman and everybody did nothing but encourage me and help me and I barely knew how to program, and Richard Greenblatt, who was building the Lisp machine, sat down and taught me about computer architecture, and Tom Knight did.
So there were all these people that, instead of explaining to me how hopelessly ambitious what I was trying to do was, just helped. And so I started building up a pretty big group around me, and then DARPA at that time had people like... Bob Kahn was running it. He started this strategic computing programme. He came by, I told him what I wanted to do. Even though I was just a student, he was like, yeah, we can fund that. And so first he gave money to the AI lab to do it, but then the project started getting more and more expensive, and it became a little bit ridiculous having a student have all these people working for him and spending millions of dollars, when actually I had no real official capacity there. And so eventually I realised I had to start a company on the outside to do it. So that's how Thinking Machines got started: it was just to build this thing that I wanted to use for my thesis, was the original idea.

As it turns out, it turned out to be good for a lot of other things other than neural networks. In fact, people did kind of use it for neural networks, but it was still, as it turned out, thousands of times too slow to really make it work. So it took another few decades before computers got fast enough. But that basic architecture that we were trying to do there is basically what makes things like Deep Mind work and so on. It's pretty much the same algorithms, it's just I was only off by a factor of a thousand, maybe a million.
But the idea was right. And it actually turned out, too, once we built them, that they were useful for other things. And so that was the customers wanted to use it for other things. And so things like looking for oil and designing airplanes and things like that. So it turns out actually that Gene Amdahl's proof was wrong; it had a flaw in it. Which only later did I understand it, which is: he had assumed that you were solving exactly the same problem on the bigger machine, and sure enough, if you have one problem, and the problem doesn't get bigger, if you make the machine bigger, it gets less inefficient... less efficient. But in reality, what happened was as you got bigger machines, you solved bigger and bigger problems, and so there was more data to work on. And so in fact you could get... you could keep operating it efficiently, because the problem just got bigger. And so all the real hard problems, like simulation or neural networks, they all had that characteristic that they became big because the data was big. In fact, it's very hard to find a problem that is an exception to that rule. So in practice, Amdahl's Law turned out not to be a law at all. Although for years and years, whenever I would describe my project, people would dismiss me by saying, 'Oh well, you've obviously never heard of Amdahl's Law, this will never work.' So... Fortunately, I just bombed on ahead without really understanding why Amdahl's Law was wrong.

And that was a fun project, and eventually it did become so all-consuming that it did become my thesis, but it was... you know, that was the days before it was common for a student to start a company. So when I did this, I started the company, the head of the department came to me and said, 'You're not allowed to do this. This is... you know, you're a student here, there's all kinds of rules.' And I was like, 'Well, I don't understand. How can you tell me I'm not allowed to do it? I'm paying you tuition, what right does that give you to...?' And then it turned out all the rules were for the faculty members, not for me. And so they sort of backed off on that a little bit. And then I started hiring lots of the faculty members, and then eventually I hired, like, Jerry Wiesner, who had been the previous president, and after... after a while, the faculty stopped complaining. But they were still mad at me, and... For instance, I had never signed a patent agreement, and I had all these basic patents for things like putting more than one processor on a chip. That seems crazy now, but the idea of a multi-core processor. And MIT... and I tried to get MIT to patent it, and MIT actually refused to do it, because they only had patent agreements with the faculty members. And so I went out and got money from my company. I patented it and then tried to give it to MIT, and MIT refused to take it, they were so angry at my going off and starting a company without their permission. So all that's pretty different now.
But we hired fantastic people. We were right down there by MIT and so all the really interesting professors, like Tommy Poggio or... Eric Lander was a guy up at Harvard Business School. He came... he was getting interested in genetics. He did his first genetics calculations on the connection machine. We had people like Dick Lewontin come from Harvard. And so it became a place where people could do kind of crazy things, and then people started visiting from outside of... well, like Dick Feynman coming for the summer. Sydney Brenner would come by. And of course lots of these people... like Sydney Brenner hadn't won his Nobel Prize yet, so they weren't quite as famous as they later became, or Eric Lander, nobody had ever heard of Eric Lander. But they were as interesting as they are now, they just weren't so famous. So it was pretty fabulous, the people that it attracted. And that became... that became a kind of a second education for me.

The other thing that was kind of wonderful is: I was a graduate student, and the Hertz Foundation was paying for my tuition. And that was kind of a funny story, because I sort of went... I slid right from undergraduate to graduate, and I was kind of acting like a graduate student as an undergraduate, but... in the sense that I was spending most of my time in the labs, and when it came time to do graduate school, I needed a source of tuition, because my parents had paid for my... the deal with them was they said they'd pay for my tuition, and I just had to earn my... all my living expenses and things like that. So in fact I earned my living expenses by taking on jobs that were interesting, sometimes around MIT.
But the most interesting job I had was I worked for the Milton Bradley company as a toy designer. And so I would go out to Springfield and work on electronic toys. And so I got to be part of the project that made the very first Simon, actually made the sounds of the Simon and... and programmed the very first Simon. I didn't think of the idea, but... They had the idea, but they didn't know how to build it. And that's still one of the most successful electronic toys ever. But since I could design chips and electronic toys were coming along, then Milton Bradley wanted me to design a chip for a video game. And so they sent me down to Texas Instruments, and I had this great time at Texas Instruments designing the first chip for a video game. And it was in the... in the building where they made calculators. And... but they wouldn't give me a calculator, because Texas Instruments had a rule of what level of employee you had to be to get a calculator. And I... it had lots of levels. And every time you got promoted, they gave you a little bit higher wall around your office. And it was all, like, go up six inches. And that summer, I got promoted, like, seven times. And so my wall got up to be about this high. But they still... I still never got to the point of being issued a calculator. And even though I was designing chips for them, and... so I had to borrow a calculator, but of course I worked all night, they all went home. And so it really annoyed me I had to borrow the calculator, so I would go to the head of the group and I would pick the lock on his office and I would borrow his calculator and then I would leave him a note saying, 'You weren't here, so I just borrowed your calculator', just to sort of bug him, and then relock his office. And then the next day I came in, he didn't say anything, but the next night I did it and I went in, and his calculator was locked into his desk. So I picked the lock on his desk and I left the note saying, 'Thanks, I just borrowed your calculator.' Relocked his desk, relocked his office. So then I came in the next day and there's this crew installing more locks on his door, but idiotically, like, it's exactly the same kind of lock that I had picked, no better lock, just more of them. So of course I just picked all of the locks, went ahead and picked the lock on his desk and left a note saying, 'Thanks, borrowed your calculator again.' And then finally they issued me a calculator.

The whole time I was designing this chip for Milton Bradley, which was a video game chip and I had... you couldn't really put enough memory to hold the picture of the video game, so I invented this thing which I called 'pixies', but it turned out 'pixies' was trademarked, so we changed the name to 'sprites'. But it was little patches that moved around on the screen and I made a sample video game, which was, for most people, like, at Texas Instruments, the first time they'd ever played a video game on the simulator. And so everybody got very excited about it, but then Milton Bradley chickened out of going into the video game business. And they decided it was too expensive a product, they couldn't sell it through normal toy channels. They mostly sold things like checkers sets, Candyland was their big seller. In fact, when I was at Milton Bradley, the guy in the office next to me was Hoolie, the guy who invented Candyland. And in fact, when I was working on the... and so I explained to him that I could make the Simon play lots of different games, and it just didn't have to be one, and Hoolie said to me, I still remember, he said, 'Kid, let me explain to you something about games.' He said, 'How much do you think you can charge for a checkers set?' And the answer was, about five dollars. 'How much do you think charge for a chess set?' And the answer was about $15. And he was like, 'How much do you think you can charge for a combination chess set, checkers set?' And the answer is actually less than what you can charge for a chess set. And so I've always remembered that lesson, and in fact my one contribution... and the sad news is my idea of having the Simon play multiple games actually did get into the Simon, and it's the worst thing about Simon. Simon actually does have a switch on it that lets you play a few different games, and it would be probably better without that switch, but that switch was my contribution. Which Hoolie correctly tried to talk me out of. And so I learned a lesson from that mistake.

That was how I was making my money, but that became harder and harder, as I was starting the company, to go all the way out to Springfield. So I stopped that and Milton Bradley stopped the project to build a video game. But here I already had this chip design. And fortunately, this little Japanese company that nobody had ever heard of came along to buy it, this little company called Nintendo. And so that chip became the original Nintendo chip and it got into that game and sprites got used and copied and that became part of the video game culture for a long time. People still talk about them sometimes. They're sort of a conceptual thing now, but it was sort of built into the idea of video games and a lot of the original video games, things like Zelda, are all sort of built around that idea of the little sprites that you move around. So that had a nice impact.
But by then, I had already stopped working there and I needed a source of money. So I decided to apply for an NSF fellowship. And I went down to apply and I looked at the NSF fellowship and I looked at the list of fellowships, and I saw there was one fellowship that paid twice as much as all the others. It was for applied physics. It was called the Hertz Fellowship. But I hadn't sent away for the application form, but Guy Steele was there, and he was like, 'Oh yes, I applied for that. I'll let you Xerox my application form.' So we both... I applied for it and Guy Steele applied for it, and I somehow described what I wanted to do as applied physics. And I'd never heard of the Hertz Foundation.
And so the Hertz Foundation came by to interview and this guy Lowell Wood showed up as the interviewer and I told him about this computer that I wanted to make and he said, 'Well, how much floating point ability does it have?' And I was, like, 'Well, it doesn't really have floating point, because the universe doesn't really have floating point. God doesn't use floating point.' And he argued with me that. 'You know, everybody would want to use floating point', and we got into a big argument and he told me about his computer, which was the S1, and I told him what a stupid idea that was, his complicated instruction set, and told him all the reasons that was wrong. And so we got into a big argument and I was pretty sure I had lost the fellowship. But on my way out, I basically said, 'Well, there's this other guy who's applying, Guy Steele, and he's really brilliant. You should give the fellowship to him.' And then I later found out that Guy Steele, on his way out, told Lowell Wood, 'You know, there's this other guy, Danny Hillis and you should really give the fellowship to him.' And Lowell was so impressed that this had never happened, that two people had said: you should really give the fellowship to the other guy, that he ended up giving us both the fellowship. So much to my surprise, having had this terrible argument with him, I got this note from the Hertz Foundation saying that they were going to give me a fellowship that would pay for my graduate education. So I was very excited.

So when it came time to get my Hertz fellowship, they sent me a document to sign which was all very reasonable except for one part. So the reasonable parts were things like: I'd put my name on papers. I'd put Hertz Foundation's name on papers that I wrote. But it had this sentence which I still remember exactly, which is: 'In times of national emergency, real or imagined, I will make available my skills and services to the United States Government.' I thought, that's really silly. Just because somebody imagines something, I'm not going to do that. So I crossed out real or imagined and I signed the document, and I wrote a cover letter saying, 'I just took out the imagined part', but I signed it and I sent it back to them.
And they sent me back a letter that said, 'No, you have to sign it unmodified.' And I sent them back a letter saying, 'Well, I'm not going to sign it unmodified. That's ridiculous.' So I get a call from the president of the foundation. He said, 'I'm sorry, but this is the rules. You know, we can't give you the fellowship unless you sign this.' I said, 'But it's ridiculous.' He says, 'Well, I know it's ridiculous, but that's just the way we do things.' And I'm, like, 'Well, I'm not going to do it.' He said, 'Well, if you don't do it, you don't get the fellowship.' And I was, like, 'Okay, well, that's up to you, but I'm not going to sign something that says, I'm going to do something just because somebody imagines something.'
So then I get back an official notice from them saying, 'You will not get it if you do not sign it.' Which they had already kind of sent me. And so I just ignored it. I didn't send anything. And then, after a while, I get this call that says, 'You know, the board has met on this and they confirm that you cannot get the fellowship if you don't sign this.' And so I called them up and said, 'Well, yes, you made that very clear before, but I'm not going to sign it.' So then I get a call from this guy with a deep Hungarian accent, who is Edward Teller himself. And he spent an hour on the phone with me trying to convince me to sign this thing. And he was, like, 'You don't understand the communists like I understand the communists.' He says, you know, 'If they had your mother hostage, you would think different about that.' And I said, 'If they had my mother hostage, that would be a real emergency, it wouldn't be an imagined emergency.' That's not what we're talking about. And I was like, one of the... I said, you know, 'I'm very patriotic, but part of what I like about this country is you don't have to do things just because somebody imagines something.' And so he argued back and forth with me and I thought I sort of won the argument with him, but then I got the president of the... called me up and said, 'No, Dr Teller has spoken and he confirms that you cannot have the fellowship unless you sign it.' And so I said, 'Okay, well, that's up to you guys.' He said, 'No, this is really the last time', you know. And I was like, 'Yes, I get it. You've made that very clear.'
So I went and I applied for... by then I couldn't get an NSF fellowship, so I got a teaching assistantship, which paid, like, half as much, and I actually had to do real work for it and... but it paid my tuition.

And then when September came, I went down... in those days, you would go down to actually collect your cheque at the cashier's office. And I went down to collect my teaching assistantship cheque, and the guy behind the counter said, 'Oh, I can't give you two cheques. You've got...' And I said, 'What do you mean, two cheques?' And he says, 'Well, you have the one for the teaching assistantship and you have the one from the Hertz Foundation.' I was like, 'Oh, you can keep the one from the teaching assistantship, just give me the one from the Hertz Foundation.' And so they paid for my entire graduate education for six years, because it stretched out and paid all my tuition. And in those days, it was like tax-free income, so I never felt so rich as I did then, because I was getting twice as much as all my friends were, and didn't know what to spend it on, even. But it was quite a luxurious fellowship.

Years and years later, I was actually on the board of the... of the Hertz Foundation and... with Edward Teller. And I became friends with Edward Teller, even though I have very ambivalent feelings about him, but he's a very sweet person in many ways. And... or was. And got to know... I got to know Edward Teller and Lowell Wood and so on, and came to really admire the Hertz Foundation, so I volunteered to be on the board. And then sure enough, at some point, somebody else wouldn't sign this same thing. And the board said, 'Well, we've already decided you can't get the fellowship unless you sign this.' And I was like, 'Well, excuse me, but I got the fellowship and I never signed it.' And they were, like, 'How could that have happened?' You know? And, 'Didn't we talk about this?' And it sort of began to come back to them and then Lowell Wood said, 'Yes, it was interesting. I do sort of remember us talking about that, but when I went to look at the file, it wasn't there.' And so... the file where they decided all that stuff just kind of disappeared, and somehow you ended up on the list. I now know Lowell well enough to kind of know what happened. And I was like, 'Well, so it was accidentally allowed and, you know, can't that just happen again?' And everybody said, 'Hmmm.' And they didn't vote on it and the person got the fellowship. But it's sort of built into the charter of the foundation that you have to sign this, but I... so it's happened at least one other time while I was on the board.

Teller was a really interesting character. I was very good friends, actually, with Nick Metropolis, who was the one that invented the Metropolis Algorithm. And I had, because of this encounter with Teller, I had sort of a negative feeling about Teller, not to mention the fact that, you know, he had pushed the hydrogen bomb, and I had real mixed feelings about him. But Freeman said something nice about Teller, he said, 'He was really a sweet person.' And Nick Metropolis tried to tell me Teller was a sweet person. So Nick Metropolis took me out to dinner with Teller once, when he was visiting Los Alamos, and I was, and we got a nice conversation and I came to see the kind side of Teller. He genuinely had a problem with the communists and on that one subject, he was very, very unreasonable, I thought. But in many other ways, he was very reasonable and very kind. And he told me a very interesting story, actually, which I'd never heard, because I asked him, because I'd read about the Oppenheimer Affair and things like that, and I said, well, you know, well didn't... because I wanted to kind of confront him about the things that I didn't like about him and I'd heard that he'd sort of tubed Oppenheimer's security clearance. And he said, 'Yes, that's a story I will never tell publicly, but I was set up.' I was like, 'Well, what do you mean?' And so he said: he was going into the Oppenheimer security clearance to actually testify for Oppenheimer, even though he disagreed with Oppenheimer a lot, he didn't think Oppenheimer was a traitor, a security risk. And he said just before he went in, the lawyer came to him and said, 'Before you testify, I think you should be aware of some information that you probably aren't aware of.' And he showed him some stories that they had collected about Oppenheimer switching his story on... I forget what it was, but something that came out in the... but it was all new information to Teller, just before he walked into the hearing. And the guy implied that they knew that Oppenheimer was a spy and that it would be really bad if he testified in his favour. And Teller was just processing... he'd just heard this information, so when he got there, he kind of hedged. He was like, 'Well, I don't really know', because what he really meant was, obviously there's information here that I don't know about, but it came across as very negative for Oppenheimer. And then people thought that he had deliberately sabotaged Oppenheimer's security clearance, but actually he was just caught off guard by this other thing. But he never came out publicly and said any of that. And so he was kind of vilified for that, he felt unjustly, but he also... his sense of honour or whatever was such that he never defended himself publicly on that.

Getting to meet people like that was extraordinary. You know, people like Hans Bethe, I still remember him. These amazing sparkly blue eyes, and had... telling the wonderful story about him telling his wife that... showing his wife the stars and getting to tell her that he was the only one in the world that knew why they shine. So it was pretty extraordinary people around. I got to meet Stan Ulam very briefly. Didn't really know him, but he was still around then. Went out and visited him. But Metropolis was super-interested in the connection machine and really participated quite a lot in thinking about how to program it. And Dick Feynman got really interested and he had this crazy project which was to use quantum... basically use what we now call qubits to do quantum computing. So he was actually working on that project at Thinking Machines. Of course, it was before any of that stuff was really figured out how to work, but that was his secret project, was to make the quantum computer. So it... it was really a great blessing, I think, to be around all these amazing physicists. And that generation of physicists were very close to each other and tied together in an interesting way, I think partly because they'd all worked together at Los Alamos. Yes, so they were... they were kind of a society, they were kind of a community that were very tightly knit. So once you got to know a few of them, you sort of... became... you... I mean, I was always, you know, an observer, but I got to know an awful lot of them, and I always thought that was a great blessing. And of course Dick Feynman being the extreme version of that, and Philip Morrison also very important. Nick Metropolis was very important. And then later finding out that Kistiakowsky, who, you know, was my high school mentor, that he had been part of that. It's funny sort of how many of those people ended up influencing my life in various ways. But they really did set the tone for a generation of scientists.

All of them would refer back to that institution of the Manhattan Project. You know, and they had different kinds of feelings about it. I mean, obviously, the way... the way that Philip Morrison ended up feeling about it was very different than the way that Edward Teller did. Freeman wasn't part of that. Freeman was off doing something else, because he wasn't an American citizen, I guess, but he was connected with it through Feynman, because he had explained the Feynman stuff. So even the people that weren't physically there, I think it was a very important part of their lives, it kind of shaped their lives. And for Feynman, it definitely shaped his image of how things should work. So one of the things he did when he came to Thinking Machines is he said, 'Well, we should set this place up like Los Alamos. We should have group leaders and we should have seminars', and he invited out Hopfield to be our first seminar speaker, and so there was a period when we were explicitly organised to be analogous to Los Alamos, with group leaders. But he would kind of always refer back to that as the way things should be done. And it clearly was, for all of them, I think, the most exciting period of their lives. Even if they had, I think, mixed feelings. Most of them had pretty mixed feelings about what they had accomplished. For instance, I think Dick said that they got so caught up in the technical wonder of what they were doing that they didn't even kind of notice that the original reason for it was over when VE day came. They were just about to get it working and they just... it never really occurred to them to stop at that moment. They didn't rethink it. They had so much momentum of the excitement of making this thing work. And of course they were all thrilled when it worked.
But then, when it actually got used, I mean there was a moment there when they thought, 'Well, maybe we can just do a demonstration project or...', they all started panicking a bit about it being used, but of course it was inevitable at that point that it would be. And then it got used and I think Dick went through a period of depression after that, where he said he just... he would, like, look at a bridge, some people building a bridge and say, 'Why are they building this? It's just going to get destroyed.' You know, why is anybody thinking about anything long-term? The whole world is going to go away. And so he went through a few years of that. Of course his... Arlene, his wife, had just died, so he was also depressed about that, but he went through a serious period of depression after the Los Alamos thing. And I think all of those guys had stories about how it influence them. Of course, Edward Teller was the opposite extreme: he went all-in and started developing the Super and that became his life of building bigger and bigger bombs.
[Q] And starting Livermore?
And starting Livermore, that's right. So... but it's interesting how much that one event influenced that generation of physicists. And they were all extraordinary people. So I feel very lucky to have gotten to have known so many of them.

And maybe I might have become a physicist had I not been so interested in other things, but I was much more interested in the biological side of things and in thinking. So there was a lot to compete with that. So I studied... I studied math. Marvin [Minsky] encouraged me to do that, to study mathematics. Then I could kind of do anything. But my real education was really at Thinking Machines, because once we built these computers, we had the fastest computers around and the most interesting people, like Eric Lander would come to use my computer. And so it turns out that if you had just gotten the people that had come to use those computers, and you had invested in everything they had done, you would have invested in the people that... I mean, for instance, there was this kid at Stanford that, you know, used the Stanford Connection Machine to... which is all based on this kind of MapReduce paradigm, a guy by the name of Sergey Brin, who used it to make a search engine. And that turned into Google.
And there were... over and over again, I meet people who used the connection machine and then went on to do great things, so it was a kind of a magnet for attracting amazing people like Sydney... yes.  And so that, for me, being around those people, was really an even greater education than MIT was for me, because it was so interdisciplinary. There were people who would be working on economic models and people who would be working on astrophysics. And, like, Piet Hut would use it to study colliding galaxies or Schlumberger would use it to look for oil in the ground, or American Express used it for the first data-mining, of like looking at the patterns of how people charge credit cards and looking for patterns of fraud or marketing. All that stuff that’s just become so much of a part of our lives. The first people that were doing it were doing it with those machines, because they were the first ones that were powerful enough to do it. So it turned out to be the perfect way to get an education. And then later, in a sense, when I went to Disney, I got a different kind of education. Disney turned out to be a wonderful education in the arts or the applied arts of storytelling and, you know, moviemaking and all that stuff.

Thinking Machines, as I had originally designed it, really just to get my machine built, so that I could use it for artificial intelligence. But what I didn't understand was I'd build up such a big team and a company around it. So it turned into the largest employer in Cambridge, actually. It had about 750, 800 people, and we... he had, I think 150,000 square feet of prime office place around Kendall Square. And it really turned into a company, which was not really what I had intended, exactly. I hadn't really thought that part out, so much. I just wanted the machine. But I was really not getting to use the machine that much, because running a company was kind of a big deal. I didn't really run, it I was the CTO. I was the co-founder, I had a business partner. And so I wanted to just... it was clear that it was a good idea, but I didn't want to be in the computer business. So I wanted to sell the company to IBM. And I think IBM was very interested in buying it, but my co-founder [Sheryl Handler] hated that idea, and she wanted to continue running the company as an independent company. But I sort of knew that, you know, ultimately these things were just going to be boxes of microprocessors. There was nothing... there wasn't really a good business in it. And I did know that ultimately we'd have something like the Web. In fact, I wrote in my Scientific American article about the connection machine. I said, you know, 'Someday we'll all just use this big central computer, everybody in the country will use a remote computer through the network and the little computer will just be a display device, but all your information will be stored on the giant central computer.' And I remember the writer for Scientific American said, 'Well, that's just too implausible', and he bargained me down. He said, 'Well, you can say... how about a whole city, not the whole country?' So we... and I guess I said, 'Well, that gives the idea', so I think the Scientific American article says everybody in the whole city uses a central computer. But yes, I could... it was sort of inevitable that you could see that coming, but you could also see that it was going to be made out of these commodity parts and the stuff that... it wasn't a great business. So I got into kind of a big fight with the... my co-founder as to whether we should sell the company or not, which eventually I lost and then we both lost, because Cray... well, we did a lot of things wrong in how we set up the company, but eventually we kind of got ourselves in a corner of one year Cray made it illegal to export our machines, because they were too powerful, and made it so that the government was only allowed to spend money on machines... on supercomputers that were compatible with the computers you already had, which were Cray's. And so our government market dried up, our international market dried up. They also got a rule that you couldn't buy more than one of... in the Department of Energy, every lab had to have a different kind. So we could only sell one to DoE. So they really got us politically. I mean, it ended up... it was a sort of Pyrrhic victory for them, because they went bankrupt a few years later, but they really got us into a cash crunch. So we had to sell off the company. So it was a very sad thing.

We sold the... by then, IBM had come out with its own parallel computer, so we sold the hardware business to Sun and the software business to Oracle, eventually. And then eventually Oracle bought Sun, so it all ended up at Oracle. But the Sun people... Sun at that time was a workstation company, and we kind of helped move them to a server company, and that was just as the Web was happening. And, in fact, our next product was going to be a Web server, but nobody knew what a Web server was, and so people weren't willing to invest in this thing that filled a market that was a zero dollar market, but Sun did.
[Q] What year was that?
Well, it was just as the Web was coming out, so it was, you know, in the early '90s. So Mozilla was out, but Netscape wasn't yet. And the Web wasn't really that impressive then, but Sun ran with that and did very well with that. And one thing I'm very proud of is I managed to get everybody who went to Sun, I got every option that they had in a share of Thinking Machines stock converted to one option of Sun stock. And so those people actually did very well. But I felt terrible about the whole thing, because by then I really, of course, cared a lot about the people that worked, and I felt they had all depended on me to make this thing work financially, and everybody was looking to me to save it, and I couldn't, so I felt I had really let them down. And most people had never... this was the days before everybody did start-ups and so on, so most people had never had another job: they'd come right out of MIT or... and so we all thought this was kind of the end of the world. We didn't realise we'd all be fine. In fact, everybody went on and did extremely well and started their own companies, and everybody did great. And still today when I run into people from Thinking Machines, they almost always say to me, 'That was the best time I ever had', 'It was the best job I ever had.' So in retrospect, it was a success for them, but at the time I felt it was such a failure for them. So I felt pretty terrible about that. It was a bad time for me, business-wise, but it was kind of a wonderful time for me family-wise, because it was the time when I adopted my children and actually my daughter was born on the day that Thinking Machines went bankrupt.
[Q] I didn't know that. 
So I decided that was kind of an amazing moment. So... I'll come back to tell that story later, but that was sort of the end of something and the beginning of something.

In the end, I think we had a lot of impact, in the sense that those people went off and did things like had Sun go into the Web business, or Eric Lander went off and did all the stuff he did with...
[Q] Like Los Alamos?
Yes. So it was kind of like Los Alamos, in the sense that it became a sort of touch point for people, that they all remember... remember those days. And in fact I was just out visiting Sydney Brenner in Singapore, and he was talking about how wonderful it was to show up there in those days and meet everybody. We served food. That was the other thing. That was the other big innovation nobody had ever heard of, is that we had great food served. And so it became the place where everybody would come and have lunch together. So it ended up being a pretty wonderful thing and I'm proud of it. I'm sad it ended the way it did, but it had a lot of flaws in the way it had been set up as a business, and of course at the time I helped found it, I really wasn't thinking about that. I knew nothing about business, and so I made a lot of mistakes that I would never make again. So, it was a sad moment for me, but it also freed me up to really get to spend time with my children when they were infants and young. And that was kind of a wonderful opportunity.

So one of the interesting things about Thinking Machines was how it got funded, which was: I wanted to start this company, I had money from DARPA, but I needed commercial money to start the company. So my co-founder, Sheryl Handler, knew this guy named Bill Paley down in New York. I didn't really know who he was. I later discovered he's the guy that sort of invented the idea of a network and... but at the time I had no idea who this guy was. So I went down to meet him, to explain to him this idea of making a parallel computer, to get money from him. And I showed up kind of late and I showed up in blue jeans and a T-shirt and I went to this address on Park Avenue and was rather sceptically shown upstairs by the butler. And the door opened, and all of a sudden I saw all these Monets and Matisses and Degas's and you know... all those things are now a wing of the Met, but they were all hanging up and it was all this familiar stuff. I mean, I recognised the paintings, but I had seen them as posters in dormitories. These were, like, the actual paintings, right? When you opened it up, it was the Picasso of the boy leading the horse was, like, right in front of the elevator when it opened up. And next to it was like the Renoir Strawberries, and then Degas's, the women with the water and the jars and there was a Degas dancer, bronze dancer, and it was just overwhelming when you walked in. And as soon as I walked in, I was like, oh, I should have done my homework here. I had no idea what I was talking about.
So then I met Bill Paley and he was a little surprised to see me dressed as I was. And we sat down and we had dinner together, and I told him all about parallel computing and he didn't ask many questions. And then at the end he says... he said, 'Kid', he says, 'Why don't you just stop right there? I don't understand a word you're saying.' He said, 'But I'm actually a really good judge of people.' He said, 'Do you want some money to do this thing?' I said, 'Yes.' He said, 'How much do you need?' And I said, 'I need $7.5 million', I think it was. And he said, 'Okay, I'll give you half of it.' And that was my fundraising. And then I said, 'Well, will you be on the board?' And he looked a little surprised, and then he said, 'Yes, sure.'

Bill Paley was on my board. And he had... and he asked to have... he said, 'I'll do it, but I want somebody else to come with me.' And he got Frank Stanton to be on the board, too, and this was after Bill Paley had fired Frank Stanton from CBS. So Frank Stanton... I called him up and said, 'Bill Paley wants you to be on the board of this company.' And Frank Stanton said, 'Bill Paley is like a self-centred son of a bitch, but if he asked me to walk off a cliff for him, I would.'
And so I had Frank Stanton and Bill Paley on the board. Bill used to fly up in his helicopter from East Hampton to attend board meetings. And the company started out in this beautiful old house which we got from the City of Waltham by going to the city council and telling them we were doing something of historical importance, and they rented us this house called the Paine Mansion, which was built by Robert Treat Paine. It was actually designed by HH Richardson. So we were in this fantastically beautiful house in the middle of the woods, an extraordinary historical house, with our drawings all over the place and running Ethernet cables all over the place.

The house was actually... the city rented out the house every weekend for a wedding, so we would sort of move upstairs and compact into part of the house while the wedding was going on, but of course we were working through the weekends, so... and there was free food down at the wedding. So I became a sort of regular wedding crasher. I got very good at going down and hanging around. And the trick was always that the first thing when somebody came up to talk to you, you had to ask first, 'Oh, which side of the family are you with?' And then, well, it was quickly you got to know who the bride and groom were, and you got to hear the things everybody was saying about them, and you could say it, so it turns out to be pretty easy to crash a wedding. And I love to dance, and there's usually good dancing at weddings, and people usually get a little drunk and dance, and actually weddings are pretty sexy and I was single at that time, so it was kind of a nice way to meet girls.

We had this wonderful house with people like... well, Dick Feynman would come, and Dick would explain to us about physics, but somehow he expected the women to bring him food, which even... it didn't matter if they were the engineers or the president of the company or, you know, he just sort of expected he would sit down and be brought food. And so... but they sort of did it willingly because he was so charming and told them such interesting stories. But I remember asking one engineer if it sort of bugged her that he expected her to get soup for him, and she said, 'Yes, it does kind of bug me. On the other hand, he's like the only person who's ever explained to me quantum chromodynamics as if I could understand it', so he's... there was kind of a contradiction there. So it was a pretty wonderful time and pretty magical, starting out in such a strange place in the middle of a forest.

Later, we got bigger and bigger and we ended up renting a huge amount of space down at Cambridge around Kendall Square. We were kind of the only thing down there, though. And in fact, when the company ran out of cash, the big liability that prevented us... made people like IBM afraid to buy us, was that we had a 30-year lease on 150,000 square feet of office space around Kendal Square at $30 a square foot. And so they multiplied out all those numbers and considered that, like, this huge liability that they didn't want to take on. Now, of course, you know, that lease alone would have been worth hundreds of millions of dollars because that whole area exploded and now you can't begin to get space for anything like that cheap, and the 30 years still wouldn't be expired. So it would have been a goldmine if we kept that, but that the big liability on our sheet.

The sad thing, I think, about Thinking Machines was that I never really got to use the machines that much, because I'd built this thing because I wanted to use it, but I ended up running a computer company instead... instead of using the machine myself. So I put aside some time and I started to... and the thing that I got really interested in was simulating evolution and trying to understand the process of evolution. And I had a couple of people working for me on that, including Carl Simms, who made a really neat thing that involved walking machines. We started learning about evolution, and I was very excited about that area, and I think I really got the chance to do that, kind of, cut off, because I got so involved in the business stuff. And so I still would love to go back to that, because I think that's an area that has not actually made much progress since then, and I think it has huge potential. So I wish I had done that.
I also... one of the things is when we discovered the sort of general effect, which is when you had lots and lots of something, you would get kind of emergent phenomena like... well, like fluids come out of particles. And so I got more and more interested in this general idea of how emergent phenomena happen. How do simple rules cause automatically the construction of some other system of rules on top them? So that you can forget about the simple rules and you think about the system that emerged from the simple rules. And so if you look at us, for instance, we have... Schrodinger's equation is pretty simple, and out of that comes atoms, and out of the interaction of atoms come molecules and out of the interaction of molecules comes biochemistry, and somehow you get... you know, so molecules are emergent phenomena from Schrodinger's equation, and life is an emergent phenomenon of molecules, and neural systems are an emergent phenomenon of life and thinking is an emergent phenomenon from neural systems. And so we're sort of stacked up, these emergences on top of emergences on top of emergences. And how that happens, I think, is the most interesting thing. And in some sense, what's interesting about us is higher levels of the stack. And maybe there's higher levels up on top of that. I mean, as we interact, we're the particles, something emerges on top of us, which would be even more interesting. And I think we sometimes get a glimpse of that, I think. I'm not a mystic, but I do believe that there is something. You know, I believe that there's something more than us. And so that, to me, is something I started noticing then, and I've stayed with that as being one of the fundamental things that I'm interested in. How does that happen? How can you make it happen? I still think it's not very well understood. So for me that's one of the most fundamental, intellectually interesting puzzles of our time.

I used to have lots of talks with Francis Crick about consciousness. And honestly, I didn't like his ideas of consciousness very much. I thought he had a kind of trivial idea of consciousness. So I think the kind of consciousness that Francis Crick was talking about is that we have a function in our brain that is a storyteller, and it was probably evolved to tell stories about what other people were doing, because we're social creatures. And so it imagines things like motives and causes and effects and so it imposes that order in order to predict other people. And so we have that mechanism and we apply that mechanism to ourselves. So we notice ourselves reaching for food, and so we say to ourselves, oh, we must be hungry. But we're observing ourselves just like we observe other people and we're telling a story about ourselves just like we're telling a story about other people. And I think that storytelling function is what Francis was talking about when he was talking about consciousness. And I actually don't think that's such an interesting part of our... I mean, it's one of the parts of our brain, but I don't think it's the most interesting or the most important part of our brain. It's just the part that leaves behind a story. I don't think it's the part that does most of the thinking, I don't think it's the part that has most of the value, most of the creativity and so on. And so I think by focusing on that function, I think Francis was kind of focusing on the wrong thing.

Thinking about consciousness, I think Dan Dennett probably has a much... is also... he's stayed a good friend. But I think his way of thinking about consciousness as just something that emerges from thought is much closer to what I think of, rather than some little part of the brain that is either on or off. But it's definitely true that thinking is way more complicated than we thought, and it's not just one thing. We have lots going on. And I think that's one thing that I learned from Marvin, is that thinking is complex, multi-dimensional, it's not a neat idea, it's not just one thing. And I do see the world much more like Marvin's... I do see myself much more like Marvin's Society of Minds. There's lots of intelligences that sometimes contradict each other, sometimes cooperate. And the me that I imagine in my story I tell of myself is probably no more accurate than the story I read in the newspaper about what's going on in the world. It's just a simplified story to make me understandable to myself, but it misses most of the interesting details.

I think because we have this storytelling function, we end up telling stories about the world, and so I think that the idea of cause and effect is actually not something that's really in the world. It's just a story we tell about the world. So if we take something in physics, like F=ma, we tend to think of a force as causing acceleration, but that equation can be rearranged. You could think of acceleration as causing mass, or mass as causing force. Mathematically, it's all the same. We think of it that way because we can create forces by pushing on something. And we can't create masses by willing something, so we tend to think of the force as the cause. So it's really just kind of a storytelling convention. So I believe actually all the stories we tell about the cause and effect of things are either false, if they are about real things in the physical world, or they're constructed if they're in things we engineer. So for instance on a computer, we deliberately construct electronic circuits that have... implement cause and effect. The input can affect the output, but the output really can't affect the input. And so we create something that is our fantasy of cause and effect, as in a logic gate. And then we connect all those together and we build these fantastic chains of causes and effect in computer programs and things like that. And so those things really do have cause and effect, because they were built to. It may be that evolution builds things with causes and effects for similar reasons, but I think mostly in physical systems, causes and effects are just something that we make up about a system in order to explain it. And in fact, probably complicated systems like economies or ecologies or maybe even brains aren't really explainable in those terms. And so it may be that trying to understand those things in the same sense that we understand a computer circuit may just be impossible.

You could build a different kind of computer that didn't have that kind of one-way flow of information and had much more connected emergent phenomena, but we wouldn't know how to build such a thing because that's not how we think. So we think in terms of these stories, so we sort of have to implement stories. So it sounds sort of radical, but I actually don't really believe in cause and effect, that that's a fundamental building block of the universe. I believe in it as a construct that we've created to understand the universe and to build things in the universe. And of course it's very useful in things like social interactions, where we can have like systems of law that assume that there's an agent that caused this and had this effect, and there's a storytelling technique that's very important for organising society, that we all use that storytelling technique so that we can assign blame to things and so on. But it's not really how physics works. It's not really how the universe works.

I actually went to visit Disney long before I went to work for Disney. I had grown up watching Walt Disney talk about the construction of Disneyworld and the Imagineers and I'd always kind of imagined being an Imagineer. And then it turns out that one of the investors in Thinking Machines was very close to the Bass brothers, who'd made a big investment in Disney. So when that happened, I asked if I could get an inside tour of Disney and go to see Imagineering. So they arranged for it and I... this was just when they had hired Michael Eisner and they were mostly paying attention to the movie side of Disney, hadn't really paid much attention to the theme parks. So I went to Burbank to this address to show up to get my tour of Imagineering and I arrived and went to the desk and said, 'I'm here', and: 'Oh, they've been waiting for you.' I'm like, 'They?' Like, oh yes, sort of. And I walked in and everybody is in suits and ties, lined up, all the vice presidents. And it turns out I'm like the first representative of the Bass brothers that has come to visit Imagineering, so they're quite sure I'm like the guy that's going to decide if they're all going to get fired, so I realised that there's been some real misunderstanding. So I asked to talk to the president of Imagineering and sort of pulled him off to the side and said, 'Look, I think there's been some misunderstanding. I'm not going to, like, report back, I'm not, you know, I'm just doing this as a... for fun.' And I don't think he quite believes me. He says, 'Well look, we've got... everybody's ready for this, so let's just go ahead and do it like we've planned it.' And so I was, like, 'Okay, I've been honest, I guess I'll just enjoy it.'
So I sat down and they said, 'Well, what would you like to see?', and I'd like, well, 'First of all I'd like to see all your secret projects and particularly the ones that you've decided not to do, you know, that were too radical. And I want to talk to the guy that designs the animatronics, and I'd like to see all your budgets, and I'd like to...', you know, I just went... 'I'd like to see your planning process and I...', you know, 'Do you have manuals of how you do things? I'd like copies of all those manuals, what your processes are.' I just... I went crazy. And I went around and I had the most amazing tour of the place and met all these people and was shown everything and given copies of all the secret plans and it was so exciting and so fun and I went back and really enjoyed the whole experience. But that was just while Thinking Machines was still going on, so it was just a lark.

Then when Thinking Machines got broken up and sold off, Sun wanted me to come to Sun. But I just didn't have the heart to keep doing the same thing. I just wanted a break. And my children were infants. I wanted something that I could do with my children. And my friend Bran Ferren had just gotten his company bought by Disney, and he had convinced Frank Wells, who was one of the senior executives, to build up the research at Disney. So he said, 'Why don't you come to Disney?' I was, like, 'Well, there's not really a job for me at Disney.' He's like, 'Make one up.' So I said, 'Okay, I want to be Disney Fellow and I want to be able to go to any meeting.' And I kind of sort of used my example. 'I want to be able to go and ask people for anything and get it.' And he said, 'Okay, but nobody will take you seriously unless you're a vice president, so we'll make you Vice President of R&D, too.' I was, like, 'Okay, great.'
And so Frank Wells got excited about this and bought off on it, and so I got my family all ready to move. I sold my house in Cambridge, which I couldn't afford the mortgage on any more because I was out of a job, I had no money. So I had three young kids, no house, going off to Disney, and then Frank Wells died in a helicopter crash. So I was just about to move and I didn't have any place to move to. I had no house and my friend Jacqui Safra said, 'I have a vineyard that I just bought out in Napa Valley. Why don't you stay at the vineyard?' And so I went out there and it turns out the vineyard was this extraordinary place. It was the place where they filmed the television show called Falcon Crest, this beautiful, amazing seven-storey house in the middle of hundreds of acres of lovely vineyard. And so it was kind of an ideal, beautiful place to go with my young children who were, like, I guess the boys were two, my daughter was probably just one then. She was an infant. And go out and just had a wonderful time bonding with my children in this idyllic setting while Disney tried to figure out what to do about me.

And so months later, they finally decided to go ahead and sign the contract and I moved down to Los Angeles and started at Disney, which was an incredibly fun place to be. And it turns out everybody remembered my visit, because I got there and I was very surprised: nobody was wearing coats and ties. It turns out they had all been told to put on coats and ties because... for my visit. They didn't normally do that. But I arrived at Disney and got to know the Imagineers and had a wonderful time designing theme park rides and got... we were just starting Animal Kingdom, trying to figure out what that would be. So I got... you know, from the very beginning of the brainstorming session of what park... what's the park going to be at all, all the way through the park opening. And during that whole time, my children were growing up and they were just the right age for Disney. So of course we got to go visit. And they were very keen eye for design, even then, even as young kids, and I remember mostly we went to the California park, which was the original Disneyland. And then once I took them to Florida, and Noah said... we went to the Magic Kingdom in Florida and Noah looked around and looked up at me and said, 'Dad, this is a fake Disneyland.' Which is funny, because the Imagineers kind of think of that as a fake Disneyland, too. So he had the discerning ability to see that it wasn't quite as detailed and quite as authentic as the original one.
But... so we had a wonderful time there, and I remember Animal Kingdom was one of the most fun projects, because I got that from start to finish while I was there. And when Animal Kingdom finally opened up, every park has a central icon like the ball at Epcot or the caste at Disneyland. And in Animal Kingdom, it's a giant tree that has animals in its bark and is probably five storeys tall or something like that. It actually has a theatre inside of it. It's an amazing, extraordinary object. And so we went to the park on opening day and we walk up to this tree with my little, probably five-year-old kids and Lisa looks up at the tree and looks at me and says, 'Daddy, did God make that or did you make that?' And I was, like, okay, this is like the peak of my fatherhood here.

It was a wonderful way of spending time with my children. And we home-schooled our children, so I did get to spend a lot of time with them in that, and the Disney job let me do it. And it was also, for me, the first time I'd ever had a job, which was kind of a unique experience. I remember when I got my first paycheque from Disney. I had benefits, like all the insurance payments they had made for me and so on. And for the first time, I realised why benefits are called benefits. It's like they were giving me all this stuff, whereas always before benefits was stuff I had to pay, right? So it was a completely different perspective on things, in the sense that the company was going to be fine whatever I did. It was doing well. And so I didn't have that sense of responsibility and mostly they didn't listen to what I told them to do, but occasionally they did, and they were happy with the things that they did listen to. I mean, I tried to get them to... I mean, for instance, this was when the Internet was just starting to happen, and there was an executive there that I really liked a lot named Gerry Laybourne and Gerry and I were interested in doing something for children, making a new television brand for children. And we went and we interviewed focus groups, and we realised this amazing thing, which was that for everybody at that time, they didn't really know what the Internet was but they thought it was really important and they thought it was called Yahoo. So we realised Yahoo was this amazing brand that meant the Internet. And so we went back and we tried to get Disney to buy Yahoo. But it would cost $100 million, right, so Disney was like, 'Why would we buy a strange company that has a silly name for $100 million?' So that was the kind of thing they wouldn't do. So they sort of knew this technology thing was important, but they didn't really know why it was important and they didn't have very good intuitions about it, but they treated me very well.

The time I realised they didn't really get what was going on, even with their own stuff, was I arrived just before Michael Ovitz arrived. And Michael Ovitz was the agent who had... was known as the most powerful guy in Hollywood and after Frank Wells died, they needed somebody else in a kind of more operational role to work with Michael Eisner. And so they hired Michael Ovitz.
On Michael Ovitz's first day, he decides to hold a meeting, which he announces. So lots of the executives, including me, are invited to meet with Michael Ovitz for the first time. And so we show up in this room, with a big, long conference table, and Michael Ovitz is late to the meeting, and nobody knows where to sit, so everybody is sort of milling around. They don't want to sit down until they see where Michael Ovitz sits. And I don't know anybody, so I just sit down, and then finally Michael Ovitz comes in and he sits down at one end of the table and everybody arranges themselves around him, but nobody knows who I am, so the two seats next to me are empty. And the first thing Michael Ovitz says is... he says, 'So, there's a lot of clever people around here, but we need to be smart, not clever.' And I'm thinking, what does that even mean? But everyone looks at him like he's said something profound. And then he says, 'We need to get out of the old ways of thinking. I want each of you to tell me your biggest new idea.' And he's like given nobody any preparation for this. And he turns to the person next to him and he says, 'What's your biggest new idea?' And of course, everybody's just working on whatever they're working on, nobody has any time to think about this. So everybody just ends up talking about the thing they're working on, none of which are terribly radical ideas. I'm not working on anything. And fortunately, I'm like three quarters of the way around the table, so I have some time to think. So I think of what would be like a really big idea for Disney to do. So it gets to me and I start talking about having this new kind of educational brand for kids as they get older, and create a new brand around actually thinking and, you know, that involves the Internet and integrates the Internet with... you know, all stuff Disney wasn't even beginning to think about doing. And I hadn't even thought about doing until five minutes ago. So then Ovitz says, 'Now that's a big idea.' It's the first positive thing he's said about anybody's idea. And then they go around and then we sort of take a break for coffee break, and I sit down after the coffee break and two people come [whoosh] sit down right next to me. And I suddenly realised how things worked. That all of a sudden they want to sit next to the guy that has the big idea. But they can't tell that this idea is just off the cuff, made up. They have no idea. And I suddenly understood that entertainment's not like science. In science there's a real underlying truth. If you've figured out the way that liquid helium works, you've really figured something out. You know something other people don't. It's not like... you know, that's a big idea. In entertainment, what's a big idea is the one that causes the people to sit next to you. And so that was when it first started dawning on me that this was all just smoke and mirrors.

Also, people treated me incredibly well, and I got to learn a different way of thinking about storytelling. But actually, people treated me embarrassingly well. I mean, the first day I was there, I sit down at my desk and somebody comes to me and says, 'What kind of crudités would you like every day?' And I'm like, 'Well, what do you mean?' And they show me the menu, like, 'Okay, if we deliver it in the morning or...' 'Okay, yes, sure, that'll be fine.' And they're like, 'Is it okay if we wash and gas your car on Tuesdays and Thursdays', and I'm like, 'Yes, that'll be fine.' You know? I mean, all this crazy stuff that you would never have in technology. So it was a funny shift of culture.
I remember at one point there was a budget memo that went around that said: new policy, no unnecessary travel and no ordering fresh flowers for your room, no ordering champagne and caviar. It had this whole list, and I was like, we were supposed to be doing this all along? Unnecessary travel was allowed? I mean, it was all these things that never occurred to me were suddenly outlawed, so it was a crazy, crazy culture, but also a lot of fun.
But it was all a culture that was set up as a reflection of the two brothers that had started it: Walt and Roy. And Walt had been the creative guy who went off and did whatever he wanted and threatened to quit, sometimes did quit, when he didn't get his way. And Roy had been the businessman that had sort of kept the budget. And Roy had originally refused to fund Disneyland and Walt quit and started Imagineering and then Roy had to buy it back, but the whole dynamic of the company was like that. Imagineering was the embodiment of Walt, with its crazy ideas and sort of petulant and wanting to do what they wanted to do whether it made business sense or not. And strategic planning was Roy, and finance and... you know, they were the naysayers on everything. And so it was always this dynamic between them that still existed. So you always played out that projects of you would always pitch your projects to the business people. So that was a lot of fun.

At one point, they asked me to work on the problem of getting... moving people through the rides faster. And I was like, 'Why do you want to do that?' And they were like, 'Well, the biggest complaint is that people don't like standing in the lines.' I said, 'Well, that's stupid. If the lines move faster, people will just come out of the lines faster and they'll stand in another line and they'll actually spend more time standing in lines if you make it move faster. They'll spend less time on the rides.' And they're like, 'Oh, I guess that's right. So what you need to do...', they said, 'Well, this didn't use to be a problem.' And so I went back and I looked at Walt's... I said, 'Okay, let me look into this.'
So I looked at Walt's original memorandum to Roy about what Disneyland was going to be. And it was amazingly accurate. It described, like, Tomorrowland and Frontierland and the castle in the middle and the train tracks going around. But the interesting thing is that it didn't have any rides, except for transportation, actually moving from one place to another. And the rides had been something that had been added afterwards. And so now they were putting all their money into these boxes and of course people were lining up to see where they spend the money. And the park really hadn't had much done to it. So I was like, 'Well, what you need to do is invest in the park and make it more exciting so that people want to hang out in the park rather than go into the ride.' They were like, 'Yes, but how can you make a park compete with the rides?' And so I was like, 'Well, what if you had, like, giant dinosaurs and unicorns and things like that wandering around?' And they were like, 'Well, you couldn't do that. I mean, it would be too dangerous, it would be...' I was, like, 'No, I'll do that.'
 So I made this giant... I got the money to make a project to make a giant robot dinosaur. But then it came to the point... so everybody knew I was making this robot dinosaur and it came to the point where they had to make the decision whether they were going to go ahead with the project. But there's a thing that I learned by then, which is when you're going to do a demonstration, you really need to plan how it's going to feel relative to people's expectations. And everybody was expecting to come see this giant robot dinosaur, so if I'd just showed them a giant robot dinosaur, it wasn't going to be that exciting to them. So I was, like, how can I kind of lower their expectations and...? So they had no idea how big this thing was going to be. So I had a... I built a box that was about a quarter the size of the dinosaur. So it was still, like, 12 feet on a side or something like that. Big wooden crate. And I wrote 'danger' all over it and I had it in front of a set of black curtains. And then I had folding chairs around the box. And so the strategic planning people and the finance people and Michael Eisner and Michael Ovitz came and they all sat around this box and I told them why they needed dinosaurs wandering around the park, and it was all set up with a tassel that I would pull and the box would open up. And so I pulled the tassel, and the box falls open, and it's empty. And then the curtains open, and behind it is, like, a dinosaur, way bigger, that just comes walking toward them. And they... I had wired it so that every... with switches on the footpads, so that every time it took a step, there were big sub-woofers, so boom, boom, boom. And it scared them to death. They jumped up, they knocked over their chairs, they really did not see it coming. So unfortunately I overdid it. So then they decided that this would be way too frightening for the parks. And I was, like, 'No, no, no, it's not really frightening, kids will love this.' And they're like, 'No, no, no, it's really scary, we don't want to frighten the kids.' And I was like, 'No, it just frightened you.' So they insisted that I make it be the size... they said, 'Well, if you shrink it down to the size of that original box and sort of make it soft and fuzzy and cute...', which eventually is what we had to do. Of course, it was much less interesting. So my show techniques kind of backfired on me.

It's actually interesting what happened to the large dinosaur, which is they... when I left, I asked if I could borrow it. And they said, 'Okay, you can borrow it for a year.' And then I asked them if they wanted it back and they didn't have any place to put it. So... then years and years later they asked for it back, but I was like, 'Well, I tried to give it back to you before and you wouldn't take it.' And they were, like, 'Well, we want it back now' and I was, like, 'I'm not sure I can find it. So, don't know. I do have a dinosaur around, it might be the same one, but I think that one got lost.'

One nice thing about living in this wonderful vineyard in Napa was the kids had the run of the place and they still talk about the kids there. For instance, Noah always loved vehicles and he was really probably just like four years old or something like that, but he... we had these little four-wheel-drive almost like motorcycle things, and he figured out how to start them, so he was always kidnapping the vehicles and driving them around. And one of the things I did is I got... because I had lots of time, I built the kids a treehouse off in the woods out of an old wine crate. But the kids were too small to climb a ladder, so I built an elevator for them that I could lift them up into the treehouse. And so we would go off into the woods to the treehouse. But while we were there, we discovered old wine stakes that... you know, stakes for growing grapes, and told... told the people at the vineyard about it. And they went back and discovered that there had been old grape fields there. And of course, grape fields in Napa are worth tens of thousands of dollars, maybe hundreds of thousands of dollars an acre, so finding a place where they could plant grapes was a big deal. So they decided that the whole area... they were going to clear it and replant grapes there. But Jacqui Safra knew that this was the area where I built this treehouse. So he insisted that they leave the treehouse and they'd leave an area around the treehouse, which they have to do anyway, because the grapes can't be near the trees, and so he probably left this, like, hundred thousand dollar chunk of land just to preserve this little treehouse that I made. And it's still there today, and when we go back, the kids go and visit their treehouse and the... I put it up temporarily with ropes, binding it, because I didn't want to hurt the tree by putting nails into it, and the tree's now grown up around the ropes and sort of incorporated the ropes, but the treehouse is still there in the middle of this grape vineyard.

While I was at the vineyard getting to know my kids, the other thing I got to do was think about some things that had been in the back of my mind for a long time. In particular, I had had this idea about the future shrinking, and I had had this idea about building a clock that lasted for 10,000 years. And that was the first moment that I really got to sort of sit and think about it and write it down. So I wrote an essay. Wired magazine was doing its tenth anniversary or something like that, and they asked me to write an essay for them. And so I wrote down, for the first time, the idea of the clock sort of sitting in the tower there overlooking the vineyard. And that's really when I committed to doing that project. And so one of the great things about Disney is it let me begin to build the prototype, so the pieces of the clock, which I never would have had time to do if I was still running Thinking Machines. So that actually ended up being a great blessing, too, because they were very supportive of my using the machine shops and things like that to play with the ideas of the clock. So that became the beginning of my actually working on the clock. I mean, I had thought about the idea before I had talked about it, but that was the point where I really started working on it.

One of the wonderful things about Thinking Machines is that we actually got to talk with the people that were on the cutting edge of everything, so we got to see these new technologies come along that were going to be important, but nobody had heard of yet. Like I remember the first time I saw a CD, and bringing it home and saying, 'Look, this is going to replace'... I brought it home to Pati and said, 'This is going to replace your record collection.' And she's like, 'No, never. I'll never get rid of my records.'
But one of the things was, too, talking to the people at Motorola about their plans to have cell phones. And I went around all my friends and said, you know, 'You're going to be able to have portable telephones you'll be able to carry in your pocket and talk to anybody', and every single person I said that to said, 'Oh, I would never want that. Universally, the idea that people could call me any time they wanted and be...' So it was interesting seeing the future and seeing how much people didn't believe and accept it. And then a few years later, it would just happen. And even Moore's Law, which I had the chance to actually talk with Gordon Moore about, was just so implausible, even though we believed it. You know, the idea that we would have actual things in our pockets and on our laps that were faster than the fastest computers that we had now, was just kind of unbelievable. And that we could store a video in a little card, even though we knew it, we sort of didn't really quiet believe it. So it was kind of a glimpse of the future. That was a great opportunity, to see sort of how the future emerges from dreams, how very implausible dreams just become reality and taken for granted.

One of the dreams that I had as an undergraduate is I always wanted to have a map that I could just spread out and zoom into. And I actually tried to build a prototype. I built a prototype and that was back in the days when I knew Steve Jobs, and I showed Steve Jobs my prototype of the zooming map, and he was, like, 'That's impractical, people don't want to touch a computer screen.' And then later I really got it working well enough to patent it, and file a patent on it. And then of course, years later, the iPhone came out and it had pinch-to-zoom on it. And much to my surprise, Apple filed a patent on this thing that I had invented long ago. But I just kind of ignored it, but then Apple, when Samsung came out with their phones, Apple sued Samsung for pinch-to-zoom. And actually won a $1.2 billion settlement from Samsung. So Samsung countersued and they went back and they found my old patent, and they countersued on the grounds that I had invented it long before Apple ever did. And they won. And so they got Apple's patents completely thrown out. And they got the patent office to basically declare that my invention... you know, I had invented it before Apple had patented it, so they declared Apple's patent invalid. But I always felt sort of bad that Samsung... if they'd only like given me .001% of the amount of money, but it never happened. But I have to say it's one of my inventions that I'm most proud of, because I see now children do it to magazines, and they just expect every screen to do that. And I realise that they will grow up not ever imagining that that was ever invented, because it's just so intuitive that they would just think... children are born expecting to do that to pictures, because infants do it now, because they see it happen. So I love that invention, because I see people use it every day. And yes, somebody else probably would have invented it if I hadn't, but it's still pretty great to think, wow, I imagined the world was like that before it was, and I helped make it like that.

One of the wonderful things about Disney is they had no idea who I was, but they treated me kind of like a movie star.
[Q] It's always safer to. 
So it was just... yes. And partly because Michael Ovitz treated me that way and they followed the lead of Michael Ovitz. So... for instance, one of the early... one of my first days that I was there I wanted to try a ride that I always sort of imagined that involved hanging from a parachute harness. And so I said to the person that had been assigned to help me, 'Can you get me a parachute harness?' And she said, 'What size?' And I sort of knew, okay, this is not a place where they're questioning you. So that was... I was treated really very well. I was assigned fantastic people. The assistant that I was assigned, somebody who had worked for Michael Eisner, and she was actually an Olympic basketball player, and she was incredibly overqualified for the job, and was actually kind of bored with the job a little bit, but she hired... she said, 'You need another assistant.' I'm like, 'Okay', and she brought somebody else from Michael Eisner's office, who was Alice Hargrove. And then, after having done that, she said, 'Oh, by the way, I'm leaving because I've been offered to be a vice president at Nike.' So she went off and did that and left me with Alice, who was just fantastic, and that's been a very important collaboration, really, not just from Disney. I mean, Alice came with me from Disney and then came with me to Applied Minds and then came with me to Applied Invention. And she's so much of a partner in everything that I've managed to accomplish. I don't know how I could possibly operate without her. So that's been a fantastic collaboration. But I remember one of the first things when Alice came aboard. Because at Disney, you sort of had permission to do anything. I saw the Goodyear Blimp flying over. I was like, 'Oh, I'd like a ride on that.' And then I was like, Alice, can you get me a ride on the Goodyear Blimp? And she came back and she said, 'Would you like to fly it? So I don't know how she did it, but she... So I went down and they had the Goodyear Blimp waiting for me, and I got to fly the Goodyear Blimp with a co-pilot sitting there. And it was just like the people from Disney would like to check out the Goodyear Blimp, you know. So it was tremendous permission to do everything, so I had a lot of fun with that.

It was also sort of fun watching Hollywood and Silicon Valley trying to get together with each other, and that was the 'Siliwood' days. They each sensed the other was important, but they didn't quite know how. And I was kind of the technical guy at Disney, so Michael Ovitz would always bring me into his meetings with the Silicon Valley people. And I remember a meeting, for example, between Andy Grove, who was the president of Intel, and Michael Ovitz. And of course I got invited to the lunch. And I show up and Michael came in late to the lunch, which is the thing you do in Hollywood, not the thing you do in Silicon Valley. So Andy Grove was a bit irritated. And then Michael started saying, 'Oh, I'm sorry, I was late because Robin Williams had a personal problem and then Vanessa Redgrave called me and I had to deal with something with Spielberg...', and he's just dropping names right and left and Andy Grove is looking at him, like, 'Why are you wasting my time here?' I mean, Andy does not care about having all these names dropped. And so Michael's sensitive enough to realise that tack isn't working, so he sits down and he says, 'So,' he says, 'what do you see as important in your business?' And Andy Grove says, 'Well, you know, we think networks are really important.' And Michael Ovitz says, 'Oh, we do too, that's why we bought ABC.' And he goes off on... and Andy Grove just like looks confused and... So they go on for a while and Michael Ovitz doesn't quite know what's wrong, but he realises this isn't happening and so he says, 'Well, you know, what do you think makes you so successful?' And Andy Grove says, 'Well, we've established some standards' – by which he meant the 38 – 'we've established some standards and the industry uses our standards, so that lets us make a premium.' And Michael says, 'That's exactly what we do. I mean, we established the standards for our industry.' And Andy's like, 'Really? What standards have you established?' And he's like, 'Well, I mean we are the standard. I mean, everybody follows our standards and we get to charge a premium for our product because we have so much higher standards.'
It was just... you know, I'm just keeping my mouth shut. This whole thing is a train wreck. So Michael realises something is going wrong, this isn't quite working. So he decides to take another tactic. So he says, 'Well – he says – you know, a part of it is just the emotional feeling for the brand. I mean, people love Disney and I know they just love Intel. I mean, we just love Intel. It's an emotional thing.' And Andy looks confused, because nobody loves Intel. Even Andy doesn't love Intel. Andy also knows that Intel was like a big competitor of mine, because they were trying to make parallel computers, and he's very well aware of the fact that we competed with them and they're a very tough, nasty competitor. And so this whole thing, Andy hasn't said much, but after Michael says that, he looks over at me, and he says, 'I had no idea, Danny. Is this really true? Do you love Intel?' He knows exactly what he's asking. And so Michael Ovitz looks at me like, come on, back me up here. Fortunately I had a soup spoon in my mouth, so I had a chance to think. I put down the soup spoon and I said, 'You know, Intel dominates the industry. We respect that.' And Andy says, 'Thank you.' And Michael Ovitz looks like, what just went on there? I don't get it. So it was a crazy time.

It was a funny time, because cell phones... small cell phones were just coming out and the Hollywood agents loved them. They were real status symbols, and the tech guys had, like, the newer models. And so at one point, we had the head of Motorola, [Bob] Galvin, came and arrived with the StarTAC. And he had it on his little clip on the outside, and he sits down with me and Michael Ovitz and he pulls out his StarTAC and he puts it down, this beautiful... you know, it was the original flip phone. And it had just come out, nobody had seen it. And Michael says, 'Wow, that's amazing. I would really like one of those.'
Now this is where Hollywood culture and tech culture is totally different, because in Hollywood culture, what this means is, give me one as a gift. But in tech culture, you would never have a business relationship with someone and give them an expensive gift. I mean, that was a $2000 phone, that. So in Hollywood culture, you would just hand it, say, 'Here, take this one.' But in tech culture, that would be like an illegal, unethical thing to do, to give a $2000 present to somebody that you're talking about having a business deal with. So I immediately, like, saw it from both sides, and I wondered what's going to happen here. And Galvin says, 'I'll give you a phone number where you can buy one at the lowest possible price.' And Michael Ovitz, like, looks and I'm like, okay, like Michael did the right thing by his culture, but it didn't work... I mean, sorry, Galvin did the right thing by his culture, but it didn't work with Michael. And sure enough, we get up from the dinner... from lunch and Michael says, 'Well, I can tell he doesn't want to do business with us.' And that was the end of that discussion.

I ended up staying at Disney for almost five years, which was a surprise. It was just fun. I intended to just be there as kind of a vacation, but it was wonderful people to work with, I got to work on the clock, I got to meet all kinds of interesting characters and funny people like Robin Williams and really interesting, smart, people of all sorts. And got to travel all over the place, and got a paycheque. Didn't have to worry about running a company. So it was a great vacation, but after a while I realised that it... I had been there a lot longer than I had expected to be, and probably I needed to stop taking a vacation and do something useful. So I said... I told Bran Ferren, who had brought me there, 'I'm going to quit and start a company to do things that are more important for the world.' And Bran said, 'Well, if you wait another six months, I'll come with you.' And so that's how we started Applied Minds.
And Disney was happy about it, I mean happy that we gave them notice and so on, and they actually rented us the space and we had a very good relationship, still, with Disney. But we went on to do things that we thought were more important and had more impact, because it was kind of discouraging, I would say, that the best ideas that we had in research and I had in particular, never got acted on. And just the sort of low-hanging fruit got acted on and Disney was happy with that, but ultimately that was frustrating for me. And I wanted to do something that made more difference. But it was a great thing to do with my kids when they were young, so it was a wonderful period of my life. And it was nice to go through a period of actually seeing what it was like to have a job. And it gave me a very different perspective on things, having a job, because I'd always kind of been the boss before. I didn't realise how much work everybody goes to manipulate the boss and spin things so that the boss thinks the boss is making a decision, when actually you've set things up so that the boss can only do one thing, and I got to see it all from a different angle.

And I also got to be in a situation where I wasn't the expert. That was a little hard for me, at first, but I remember... because I was used to having my own company and people would come to me with problems and I would tell them the answer, and that would be the way it was. But at Disney, I didn't know the... I didn't have that kind of authority and certainly didn't have the expertise actually to have the right answer, so...
I remember being shocked, like, the first time we sat down at something that I thought I knew about, they said, 'We should have an online service. Let's have a brainstorming session about what that look like... Disney online would look like.' And so Disney would do these things called 'charettes', where they'd get all these people together and they would start brainstorming about it. So they began, like, 'Let's just everybody make a little presentation of what you imagine the online service to be.' And so we all sketched a little bit, and then they went around the table, and the first person holds up, like, a picture of a castle and says, 'Oh, I think it should be like a castle, it should be like a virtual Disneyland', and somebody holds up a picture of a spaceship, and you know, there are all these pictures of, like, I don't even know what they were pictures of, but they were sort of ideas of concepts of what it should be like. They were sort of metaphors. And it gets to mine, and I have, like, this block diagram of well, you should have the server and you should have this service, you'll be able to serve a... and everybody looks at me confused, and, like, 'We don't understand. You think it should be a like a bunch of boxes with lines between them?' I mean... My solution was a total disconnect for them. They just saw no value in what I had to offer whatsoever to this discussion. And so it was very surprising to be in a situation where, like, I would give them the answer and they wouldn't even appreciate it as being useful at all. So it taught me a kind of humility, but it was also a great chance to learn what they knew.

One of the interesting things about making supercomputers is it was during the Cold War, still, it was like the end of the Cold War. And supercomputers were considered very special, secret technology. And in fact, my first patents that I filed on them, I got a notice back that they had been declared secret and that I wasn't allowed to look at them. So it was considered a very hot technology. Eventually I got them undeclared secret, but it was a strange experience with that. And in fact, that was just before the Reagan administration, and one of the meetings that Marvin [Minsky] brought me to was a meeting about how we should do a space programme by a bunch of people who were sort of disgusted with NASA. So it was like science fiction writers like Larry Niven and some people like the head of the Air Force, by the name of [James] Abrahamson, and Edward Teller was there. And they all decided that they were going to make another space programme, and that the excuse for the space programme was going to be that they were going to build a missile shield that would shoot down ballistic missiles, and it was really just an excuse for building a different space programme that wasn't NASA. And I thought this was just a completely crazy idea, because obviously it wouldn't work. And I pointed out that it obviously wouldn't work, and they were, like, 'No, no, it doesn't have to work, it just... it will work to get us a space programme.' And I thought it was silly, but their whole scheme depended on getting this movie star named Ronald Reagan elected president, which I just thought was such a bizarre idea that I went away from this meeting thinking this is just nuts.
But indeed, Ronald Reagan did get elected president. He started what came to be called the 'Star Wars' program, and a big central tenet of it, which he actually announced in the state of the union was that we were going to have supercomputers and our lead in supercomputers was a big deal. And the Soviets believed him. So all of a sudden, supercomputers became the hot topic, and this was what I was building. And so I was building computers that were way faster than the Cray's, so they were declared strategic technology and we weren't allowed to export them, and the Soviets, it turns out, started a programme to copy our computer. I didn't know about this until much later, but what I did know is I started getting strange things happening.

One time a very beautiful woman showed up at the AI lab, visiting from Romania, and took quite a fancy to me. And started hanging out with me quite a lot and the relationship started to develop in interesting ways and we became great friends. And then eventually she says, 'I can't do this, I have to tell you what's going on.' I was, like, 'What?' And she's, like, 'Well, I'm a spy. I've been sent... I'm supposed to, like, get all these secrets from you, but I really like you and I can't do it and I like it here and I want to defect.' And she's like, but... she's like, 'My supervisor's coming and he wants to, like, know that I'm meeting you, so he wants to meet you. But I can't lie to you that he's just a spy. He's pretending to be a scientist, but I'm going to be in trouble if I don't introduce you, because he wants to see that I really have a relationship with you, and...' So I was saying, 'Okay, well, I'll meet him, that's great.' So he shows up and she introduces him, he says, 'Oh, I'm a scientist', and I'm like, 'Oh really, what kind of scientist you are?' And he says, 'Well, I'm really a theoretical physicist.' And I was, like, 'Oh, that's interesting. I used to be a theoretical physicist. What kind of theory do you do?' He's like, 'Well, really, it was more a mathematician.' I was, like, 'That's exactly what I was, really. What kind of math?' And I kept on doing this to him until he kind of got uncomfortable and went away. He clearly... whatever he tried to shift to, I claimed to be an expert at it. And so she eventually defected and became an American citizen and never went back. So that was my first experience with it.

My second experience with it was that after Thinking Machines had started and we were... you know, selling a computer was a big deal, because it was a lot... it was $5, $10 million to sell a machine. And I got a call from this guy in Canada who said, 'You know, we're just about to buy two supercomputers and we're about to buy Cray's, but I just heard about your machine, and before I buy the Cray, I want to find out about yours. Can you come up and talk to me?' So I'm like, immediately, 'Yes, sure.' So I jump on a plane, I go up and I get picked up in a car at the airport. He says, 'Oh, and bring all the manuals with you, I want to see them.' So I bring the manuals and I pack up and I get picked up in the car and the guy that picks me up... there's like three people in the car. There is the guy who's this fast-talking Canadian type, who claims to have a private research institute for ocean stuff. He's the one that called me that. And then there's Boris, who has a heavy Russian accent and very bad shoes. And then there's this guy that he doesn't introduce that I'll call Igor, who's the driver. Obviously also Russian, right? And we go.
So immediately I'm, like, this is kind of weird. So we go to this restaurant, we're driving off and we go to a restaurant which has nobody in it. And we sit down, and they carefully arrange it so that Igor sits next to me. And then he asks to have the music turned off in the restaurant. And this is so obviously a setup. I'm out there with my vice president of production, which is Dick Clayton. And we both realise this is completely a weird situation. And so he says... he says, 'Look, this is an unusual situation, because Canadian tax law is very complicated, and if I buy your machine... I've looked at your machine and it seems really interesting, but if I buy it, it turns out... if I buy a machine as a machine I'll have to pay huge taxes on it. But... so what I'd really like to do is I'd like to buy it and just have you invoiced us as electronic parts. But don't worry, because I have an ocean vessel, and so I'll just show up with the ship in the Boston harbour, and you give me these boxes, invoiced as electronic parts, but it's really a machine, really one of your computers. And I know this is a lot more trouble for you, so even though it's $5 million, I'll pay you $6 million and I'll pay it, since it's so much more trouble, I will actually pay it in cash. And then if I like that I'll buy another one. We'll just buy one first. It's all, you know, to get around difficulties with Canadian tax law.'
And I'm just sitting there thinking, of course, this is not how computer sales go. And it's just so obviously a bribe. And I'm like wondering, is this... surely this guy realises that we don't believe any of this? He just thinks we're going to take the cash and take our million dollars and give five million to the company or whatever. It's like he's going to pay us more than the list price in cash. And then we started realising, gosh, we have no idea where we are. We've been picked up at the airport and we've got all these manuals, which, come to think of it, probably we shouldn't have brought with us. He's like, 'Oh, by the way, where are the manuals?' And I say, 'Oh, I didn't bring them. I'll mail them to you.' And they're sitting, like, right in, actually, Dick Clayton's suitcase, but Dick gets it too. And so he's like, 'Yes, we didn't have time to get them together to bring them.' And he's like, 'Oh, well, we really want them. We'll have to have copies of the manuals before we go ahead.' And we're like, 'Okay, well this sounds interesting, you know. We'll send you the manuals and then let's work out the details.' And we just want to get out of there, right? So we didn't even have to talk with each other, we both were on the same page.
So they drive us back and we promise to send them the manuals and work out the details of all this and they take us back to the airport and we get... they leave us off and we look at each other and we're like, 'Oh my God, we escaped.' So we go back and then we try to call up the FBI to report this, and it's really hard to even figure out who do you tell this to, so... but we had a guy in the Navy, Marvin Denicoff and so he... we got him to tell people, get the FBI to take this seriously. And the FBI, they actually said, 'Well, would you be willing to go back?' And I was, like, 'No, no way, I don't want to have anything to do with it', which was a good decision. And so then we didn't hear anything about it, but then about... I don't know how many people they did this with, but about a year later, there was a little company that made a much less powerful computer, called Saxby, that ended up getting arrested up for basically doing a deal like this with the Russians up in Canada. And I've always figured it was probably the same people and maybe we put them onto them. I don't really know the story, if there was any connection between that.

I always wanted to find a dinosaur. This was a childhood dream, and Nathan Myhrvold actually funded Jack Horner to search for, I guess, for dinosaurs up in Hell Creek. And I went up to visit him with Nathan and I got to see some of the dinosaurs they were finding and sort of see how they found it in the rock. So I asked Jack if there were any areas where they hadn't looked yet. He said, 'Yes, but they're far away from the camp, and...' And I said, 'Okay, well, I want to go find one.' And he's like, 'Well, you know, it takes a lot of practice to find a dinosaur.' And I was like, 'No, I really want to find one.'
So I hiked out every day to these remote areas. I would find little chips of things and so on, but nothing much, and then I went way, way out one day, and I found a lot of dinosaur bones, like clearly a whole dinosaur. I was very excited, and I went back to Jack, and I was like, 'Hey, I found a dinosaur.' And he said, 'Oh, a lot of people think they find dinosaurs. It's usually just a cow or something like that.' And I was like, 'No, this is a real dinosaur.' He's like, 'Yes, well, it's really far away. I don't want to go out there to find a cow. It'll take us the whole day.' I was like, 'No, come on, you have to come.' So I finally convinced him to go out and hike with me and we went out there and we find it, and Jack says, 'Oh yes, this is a Triceratops. You actually found a Triceratops. That's pretty good.' He says, 'Since I'm the State Palaeontologist of Montana, I get to name every find. And since you found it, I'm going to name it Beginner's Luck.' So that kind of annoyed me. So I went back in and I searched until I found another dinosaur. So I found two Triceratopses. But then, actually years later, I ran into Jack and I said, 'You know, it always sort of bugged me that you named that Beginner's Luck.' And he said, 'Oh – he said – yes, that dinosaur. You know, there's a graduate student out working on that dinosaur.' He said, 'Unfortunately, it turned out Beginner's Luck was... that name was already taken, so we called it: The Hillis Claim.' He'd just been pulling my leg the whole time.

From the time that I married Pati, we tried to have children, but Pati had had fertility problems, even in her previous marriage. And she had actually been one of the pioneers of trying to get in vitro fertilisation to work. And so we tried really hard to do in vitro fertilisation, really before many people had ever done it. And without success. She may hold the world's record for the number of times, I think. She maybe has done as many as 22 cycles of... retrieval cycles, which they wouldn't let you do these days. But the whole time we were doing this, I was like, 'Why don't we just adopt kids?' And Pati was like, 'No, let's try one more time, let's do it again.'
 And then one day we were sitting at a playground watching a bunch of kids play. And I said to her, I said, 'So which one of these kids would you be disappointed if you had adopted?' And Pati looked around, and then the next day, she went to the phonebook and found an adoption agency, said, 'Let's just go in and talk.' So she... actually, she didn't even tell me, she just went in and talked. She said, 'I went in and I talked to them, just to find out what the rules are, and it turns out that if you're going to adopt, you really need to get your name on a list. It takes a long time. And if we think we're ever going to adopt, we should do it now, because it takes years to go through it.' And I was, like, 'Okay, that's a good idea.' And we were about to go on vacation, she was, like, 'Well, let's hurry up and get all this done before we go.' So you have to get a police report and you have to fill out forms, and so we went through all of that. And we were about to leave on our vacation and we get a call, and they said, 'Oh, could you take...' and one of the things you did, too, is you made a book and the book was your life, and our life was, like, clowns riding around on fire engines and... you know, we sort of went all out to show our fun life with our dog and our house and all the fun trips we went on and we made a really fun-looking book. Which was true. It was, like, my amphibious car, for instance. Shots of us driving down the Charles in the car. And so we had a great book, but anyway, they called up, we handed in the book, we're packing to leave and they call up and they say, 'Could you take twins?' And we're like, 'Oh, did we forget to check that off as an option? It was, like, sure.' They were, like, 'No, we mean like right now.' We're like, 'What do you mean, right now?' And they said, well, your book was sitting on the desk when a mother came in that was really thinking that she wanted... she was wrestling with the idea of whether to put her kids up for adoption or not, because she was single and couldn't really handle it, and she saw this book. And she said, 'If my twins could be in that family, then I want to put them up for adoption.' And so she saw the match. And so that kind of... we went around all the lists and everything, and so we said, 'Well, how long do we have to think about this?' Because we had imagined... and they said, 'Oh, take your time. I mean, you have all afternoon.' So we cancelled our trip, just postponed the trip and we drove around and it really didn't take us that long. We realised it was just kind of meant to be, that this seemed right. And so we decided that we would adopt the twins. And then we went off on our vacation.

We really... this was all very abstract still. We were still kind of getting used to the idea.
[Q] How old were the twins?
Well, no, they weren't born yet. The twins weren't born yet. And they weren't due to be born for a while, so we had some chance to think about it. So were up in Santa Fe, actually, and we got all of our ski clothes together and the ski resort was pretty far away in Santa Fe, so it's a big deal to get up there. And we got everything together and we got up to the top of the mountain, and before we started skiing, I just said, 'You know, what if we get a call from the adoption agency?' And Pati was, like, you know, 'The twins aren't going to be born for a long time.' And I was like, 'No, I just... I feel funny being out of contact.' And everybody thought I was crazy, but I went back down without even skiing, after going way up to the top of the mountain, and I walked in, and just as I walked in, the phone rang and it was the adoption agency. And the twins had been born prematurely. And I was totally excited, and they said that they were healthy and we should come up right away and we should think of what the names of them would be, and I was just so excited, and I hung up and then I was trying to get Pati up at the ski slope. But this was the days before cell phones, so I tried to get a message to the ski slope. And so it was hours and hours before she finally came back. And she came back and I was just so excited I was, like, 'The twins are born, the twins are born, we need to think up names for them.' And she said, 'Are they boys or girls or...' and I was, like, 'Oh, I forgot to ask.' I was just so excited I hadn't even thought of that.
So we called back and we found out they were boys, and they were, like, 'What are their names?' And we're like, 'Well, we need some time to think about this.' And they're like, 'No, we've got to write something on the birth certificate.' So we decided real quickly, we had a fast discussion and Pati wanted to name, well, I thought were so silly names, of like Atom Smasher and Edison Flash. I was, like, no, no, I mean, they can nicknames later. Let's name them good old-fashioned kind of names that sound right together. And so we named them Asa and Noah. And then... so it was Asa Gabriel and Noah Matthew. And so it was Asa and Noah.
And then we got on the plane and we flew up to Minnesota, which was where they were born. And we arrived at Minnesota and there was a blizzard going on, and we went out to this little hospital in the country and they came out and they brought out these little, tiny, tiny... I remember thinking they were the size of guinea pigs. They were about the size of... if you remember a Princess phone, they were that size. And they're handing them to me and I'm just shaking. And I said, 'How long will they have to stay in the hospital?' And they said, 'Oh, no, they're not staying in the hospital. Noah's going to stay overnight, but Asa can go home with you right now.' And I was, like, 'Well, home, we don't have a... we just flew in.' And they're like, oh, well, go and get a hotel room, get a nice warm... you just have to keep him warm. You know, you'll take care of him better... you know, you'll pay more attention than we will to them.

And we went out and checked into a Residence Inn and I remember we had not even really totally filled out all the paperwork for adopting in Massachusetts yet, so we were scared we were doing something illegal or something like that. We really wanted all the papers back, and... So they gave us these little tiny, tiny babies, and we went for two weeks in a Residence Inn while the blizzard went on. The snow did not come out for... the sun did not come out for two weeks. And we sat there and one of us was always awake with them and we would feed them with eye-droppers. And we'd spend hours and hours, like, getting a few drops of milk down and then they would throw up and start all over again. But they were always really very strong and robust. And we were a bit sleep-deprived, because we were afraid to go to sleep at any time. And of course, we hadn't read any directions on how to take care of babies. I couldn't believe they let us take them out of the hospital without any instructions. And they were tiny, tiny, so normal diapers didn't fit on them or anything. And we had no idea how much they were supposed to eat. We just tried to get them to eat as much as possible to grow. And they ate a lot. So we would get these cases of Similac and it seemed like these tiny babies with all this milk, but they got bigger and bigger. So we took them back to the hospital every couple of days, and after they'd been a week, we said, 'Doctor, they seem to be eating an awful lot. We go through a case of Similac every week.' And he said, 'Wow, that is a lot. That's like half a case each.' And, like, 'No, we go through a case for each of them every week.' And the doctor was amazed, but they just grew and grew and grew and they got stronger and stronger and we finally... you know, the papers came through from Massachusetts and so we brought them back and they were just incredibly strong, funny, happy kids. They would laugh, they would giggle, they would play with each other. But they were impossible to pin down, because they were just so active. Even before they could walk, they were very, very strong. Like, ordinary baby gates, they would just tear right through. And we put them in cribs, like giant cribs with very high walls, the highest walls we could get, we'd put them in separate cribs. And then in the morning, they would have somehow climbed down the crib. They would throw their bottles over to the other crib. One of them would climb down and then climb up the other, and we would always find them in the same crib in the morning. They always would get together. And they learned to throw their bottles before they went over. And sometimes they'd clearly had fights during the night, there would be bite marks on them. It sort of looked like a drunken brawl of all these empty bottles around them. And it was very hard to keep them safe, because they were so strong. So eventually they would tear through all these baby gates, so eventually I took two-by-fours and I partitioned off the living room with two-by-fours, almost made like a jail with a gate. And actually, I just visited the house. The nails are still there for the jail in the floor. And it sort of looked... like, people were horrified when they came and they saw that we kept our kids in jail, but it was the only way to keep them safe because they were so strong.

 One time... we would nail shut all the windows, and one time we were sitting in the living room and a neighbour comes and rings the doorbell and says, 'Your children are on the roof.' I'm like, 'What?' And we'd put them to go to sleep and nap in their cribs, but they had climbed out of their cribs. And this was before they walked. But they were very strong in upper body strength, and they crawled. They'd climbed up out of their cribs and gotten over to the window and pushed up the window, and a workman had come and fixed the roof and left the nail out of the window. And they were out on the roof of the three-storey building. And this was before they had any sense of self-preservation, and the big game was, like, chase. So I knew that I went out on the roof after them, they would just run away and giggle and they thought it was really funny. So eventually, what we did is stuck out and I, like, dangled some toy that they liked to play with and some bottles of milk and eventually they crawled back and came back in. But they really... you know, they always had fun and they always were cheerful and happy.

And then, when we had them, we kind of relaxed, but we still had some eggs from the in vitro and we didn't want to throw them away, so the doctor said, 'Well, what do you do?' And we said, 'Well, we have the frozen eggs, so let's try implanting them again.' But I said to the doctor... I said, 'You know, we've always been following the protocol.' The protocol was you take the fertilised eggs and you leave them in a petri dish for two days, in those days, and then you implant them. And I said, 'Why don't... where these two days come from?' And he was, like, 'Well, that's just the first thing that worked, so we do that.' And I was like, 'Well, let's try leaving them in for a little longer, because that isn't working for us. Let's try stretching it out and doing it a little further' and they're like, 'Okay, sure'. I mean... because they didn't really know what they were doing yet. So they did that and it worked, and that's where India came from. So all of a sudden, we had three babies. It also became the way that they started doing in vitro after that. They did experiments and they changed it, and now they always leave it in for longer. But India was the first one that was born under that protocol.

On the day that India still had... it was a difficult pregnancy and we were very frightened that Pati would lose the baby, so she was very still the whole time, and this was the whole time when things were coming to a head at Thinking Machines. And so I had... the day that Thinking Machines finally filed Chapter 11 and we worked out this business of selling off the hardware business to Sun and had announced it to everybody, and it was really kind of up to that point, kind of the worst day of my life. And I came home just completely drained and exhausted and I said, 'I think I just had, like, the worst day of my life.' And Pati said, 'I think my water just broke.' So I got her into the hospital and we went and she actually had a surprisingly short labour and India was born and she was perfect and I collapsed and fell asleep. And that was... became one of the very best days of my whole life. So it went from being one of the worst days to one of the best days.

The twins were really identical when we got them. So when they handed one to us, they said, 'This is Asa and this is Noah', but I don't know how they decided. And they claimed Asa was the one that came out first. But they were so identical I'm not sure that they didn't get them mixed up. And in fact, I can't swear that we didn't get them mixed up, because they really looked identical. Very quickly, though, sometime in the first day, Asa got a little scar on him, and then that's how we kept them straight for a while. And then, I think, by then, their behaviour was always a little bit different. But they did reach a point where they would pretend to be each other. And then that got very confusing. And even they couldn't tell, looking at pictures, of whether it was a picture of themselves or a picture of their brother. They were truly identical. And it was a great dynamic between Asa and Noah, which they kept growing. They grew up very fast and they kept that strength as they learned to walk. They became very big very quickly, and very, very strong. They were sort of like super kids. And in fact, we were in Hollywood and we got people asking us if we'd be willing to cast them for Bamm-Bamm in the Flintstones movie because they were just so strong and muscular and they loved having identical twins, because they can work them harder. But we didn't want them to get into that.

But the other funny thing was we lived in a house where... when they were really young identical twins, we had moved into a house for another set of identical twins, which were a set of little girls at the time we moved in. And we got the house from them because they actually sort of couldn't afford to buy the house themselves, they'd been renting it. And they were child actresses, but then they later actually did pretty well. They were the Olsen twins. And they became billionaires and they would come back and visit the house later, but everybody thought it was funny that we were going from a house of twins to a house of twins.

And we lived on a lake there, it was on Toluca Lake, and we actually had a house on the lake and the kids would go out. And they were fantastic fishermen, so Asa and Noah would go out and catch all kinds of fish in the lake and they were great swimmers, very, very strong swimmers. And India was very fragile by comparison, so she was much smaller than they were, and frighteningly enough, she looked a lot like me when she was very young. So we were afraid that she would stay like that. Fortunately, she grew out of it. But so she was a little tiny kid, but from the very beginning, she was always the spokesperson for the group, because she started language very early, and the boys actually had their own twin-talk. So they spoke English later because they had their twin-talk, so it was very funny that they would always show up with India standing in front and the two boys behind her, like her bodyguards, and India would say, 'We have decided that...' and do all the speaking.
But the other thing is, they were very rough and played rough, and India was very small. And she was also about the height of table-tops. So India insisted on wearing a bicycle helmet all the time. Or at least hats. But often, like, a crash helmet. And that was just her thing: she just didn't want to deal with her head being bashed into tables. And that was very typical of India, is she would make a decision of what she thought was the right thing and stick to it. So she always had her crash helmet on for a period.

Another story about her making a decision is: very early we were at Zorthian's house, Feynman's artist friend, at a barbecue. And Zorthian had a pig on a spit, and India looked at the pig on the spit and turned to me. And she was probably about four years old. And she turned to me and she said, 'Dad, does all meat come from animals?' And I said, 'Yes.' And she said, 'Oh. I'm not going to eat meat.' And she didn't just mean for the party, she didn't eat meat until she was like 21 years old. She just decided it. It was never a big deal with her, she didn't preach about it, she didn't do anything, but she just made the decision and stuck with it. And that was how India was, she would just decide things. And she would focus on things, so it was funny. And the boys always had that unflappable strength and confidence.
I remember we had, for instance... well, we home schooled them, which was wonderful, so we really got to see them a lot. And we had a martial arts teacher whose family had been part of the bodyguard of the Russian czars, he was a very serious martial arts teacher. And he would try to intimidate them into serious martial arts. And finally, he just came in and said, 'I quit.' I was like, 'What do you mean, you quit?' And he's like, 'They have no fear. I can't control them.' And he left. And we were like, well, what went on? And India says, 'Well, you know, he just... they were just giggling and he tried to get them to behave and so he threw knives at their feet to make them...' and she showed, like, in the floor, that he would throw knives down at them and they just giggled. Which is probably what they would have done. And he just gave up on... but India was very, very disciplined and in fact had... became a great martial artist. I mean, India had this habit of whatever she concentrated on doing, she would really concentrate on and just become excellent at it. And she had... the martial arts, she was just fantastic at. And she was so good, in fact, that someone who was producing a movie saw her do her kind of [moves] and they were working with Quentin Tarantino to do Kill Bill II, and they got the martial arts instructor for Kill Bill II to come look at her to play the part of a little girl and he said, 'Yes, we can train her to do this, but she'll have to be on the set and she'll have to be in...' and India was old enough at that point that we asked her, do you really want to do this? And she was smart enough to say no. So... but she was good enough to do it.

The kids were always really very self-motivated. They were never bored, they were... they always wanted tools for presents, they were always building things. I remember once Asa... Asa in particular. Both Asa and Noah did this, but Asa in particular got... started making pens on a lathe, like turning wooden pens and started selling them and actually making a pretty good business in selling these beautiful, hand-crafted wooden pens. So they were very entrepreneurial, too. So he actually made way more than his allowance by building these pens. And then he got interested... he really wanted a jigsaw. And so Christmas was coming up, and so we said, 'Well, you know, wait until Christmas', and I ordered a jigsaw from Amazon, and Amazon accidentally shipped not a jigsaw, but a compound mitre saw. It's very rare. Only time I've ever had it happen, but the wrong saw showed up and it was just before Christmas. And I was really concerned about it, and I... but I saw... I called up Amazon and said, 'This is really important', and I sort of dropped Jeff's name and said, 'You know, I'm a friend of Jeff Bezos's, can you do...' I think I called his office. I didn't really call Jeff, but called his office and said, 'Is there any way you can get this expedited? You know, this is really important to him.' And then I didn't hear anything back, and then the next day the doorbell rang and Jeff Bezos actually showed up himself with the jigsaw. So that's my ultimate service story for Amazon, is Jeff delivering the jigsaw for Asa's Christmas present.

They always built things, and Noah was particularly interested in vehicles. He would always try to drive vehicles and drive cars. In fact, he would sometimes convince his babysitters or teachers to let him... somehow he convinced one of his babysitters to let him drive around the neighbourhood in a car. Of course, that babysitter got fired, but he was obsessed with vehicles from the beginning. And then he started building vehicles, in particular trailers. That was a very early passion of his. He got an old Airstream trailer and he loved that from the beginning. Asa started with the pens and then he went to the jigsaw, then he went to furniture. And in the beginning, I would work with them in the wood shop just for fun, just trying to teach them safety. So for instance, one thing I did was I was trying to teach them how to use the table saw, teaching them about kickback, and I got a plank and I sort of deliberately lifted it up a little bit so it would have kickback, and sure enough, it grabbed the plank and it shot it back behind me. I was trying to teach them not to stand behind the plank. And it shot it back behind me, but it actually went through the door of the workshop and made this rectangle. So I never fixed it, I always just left it there as a sort of reminder of how like how dangerous a table saw can be. But they built things from the beginning, and of course rapidly became much better than I was, and then when they went to school and studied it, became even better. You know, they started building guitars and furniture and things like that, just things that I would never even imagine building. So it was extraordinary to watch them find that passion.
India was much more... you know, would have serial passions of... you know, she would do martial arts, she became like a great classical guitarist. But then she would just drop it. You know, she became a pony jumper, she came... she became such a good pony jumper that she actually was the backup pony champion for California, pony jumper. It drove her crazy that she didn't win. And she came so close. She was like one point off winning, and so she was about to double down on doing that, and I went for a long walk with her and I said, 'You know, you can do a lot of things. Just think if that's really what you want to do.' And she ended up going on to the next thing, going on to art school and then graphic arts, then design. And in everything she would pick, she would just be great at. I mean, I think you remember watching her the first time we were in Texas at Jeff's ranch, and him handing her a lasso and having her practice, and she just immediately so focused, did exactly the right thing, and operated that lasso. And that was kind of what India did: she just had a tremendous sense of focus, and she still does.

Asa always had this crazy sense of humour, and I remember once, even when he was really little, we were studying dinosaurs in the... and we were also... we had just incubated some chicken eggs. We'd gone out and gotten some fertilised chicken eggs, and incubated with lightbulbs and had them hatch. And then one morning, I was asleep and he wakes me up early, early in the morning and says, 'Daddy, Daddy, they didn't hatch.' I'm like, 'What didn't hatch?' I'm very groggy in the morning when I wake up. He said, 'The dinosaur eggs. I put the dinosaur eggs in the drawer where they would be warm, but they didn't hatch.' And I'm thinking, 'I wonder if these were, like, real eggs.' And then I realised, 'Oh yes, they sort of had some egg-shaped stones', and I was like, well, I'm also thinking do they think any eggs... So I'm still groggy. I think, 'Well, I need to explain to them about fertilised eggs, maybe.' I was like, well, 'Eggs have to have like a mommy and daddy before they hatch, and besides, the dinosaurs are all dead.' I'm still getting my act... and he's like, 'So you say that they won't hatch because their mommies and daddies are dead?'
I was like, 'No, no, no, that's not what I'm saying.' Then I was like, 'Why don't you just come in bed and snuggle with me?' And Asa says, 'No thanks, I'm already hatched.'

Noah was the one that was obsessed with vehicles, so he would do things like get blocks of wood so that he could operate the four-wheel-drive things in the vineyard before his feet could reach it. That was a constant, constant theme with him. So they've all gone into do things that are true to their original loves. And so that's pretty great to watch. I think they got some of the best characteristics of their mother and their engineering ideas from me, and it's a great combination. Fortunately Pati and I had a very happy marriage while they were growing up, and so they... we always had a happy home with lots of guests. In fact, I remember India asking at one point, 'Have we ever not had houseguests?' The answer was probably no. And we always had interesting people staying over and they always engaged with them and we always had animals around. We used to play a game when a new kid would come over: can you count the number of animals. And if they didn't find at least 30 then they weren't trying very hard. We had dogs and peacocks and ponies and alpacas and sheep and turtles. It went on and on. Parrots, cats, so it was a house full of animals. Guests would often wake up in the morning and find a freshly-laid egg in their bed. We had some very affectionate chickens. It was really a kind of paradise for the kids growing up, and it was wonderful having them there, being with them so much. And I was always kind of jealous of it, I wished I had been home schooled. They had wonderful teachers and they learned a lot from watching the Simpsons, which was fun, because we knew Matt Groening, too. So the Simpsons weren't just anonymous, but it would be funny, every time I would, like, try to tell them about some story in history or Greek myth or something, they're like, 'Oh, we already know that.' They'd learned it from the Simpsons.

One of the things with the twins is I never wanted them to have the surprise of discovering they were adopted. I wanted them to know about it from the very beginning. So I would always tell them a story when they went to bed, and very often, I would tell them the story about going up to Minnesota and adopting them in the snowstorm, and it was just one of the many stories that they would ask for as they went to bed. So usually I would tell them a few stories. And then I had one magic story that would put them to sleep, which was an old Indian story. I would tell them a lot of Hopi stories, but this one story that had magic spells that put the monsters to sleep, and they hated that one because they knew that that story would always make them go to sleep, because the spell was: may your eyes go down like honey, may your arms go down like honey, may your legs go down like honey, go to sleep. And that would put the monsters to sleep. But of course, it would be repeated enough that eventually it would put them to sleep. So they always would try to get me to tell other stories, rather than that one. And one of their favourites was the Minnesota story. I never knew why they liked it. But one day they were saying, 'Tell us the soda pop story.' I was like, the soda pop story? 'You know, the mini-sodas.' And I was, like, oh. And then I realised, I wonder how much they really understand about this story? I mean, they liked it, I told it... and I was like, 'No, that's not about... Minnesota is a place.' And I went back and I sort of explained the story more carefully. And they said, 'You mean we didn't come out of Mommy's tummy like India did?' I said, 'No, this is a story about how we adopted you.' And they looked at each other and then Asa turned to me and he said, 'We don't want to hear that story anymore.' So I was, like, 'Okay.' I figured they had the concept, they didn't want to hear the story anymore, and that was the last time I told them the story. So there was a period when they would ask some questions and I would always answer whatever question they asked. But I don't think they were that curious about it. And, you know, certainly I'd be happy to help them if they wanted to find out more. We didn't know very much, so...

Brian Eno and I became great friends over the clock. And one of the things that Brian and I would do is we'd just miss each other and say, hey, let's just do nothing for a while. And so Brian would fly out and we'd get into the Range Rover and we'd just go out into the desert and drive around. And once we did that, we were driving through the Southwest. And actually, Stewart Brand came with us that time. And we decided to drive to Canyon de Chelly, which is a beautiful canyon on an Indian reservation. So we drive up and the canyon is full with this river runs down it, and you can get them to take you in a boat or a four wheel drive vehicle. It's not a very deep river. But if you hire one of the Indian guides, you're allowed to drive down the river yourself. And so I had my Range Rover, so we hired the Indian guide. So we had the Indian guide and Brian and Stewart and me driving the Range Rover in the Canyon de Chelly through this water, which is very exciting. Because you couldn't really see the bottom, but the guide would steer us and say, 'Go to the right' and 'Go to the left.' So we went out there and went up into a side canyon and at some point, there were some rapids, and the guide said, 'Go that way.' I said, 'Are you sure? That doesn't...' And he's like, 'Yes, just go that way.' So I drove over and I basically drove over a waterfall and I hear this [crunching sound] and then I tried to back out and I'm completely stuck. And fortunately I have a winch in the car, but the car is really in water. It's still running, but it's in water. And we get the car up on the side and we realise what's happened is that the rock came down and hit and broke the tie rod and jammed it through the tyre, and it's actually skewered the wheel, so it's broken the tyre... it's popped the tyre by skewering the wheel from the inside. And, you know, I do have a spare wheel, but I don't have a spare tie rod and we're miles and miles back in the canyon by then. And so we're trying to figure out what to do.
And these Navajos come along, and they're out to feed their horses, and they look and they, like, 'Ooh, you're in big trouble.' I say, 'Yes, we are.' They're like, 'Oh, you're in bigger trouble than you think. I mean, do you know what the name of this canyon is?' I'm like, 'Well, this is Canyon de Chelly.' And he's like, 'No, no, you're in a side canyon. This is Canyon del Muerte.' He's like, 'Do you know what that means?' And I'm like, 'Canyon of Death?' And they're like, 'Yes, but do you know why it's called that?' I was like, 'No.' And they're like, 'This is where the white men slaughtered the Navajos.' And I'm like, 'Oh. So that explains why the Navajo guides guide the white men over the waterfall.' And they all laughed. And they're like, 'Tommy, did you tell them to go that way? You shouldn't have, you know better than that.' They started giving... and they're like, 'Okay, we'll try to help you fix this. We'll go feed our horses, we'll be back in a little bit. Why don't you jack it up?'
So we jack it up and there's this loose tie rod. It looks impossible. So they come back, but they come back with, like, all their families and they lay out baskets and picnics and it's like a whole village is there. And there's a big party and everybody's joking around and half the jokes are in Navajo and I'm pretty sure they're about us, and everybody's joking around about I have this Range Rover, it's like why couldn't you have gotten a Ford? It was fancy. And so they work out this way of bending the tie rod back into the hole by lowering it down, using the weight of the car down on jacks, with people pushing it. And they try it a few times and it pops out, but finally they get it just right and then they tie it together with wire. And it's all just about there, and by then, we're totally sunburned from being out in the canyon. And we've sort of made friends with them and so it's still up on jacks and they've tied it together and they say, 'Okay, well let's go now.' And we're like, 'Well, wait a minute. Where are you going? We've got to see if this works.' And they're like, 'Oh, well, you know there's not much we can do if it doesn't work.' And I'm like, 'Well, what are we supposed to do?' And the guy says, 'Well, look at yourself. You're a red man now.' I'm totally sunburned. And he says, 'And besides that, your car is tied together with wire, so I guess we can make you an honorary member of the tribe, so you can just stay.' And then they all laugh and then they leave.
So we're looking at each other and we jack down the car very gingerly and it seems to work. The tie rod stays in there. Because without the tie rod, the wheel just goes like this, and so we very, very carefully drove it out of the canyon and then it all seemed to be holding together. So then we very, very carefully and slowly drove it all the way to Albuquerque, where the nearest Range Rover dealer was, and we sat there in the parking lot until it opened in the morning. And then when we opened in the morning and they looked at what we had driven on, they were like, 'You drove on this?' It was tied together. And then they saw the tyre that had the tie rod jammed through it with the hole in it, and they're like, 'Can we keep this to put on our wall? Because this is like the best off-road example of a Range Rover we've ever seen.' So that was our adventure when we were rescued by the Navajo.

I was raising money for the clock. I suddenly needed money to purchase the land in Nevada where we were going to put it. And this was a mountain that we had discovered that was in the middle of the national park. It was a perfect mountain, but it had a beryllium mine on it, and the guy wanted $2 billion for it. And we kept bargaining him down over the years, and we finally came down to $250,000, so we were like, 'We'd better go for this.' And I needed a few hundred thousand dollars quickly. So I knew a very interesting woman, Courtney Ross, in New York. I didn't know her very well at the time. She was related to the person I went to Papua New Guinea with, but I was in New York and I figured maybe she'll donate the money. So I called her up and I said, 'Hey, I'm in New York, can we get together?' And she said, 'Sure, come over for dinner, I'm having some friends over for dinner.' So I arrived at her New York apartment and her friends were like Jesse Jackson and Quincy Jones and it was quite a set of celebrities. And they were all already partying by the time I got there. And they were sitting at this beautiful table in a very nicely designed house, but I'm kind of oblivious to such things. And the conversation is all about psychic power and things like that. So I sort of know how these conversations go and where it's going to head, so I have some time to kind of prepare a magic trick. So I do a little homework without anybody noticing, and everybody's sort of drinking and not paying attention to me, so it's very easy for me to do it.
And then sure enough, the conversation comes around to Uri Geller and I say, 'Well, you know, it really... I can bend spoons like Uri Geller does.' And they said, 'Oh, no, you can't.' And I said, 'It's not that easy. I don't have a spoon. Can I borrow yours?' And I get somebody else's spoon and I get a glass of water and I start stirring it in the water with everybody watching, and the spoon starts bending. And I lift it up and hold it and it bends and then it bends over and it breaks in half and bends down. And the whole table is just stunned. I've never had a magic trick where I've had a reaction like this. And one of the people says, 'I can't believe you did that.' And the butler says, 'I can't believe you did that.' And I'm like, 'Well, no it's not... I didn't really use psychic power, it's just a magic trick.' And they're like, 'Do you realise what that spoon was?'
So it turns out, known to everybody else at the table but me, is that Courtney Ross is a great fan of a famous designer, Josef Hoffmann. And this apartment was designed by Josef Hoffmann. And Courtney has lovingly recreated all of the original furniture and so on that was designed for this room, including the silverware set that Josef Hoffmann hand-crafted. And she has bought at auction all 12 settings of this silverware so that she has, like, the complete set of the Josef Hoffmann spoons. Now to me, they just looked like every Crate and Barrel spoon, because those are all knock-offs of the original Josef Hoffmann spoon, but these are the things that everybody has copied, right? And I have just destroyed one of the 12 Josef Hoffmann spoons while everybody's watching, knowing what's happening but not being able to believe their eyes that I'm destroying this spoon. So of course I feel horrified, so I reach for it to pick it up and I say, 'Oh, I'll have it repaired.' And Courtney slaps my hand and says, 'Don't touch my spoons again.'
So to her credit, we became great friends. I knew I was forgiven when next Christmas, she sent me a book of Josef Hoffmann where one of the double-page foldouts was one of these spoons. But it was such a surprising thing that by the next day I was sitting in a New York restaurant and I overheard somebody telling the story of this happening. It got around that fast in New York that this guy had destroyed the spoon. But it also ended up being kind of a great blessing for me, because of course every magician heard this story, so every time I run into a famous magician, they know who I am because they've heard this story of the ultimate spoon trick gone wrong.

One of the problems with starting a company to do my PhD thesis work was I got very distracted with the company and I didn't get around to writing my thesis. And I kept trying to write it by going off someplace, but wherever I'd go off to, I would know there was something interesting and I would waste a lot of time finding it and get distracted. So I tried to go to Woods Hole for a while, or... so eventually I decided the only way I was going to do it was just go someplace where I didn't know anybody, so I literally went down to Logan Airport and looked around for a cheap flight to anywhere. And there was a flight down to Orlando, so I was like, great. I will get that. I got on the flight to Orlando and I just needed some place to stay. I didn't really know any place in Orlando, but I knew Disneyworld was in Orlando. So I called up Disneyworld and they had a house at the Contemporary, which was where the monorail comes through. And they had an eight-day pass. And my thesis, I knew... I'd already written my thesis in my head. It had seven chapters. So I figured, okay, I'll write a chapter a day. So I checked into the Contemporary Hotel and I had a ticket that came with the hotel to Disneyworld. So every morning I would go and I would sit in front of the Magic Castle as the parades went by and all the people went by, all the way to the end where the fireworks went off. And I would just sit on big yellow legal pads, and just write out my thesis, which I had kind of written in my head, but it was just writing it down. And every day, I would finish a chapter, until the last day I had done seven chapters in seven days. And I had one more day at Disneyworld, and I remember thinking, should I go or should I stay? And I couldn't decide, so I flipped a coin. I said, you know, heads I go, tails I stay. And heads came up, and so I had to go. And I felt so disappointed because I was going to go back to work and it would just become an ordinary day. So I thought, well, I should just do something that I have always wanted to do but never gotten around to and probably never will get around to.
So I had met Pati, and she'd always said come out to her house on the beach, and so I called her up and said, 'Hey, is that a good invitation still open?' I didn't really know her. And she said, 'Yes, come on out. I'll pick you up at the airport.' And so that's how I met Pati, who I eventually ended up marrying and having my children with. It all came down to that coin flip. So I always follow the coin flip.

I'm really bad at recognising faces, and it gets me into trouble sometimes. But the biggest trouble it ever got me into, or the most embarrassing moment, was back during the Clinton/Gore administration. I was actually down at Disneyworld working for Disney, and I was walking along and this bunch of joggers came along. And the joggers… suddenly they all stopped, and the guy in the middle says, 'Danny, how are you?' But out of context, I had a lot of trouble recognising a face. And so I looked at him for a second and I finally said, 'Help me out here.' And he said, 'Oh, Al Gore, Vice President of the United States.' And that's how bad I am at recognising faces, but I've known Al for a long time, since he was a senator. And he really was the first person in the Senate that ever paid any attention to the Internet, and I remember sitting around talking with him about it. You know, he realised this was going to be important and nobody else did, and how to get people to pay attention to it.
But at that point, he had three things that he cared about that nobody paid attention, which was the Internet, the ozone hole and global warming. In fact, people used to call him 'Ozone Man'. But he really did do something about the ozone hole. And he really did do something about the Internet, even though he gets made fun of for taking credit for that. But he deserves credit for that. And he's certainly trying to do something about global warming, so it's interesting that he's been interested in those things for a very, very long time, and has been very consistent about it. You know, they're not just things he does because they're hot topics. He's been interested in them back before any of his constituents had ever heard of any of these issues. He also, by the way, is really good at skipping stones. He can make a stone skip five times. I can only do three.

Living at Marvin Minsky's house was a pretty strange thing, because he kept such interesting things there. And actually, after I lived there, I would go back and visit. And one time I just happened to be carrying a radiation detector with me, and as I walked down the stairs, the radiation detector went crazy. And so I was walking next to a closet, and I opened up the closet, and it was full of all these chemicals. And so I decided to figure out what was the radioactive chemical, so I would move a chemical over and walk and see which way the radiation was, and eventually I moved all of the chemicals out of the closet, but the radiation detector was still going off on the closet. I couldn't figure out what was going on. Then I noticed that the closet had kind of a secret compartment in the back of it, and I opened up the secret compartment, and there was a human skeleton. So I thought, wow. I'm not sure how I'm going to tell him about this. So I go up and Marvin and Gloria are up in the living room, and I say, 'I'm not sure how to say this, but there's literally a skeleton in your closet.' And they're like, 'What do you mean?' And I'm like, 'Oh, I found a secret compartment and there's a human skeleton behind it.' And Gloria says, 'Oh, that's where it got to! We've been looking for that for years.' And it was her medical skeleton from her medical school, and they'd hidden it back in this compartment. And I still didn't know what was radioactive, and I eventually found that there was a lens there that was something that Marvin had gotten surplus from an old spy camera or something like that they actually doped them with radioactive elements sometimes to increase the index of refraction. So it was dangerously radioactive, I got it out of the house.

There was this period when I was designing chips, and I sort of knew microprocessors were going to be cheap, but most people were still thinking of computers as sort of big things that filled up rooms. But I could tell by the investment that was going into semiconductor technology, how many microprocessors were going to get made, and I could sort of plot the graph. And so one of the first public talks I ever gave was a talk at the National Computer Conference, and it was held in New York at the New York Hilton. And I gave this talk where I showed the number of microprocessors going up exponentially. And I said, 'In a few years, we're going to have more computers than we have people.' And the whole audience laughed. That was a ridiculous idea. They thought I was joking. I was like, 'No, this is really going to happen.' And then one of the questioners in the audience says, 'Well, what are you going to do with all these microprocessors? I mean, it's not like you need a microprocessor in every doorknob.' And I didn't have an answer for it, except that when I went back to that hotel five years, there was in fact a microprocessor in every doorknob.

Sometime in the 1990s, I started noticing that the year 2000 was kind of a mental barrier for people. It was hard for them to think past it. And I realised that when I had been a kid growing up in the 1960s, people thought about the year 2000 and, you know, 2001 Space Odyssey, and we really imagined it as a real time we'd get to see. But here it was in the middle of the '90s and people were still not thinking past the year 2000. So it was as if the future had been shrinking by one year per year for my entire life. And then I heard this story from Stewart Brand that he had heard from Gregory Bateson about New College Oxford, which may be apocryphal, but it's the story about replacing the beams with the trees that had been planted long ago to replace the beams. And when I heard that story, I was putting it together with... I was making these things that were about being faster and faster and everything quicker and quicker and I was worrying about going from nanoseconds to femtoseconds, and here were people that were thinking in terms of centuries. And I realised that this short-term thinking was kind of taking something away from us. And I started thinking about what I could do that was kind of the opposite of that, a counterpoint to that. And so I started just thinking about, just as a project for myself, the idea of building a very slow clock that would last for 10,000 years. And 10,000 years being a kind of nice number, because our history is kind of 10,000 years old, so we ought to have a future that's as big as our history. And so I started thinking about this, and noticed that when I would tell my friends about it, they would get very interested and it would always lead to a good conversation. And I got more and more serious about it, so when I had that summer between Thinking Machines and Disney, I really started seriously thinking about doing this, and putting it... really building it. And started writing down my thoughts for the first time about it.
And Stewart Brand said, 'You know, you're going to have to... if you're going to do this, you're going to need some help. We're going to have to make a foundation.' So Stewart founded the Long Now Foundation, with me as co-founder. And we started seriously building the foundation, and I started seriously building the clock, but I also asked Stewart... I said, 'You know, Stewart, the clock is like one half of the story, but it's about, sort of, Newtonian time that's reversible, it's steady, it's predictable. But there's another thing about time, time that evolves and changes and we need to think about that kind of time, too.' And Stewart said immediately, 'A library.' So Stewart thought more about the library, I thought more about the clock, and that became the basis of the Foundation. And early on, Stewart knew somebody that he had known since he was a kid, name Alexander Rose, who we hired to become the director of the Clock Project. And so I was working at Disney, where I could try things out, and my friend Jacqui Safra offered to pay for the first prototype, and so we started designing that while I was at Disney. And that's the clock that's now in the London Science Museum. And it was a digital clock and started thinking really about what it meant to be a clock. And I think the most interesting design problem was the power, because on one hand, it wasn't so hard to make a clock that could power itself, just because the temperature changes from day to night, but in some sense, I didn't really want the clock to power itself without people. I wanted people to wind it. But I also wanted it to keep going without people, and the way I finally resolved that is I realised the clock could keep ticking and know what time it was, but it didn't have to tell people what time it was until you wound it. So that was, kind of, for me, a big breakthrough in the design of it. So that's the way the clock works: it keeps time, but it doesn't tell you the time until you wind it and then you see it move forward until it reaches now.

And I had a very, very specific idea of the whole experience of going to visit the clock. I wanted it to be very hard to get to, I wanted it to be up on top of the mountain, I wanted you to have to go through a desert to get to it. I had this image of going through this narrow crack that was a sort of a portal. So I had a lot of very specific imagery of what it would be like, of sort of feeling like you were lost at times and then finding your way, or getting a glimpse of it then losing it. And so I had a wonderful time exploring around the desert, looking for a place that would do this. And I eventually found this mountain up in Nevada, where bristlecone pine trees grew. And so we bought that mountain after negotiating them down from a few billion dollars. But then, when we got that mountain, we realised the mountain's surrounded by a national park, and also these precious bristlecone pine trees. And it's also at 10,000 feet and it's very hard to operate there. So we decided we should probably practice someplace else first. And then one day, Jeff Bezos called me up and said, 'Hey, you know that clock you want to build? I want to fund paying for it.' So... It was actually the same time he said, 'Oh, by the way, I'm starting a space company. I want you to be on my space company and we'll also build your clock.' So it was a fun, fun call to get. So that was the beginning of Blue Origin.
And I had been going around with Jeff looking at ranches, and there was one that we visited together that I loved, which is the one he ended up buying, which became the Corn Ranch. And so for years, I went around that ranch, looking to see if there was a place to build the clock on the ranch. And it required a lot of things in this approach. I had a very specific idea. I needed a south-facing cliff, I needed the crack, I needed good rock that I could build in, and there was no place on the ranch I could find that did it, but then gradually he ended up expanding the ranch more and more, and every time he would buy a new section, I'd go explore that. And so there was a time I had pretty much explored the whole ranch. There was probably a time when I knew that ranch better than Jeff did. I'm sure it's not true anymore, but I did an awful lot of exploring in the corners of it, and one day I kind of found the perfect place. It had been inside of the ranch headquarters all along. It was just kind of hard to get to, and I realised the rock was right and there was a cliff. It was missing a cave. I had been looking for a cave, and only found a few caves, but I finally decided, well, we can build a cave. Because one of the things I wanted is for you to go into a tunnel, find something like a natural cave and think you were lost and then find your way out of the cave and go up to the clock.
So we picked the place and it was just missing the cave. It also didn't really have the slot, but everything else was perfect, so we decided to start building there. And so I went and I put an X on the side of the mountain to start blasting and we built a road in and we brought in equipment and bulldozers and things like that, which is all pretty hard to do, and started blasting the place where I had made the X. And I drew them little diagram, I said, 'Go in 40 feet, and then we're going to make a big chamber that we're going to make into a cave.' And so they went in 40 feet and then I got this email that said, 'You'd better come back, we've run into a problem.' So I flew back to Texas, and they'd gone in 40 feet and there was this big, black hole that they had hit. And so Xander came with it and we lowered Xander into the hole, and he found himself in this giant cave with stalactites and stalagmites, exactly where we were going to build the cave. So then the joke became if we kept digging we were going to find the clock. So we knew we were in the right place when that happened, and we've been building it there ever since. And of course the clock, the project, particularly the tunnelling part of it, has turned out to be way more expensive than we had originally expected. But Jeff's been very good about... fortunately, Amazon has done very well, and Jeff's been very good about increasing the budget as it needed to be to get it done, and so we've now done all the tunnelling. And in the meantime, we kept exploring around for how we were going to have the approach and the path and so on, and there was one canyon that we hadn't explored, because it just seemed so impassable, but Jeff insisted that we hike up one day to look at that. And we did, and we discovered the crack, the slot that you would approach it through, just as I had kind of always pictured it in my mind, so we now have the complete package of the crack and the cave and the 600-foot cliff and the spiral staircase that's cut into the rock. So as we speak now, there's a giant robot with a diamond saw that we custom-built that's climbing up this 500-foot shaft, slowly cutting a spiral staircase into the side of the clock.

The clock itself is built out of these very long-lived materials, like titanium, 316 stainless steel and ceramic and quartz. So for instance, we just finished grinding, I think, probably the world's largest quartz lens. It's about this big in diameter. And what that does is that when the sun goes overhead at the Summer Solstice, it shines down the shaft and this lens focuses the light onto a box that warms it up and it knows that the sun is directly overhead, and that allows it to synchronise and move, adjust the clock so that it's perfectly on time. And so as long as it gets one of those sunny days once every 20 or 30 years, then it will always stay adjusted. So it's just been a great thing. I get to learn about materials, I get to learn about history of the Mayan calendar system, I get to learn about bells. I mean, one of the neat things in the clock is when you wind it, if it's fully wound, when noon comes, it will play the bells. And it has ten bells. And Brian Eno noticed that the number of permutations of 10 bells is almost exactly equal to the number of days in 10,000 years. So every day for 10,000 years it plays a different permutation of bells. So there's a lot of machinery to do that. But even the bells themselves turned out to be fun. So I invented a new kind of bell which, if I had invented this 400 years ago, would have been a very important invention, but...
Normally, if you want to go down an octave in a bell, you have to make it twice as high, twice as wide, twice as thick. So it's eight times as heavy, so it costs you ten times as much. So to shift an octave down it costs you ten times as much. So that's why you only see a few bells that are like the size of the Liberty Bell or Big Ben or something like that. Mostly bells are this size. Those are the ones that are down an octave and they're very difficult to cast. And so one of the things I realised is that there's a psychoacoustic effect, that the pitch that you hear isn't necessarily the actual pitch that is generated. So these days, with the computer, we can tune bells to have different harmonics. So a normal church bell, for instance, has a minor third in it, which is why it sounds kind of whiney and sad. And people have developed, with computer models, they've actually made bells that have major thirds, which sound a little bit more cheerful. And I realised the same technique could be used to tune the harmonic structure so that you had, for instance, a fifth. And if you built the right harmonic structure, then your ear would hear the pitch to be the least common multiple of all the things in the harmonic structure. So let's say that I want a bell that plays 220A, but I can only afford a bell that plays 440A. I don't want to pay ten times as much for the 220. Well, I can make a bell that's tuned to 440 and it's also tuned to 660, it's also tuned to 880, so every multiple of 220. And so when you hear that bell, the only way your ear can make sense of it is to imagine that it's hearing a 220 bell, and these are just the higher harmonics of it. So your ear will actually hear the pitch as lower than any of the things you're actually hearing. So I explained this to a bunch of bell makers and they all told me it wouldn't work and none of them would make it. But I finally found this bell maker in Australia who knew how to tune these bells and he was willing to try it. And I agreed to pay for the bell. And he made it and it really does work. I can play you the bell sound, but you hear these higher harmonics, but your ear hears it as a lower bell. So I now know how to make a bell at a tenth the cost of a normal bell. And so all the bells that are in the clock are made like that. The last one just got cast.
So the great thing about the clock is it has all these wonderful little details like that, that it's just been such a fantastic way of learning. And also such a fantastic way of engaging with people, because, you know, I get to talk to Brian Eno about music or bell makers about bell-casting, or archaeologists about the Mayan calendar system, or astronomers about the slowing rate of the earth, or... so for me, it's just been a wonderful way into  knowledge about everything. And also, it has accomplished the thing I originally set out to be, which is it has given me a longer-term view of human history. I really do feel a part of something that goes forward 10,000 years as well as back 10,000 years.
So of all the projects I've done, I think it's the thing that is truest to my heart.

You know, when I think about the Clock Project and how wonderful it's been, I mean one of the things that's amazing is every time I've needed to do a piece of it I've had a friend that's stepped forward. Like, first Jacqui Safra to build that first prototype, then Nathan Myhrvold stepped forward and let me design the orrery, the next phase, and then Jeff came and funded the construction of the clock in Texas, the full-scale clock, and it's just, I mean, what a blessing to be alive at a time with the sort of people who are willing to support a dream like this. I'm just so incredibly grateful for it.

Probably the most important thing about the clock is actually not the physical thing itself, but the story of it. And I love it that already there's some confusion about the story. Some people hear it and don't think it's real, or they've heard about the one in Nevada and they're confused about the one in Texas, and they're not sure which one is real or... and so it had this kind of mythological character, and I like that about it. And that's... I ended up writing this book which is a bunch of reports of the clock, contradictory reports of the clock. And they're all things that I imagined the clock to be. And some of them I might build. Some of them I have built. And so I love the idea of the clock being a kind of idea that is somehow more than its instantiation in any physical thing. So it's like the Jewish idea of the temple. In some sense, it's more real because it's not there, and it has to have been built, it has to be real, but it has a reality that goes beyond its physical instantiation. And I'd like the clock to be that, too, because of course stories last longer than any physical thing that we can build. And ultimately, they're more important to us.

There have always been kind of two schools of thought in artificial intelligence. One of them is kind of the emergent intelligent idea, of, for instance, neural networks. The idea that you'd have some system that was a fundamentally simple system of replicated parts that had in it the inherent ability to organise. And that by some method of interaction with the world or training or something like that, that would form into something that could do intelligence. So neural networks are the perfect example of that. They have some structure, they have layers, they have not complete connectivity, but you're able to train them, for instance, on pictures and have them determine different categories of things. And so that idea was a very early idea in artificial intelligence. And in fact, Marvin [Minsky] worked first on that idea. And he built little electronic neurons out of tubes, and that's what he did when he was a Harvard fellow. The problem with that idea was that it really needed a lot of neurons, and so you had to get up to very, very large numbers before you got that kind of emergence happening. And so while in principle people had very good ideas about how to train the networks and so on, going back to McCulloch and Pitts, and people like Jerry Lettvin and Marvin Ashby. You know, they definitely had notions of how to do this. They, in practice, couldn't do it very much.
So part of why I built the Connection Machine was to try to get the number of neurons up much higher so that you could do those kinds of things. Now, as it turns out, even though I increased it maybe by a factor of 10,000 of what you could do before, I was still another factor of a thousand or a million off of what was actually required. So in fact, recently people have built big enough machines so that they've actually gotten enough to get this emergent behaviour. They've got enough data to train it on it. And in fact, it works very well, pretty much with exactly the algorithms that people imagined in the 1950s and 1960s. It just required more neurons.
So that certainly works, and something like that is certainly a part of intelligence. So that's the sort of... I would say, the kind of mysterious subconscious intelligence of... certainly recognition seems to work like that. And that's the kind of intelligence that takes lots and lots of weak information and puts it together and somehow comes to a conclusion, like I'm looking at George Dyson right now, from lots of little tiny clues.
So that kind of intelligence is very easy for us. We do it without much effort, but it's probably actually most of the computation that goes on in our minds. And it's probably the kind of intelligence that we have in common with animals.

There's another kind of intelligence, which is... we call it maybe symbolic intelligence. That's the kind of story in your head. It's like words, symbols, mathematics, and that's the kind of intelligence where we can explain logical reasoning and we can think out different possibilities of the future and do planning and things like that. So by the time I got to MIT, people had sort of given up a bit on this neural intelligence, and they were working mostly on the symbolic intelligence. And the symbolic intelligence is kind of what it feels like to think, because it's the part of intelligence that's very visible to us. And so when I got there, people were doing these things that seemed to require a lot of intelligence, like getting a computer to play chess, which required planning and imagining what the other person would do and reasoning like that. Or planning how to solve a little puzzle that involved moving blocks around so that you could get to another block or doing an analogy test and an IQ test. So Evans wrote this program that, you know, A is to B as C is to what?
And so those kinds of symbolic tasks were what the AI lab was doing mostly when I arrived. And in fact they turned out to be surprisingly easy. We've made lots of progress very quickly, and those actually, although they were hard for us, because we tend to lose track of all the details of the different chess positions and things like that, they were actually pretty easy for computers. And so computers did very well at them, and in fact very quickly became better than humans at many of those kinds of things. And that's also, certainly, a part of our intelligence.
But in fact, I think what we've learned is there's many parts of our intelligence. For instance, there's a visual intelligence, where we can imagine how things fit together, and we sort of do that by creating almost an analogue of an image in our head. And we can imagine things fitting or the combinatorics of it. And we may use that in planning, and certainly use that in designing things. There are emotional intelligences of sort of... maybe those are built out of these neural network things and recognising little clues, or maybe they have some symbolic things, or maybe they're something completely different. We just don't know. And so I think one of the things we're realising is intelligence is multidimensional. And so just as I was arriving at the AI lab, people were beginning to understand that intelligence was kind of more complicated. And Marvin [Minsky] kind of led that effort. And he started thinking of intelligence as a kind of society of little intelligences that interoperated with each other. And so I was very lucky to actually be living with Marvin while he developed those ideas. And so I got to talk with him about it as they were emerging. So that's the easiest way to understand an idea, you see it in the simplest form, and then you see it get more complicated and more complicated, and it's easier to follow the complexity, the idea, when you see it build up like that. I think it would... it seems, now, if you read Society of Mind, it seems... I think it would be very difficult to digest, just from the start, but watching it grow up from these simple ideas, it made a lot of logical sense. And so now I think I very much see intelligence that way. I see it as a complicated set of intelligences interacting, and our visible intelligence, our conscious intelligence, is just a small part of it. I'd call it our storytelling intelligence. And I think that as we develop AI, we're going to develop more and more of these types of intelligence, but we're also going to develop an architecture of how they work together. And in fact, if you look at the very best state of the art of AI right now, for instance the program that beats humans at go that was recently developed, it's actually a combination of those two kinds of intelligences. It has a neural network that kind of recognises patterns on the go board, and sort of intuits that it should play there, but it also has a planner that sort of guesses what the other person's going to do and looks ahead and so on, and it uses those two things together. So I think that's more and more the way of the future of artificial intelligence.

I also think there's something that I'd like to do a different than what people are doing now, and this comes out of work that I did with simulated evolution. Because if you look at, for instance, how that go program was made, there was some human that fiddled with the parameters of the network, how many layers did it have, how many examples did it have, how much control did this part of it have over that part. And so it was sort of... it wasn't completely designed by learning, it was designed by a combination of human... I won't call it engineering, but human manipulation and learning. And for us, that was done by a process of evolution. So I think that one of the most interesting things would be to recreate that process of evolution inside the computer so that it was the computer that's doing all that fiddling with the parameters and the connections of things and so on. And I think that's an incredibly promising area, but what it means is that we could evolve an artificial intelligence without really quite understanding how it works. We already really don't quite understand how the neural networks work in detail. I mean, we know in principle, for instance, how they recognise objects, but if you ask how do they recognise any particular object, we'd be hard-put to explain it.
So for instance, when I did some early work in evolving computer programs that did things, I evolved programs that could sort numbers. And it evolved programs that were very, very efficient at sorting numbers, much more efficient than I could write. And I could see all the lines of code in those programs, but I couldn't explain how they worked. I couldn't tell you a story that explained why should this sequence of instructions sort numbers perfectly. And yet, they did. So you can create something without necessarily understanding it. And in fact, it may not be understandable in the sense that you can tell a story about it. And I think we're starting to realise that about neural systems. For example, we know a little tiny flatworm [sic: roundworm] called C. elegans, a nematode called C. elegans, and we know how to... we know its neural system. It can learn, it has simple behaviour. And we know every nerve in its neural system and how it's connected, and yet we really can't explain to you how it works. And that just has a few hundred neurons in it. So I'm pretty sure that even if I mapped the human brain and I told you exactly every single neuron and exactly how it was connected, you wouldn't be able to explain how the brain worked, even with complete knowledge of its connections. And so I think understandability maybe mostly only works for simple things or engineered things or social things, because it's... we understand things by turning them into causes and effects, which is a kind of a storytelling technique, and not everything is simple enough to tell an understandable story about.

I think there's actually a lot to be done in evolution that hasn't been done. Simulated evolution. I started doing a little bit of it at Thinking Machines. I'd love to get back to it. But the basic idea is right now, if when people describe evolution, they really describe it in one of two ways. They either describe it... the most simple way is the kind of Richard Dawkins way of every gene has some independent selective value and this is the sort of classical way of population biologists describe it. And you can describe how quickly genes get selected. But that sort of suggests that a gene has this independent value. And I think that's way too simple an idea, that really interesting things happen out of combinations of genes. And so the mathematics that says how quickly genes evolve doesn't work very well for combinations of genes. In fact, it gets exponentially slower for combinations of genes. So if you try to do the calculation, you'll see that a couple of billion years is not enough to check out all the combinations of genes that you need to do something complicated. So there must be some other factor at work.
This is something that right now the evolutionists don't like to talk about much, because evolution is under attack from religion. Still. And so evolutionists don't like to admit that there's sort of a fundamental hole in the story. But the timescales don't really work out when you look at combinations of genes. So the only story we really have about combinations of genes is either that you evolve something simple and there's some path of simple improvements that goes from, let's say, a single cell bacterium to a human being by improving it one step at a time. And that is possible, but I think something more is going on and I think that, in fact, nature does things much more like an engineer does things, which is that nature develops modules which interact in limited ways with other modules and there's causes and effects and boundaries, but I can change how this one works, I can improve this one without changing its output behaviour, without changing the interface to the next one, so that there are certain interfaces that evolve more slowly. But what happens inside the modules evolves more quickly.

Nature in some sense does evolve things that have causes and effects that you can tell stories about. And in fact, we can tell stories about our body. And we can say, well, the heart pumps the blood and the kidneys clean out the blood and that's because only the same things that allow nature to evolve it quickly are the things that make it understandable. So just as we engineer things to have causes and effects, nature engineers things to have causes and effects.
And most of the people who have tried to use computers to simulate evolution haven't taken advantage of that fact. In particular, what most people do is they don't make a distinction between the genotype and the phenotype. So they basically treat genes... they treat the thing to be selected as a bag of genes, and they look at that bag of genes and they say, 'Is this a better bag of genes than that bag of genes?' And that method of selecting neglects what happens in real biology. In real biology, that bag of genes is used to generate an organism by an adaptive process that has morphogenesis, which is an adaptive process. It has learning, which is an adaptive process, behavior and so on. And each of those changes that bag of genes into something more sensible. So what happens is that we map the genetic space by adaptive process into another space, which is, let's say, the morphogenic space. And that does a lot of error correction. It makes everything sensible. So even if I make a mistake down in the genetic space, it sort of fixes it during the process of morphogenesis. So it makes it sort of sensible. It's like an editor.
So for instance if genetically I change the timing of something so that I grow an extra arm, that extra arm will have bones in it, it will have blood supply, it will have nerves, it will connect all the way up to my brain. And so in some sense lots and lots of changes will get made to sort of make it sensible. And so that process of mapping something into more sensible happens... that adaptation process happens at many levels. So for instance, once I have a creature, if I have a dog that's born with three legs, it learns how to walk with three legs pretty well. It changes its behavior by a process of learning. Now three legs isn't optimal, but it manages to survive with three legs, because it adapts at the learning level, because it failed to adapt at the morphogenic level.
And so there are many levels of adaptation that map, sort of, unsensible things into sensible things.

There's a way of thinking about evolution that evolution... you can imagine evolution as exploring a landscape of fitness. So imagine a two-dimensional landscape with hills and towers and holes and imagine that you're trying to explore around, trying to find the highest place. Well, a good algorithm would be to just always try to step uphill. And so if you think of the genes as defining that space, and the process of natural selection as a process by which you kind of always walk uphill. But the problem with that is you get stuck on a little hill, a local maximum, and so there might be a giant mountain over here, but you're stuck on this little hill and you can't get to this mountain without walking downhill for a while. So the best explanation that people have for genetics is well, there's a certain amount of randomness, and you wander over to that hill. Or they might have the landscape is such that there's a magically a ridge that always goes uphill from a bacterium to a human, like I said before. But I think both of those are unlikely explanations.
I think the more likely explanation is that if you take that genetic landscape, there's an adaptive process that takes that messy landscape and adapts it to a process that is more like a single hill. It's sort of more sensible. It doesn't have these local... these local maxima. And so it's an easier hill to do hill-climbing in. And so... and then learning takes that next space and it adapts it again to an even easier. So by the end of it, you actually have a pretty simple space that has a single hill so that evolution can actually just walk uphill to the answer or to a complex. To an answer. And so that's one of the things that I think is missing in the way we model evolution. I think another thing that we're missing is of course you're not just evolving one species at once. You're evolving a whole ecosystem of different species and one very important thing is you're evolving things that are adversarial to you. So you're evolving against parasites and you're evolving against predators and so that means that your hill is influenced by the hill of something else. And that process causes the landscape to constantly move around in a way that gets you off a local maximum. So I've also modelled that on a computer. So those sorting programs that I said, they got pretty good if I just used evolution to climb up the hill, but they got much better if I co-evolved programs that are sequences to be sorted, that tried to find bugs in the sorting programs. And so I evolved sorting program test cases at the same time I co-evolved sorting programs. And so if a sorting program was pretty good but not perfect, in other words, it had gotten up to the top of a small hill, then the test cases would evolve to exploit its imperfection and basically shrink that hill, collapse it, so that it would have to move to the next hill. And so that landscape that I described is actually very dynamic and determined by the co-evolution of everything else. So there's another important effect that's almost never modelled in simulated evolution.

Well, certainly, I now have available millions of times more power than I had available then, or I could have available, if I use the cloud or something like that. Now is a million enough? I don't know. I mean, I was off by a million last time, so maybe I'm off by a million again, but the fact is I certainly have a lot more power to do something like this. And the strange thing is, it hasn't been done. So what's been done on these faster computers isn't even as interesting as what was done on the slower computers. So I'm kind of excited to try this. So I think you could evolve an intelligence by this system of multiple adaptations and co-evolution of parasites and it could really turn out to be something pretty exciting. I think you could evolve something that had much more intelligent behavior than anything that we could evolve by the techniques that we're using today.

One of the great things about doing this today is I don't have to start by building a parallel computer. There are plenty of people that building parallel computers. So I can actually just go use one that somebody else built. And they're building them for other reasons, but... so what was the big obstacle before, I can skip over now. So I could go straight into actually building this. Now the hardest thing would be to find a domain in which you could make steady progress from something very simple to something complicated. And so you could start... because I think that's also part of evolution, is it works out an idea in a simple case, and then it elaborates it to a complicated case. And so that lets you sort of build modules and put those modules together. So one of the things I'd do, of course, is I wouldn't try to start from nothing. We know a lot of the modules. We know a lot of good ideas about, for instance, neural network algorithms that work and things like that. So I wouldn't be shy at all about pre-loading it with the genetic material that we know is useful, but it could decide how much to use that, how much to modify it and so on. But we don't have to start from zero. So I would seed it with the knowledge that we already have about how to be intelligent or how to make good computations.
The problem that I would probably use is... I'll describe it to you in the abstract and then in the specific. But what I want to do is make an intelligence that would be actually be useful for us. Because I think it's not actually all that interesting to make another human intelligence, because we have better ways of doing that. And what would be much more interesting would be to have an intelligence that was intelligent at things that we're not very good at.
And in particular, there's something that we need to get good at that we're not good at, which is manipulating very complex systems that are too complicated for us to understand, like an economy, like an ecology. You know, we repeated have problems like our global climate and things like that, very complex systems that we have a certain ability to influence, but we don't really understand them. And so the question is how should we act in a way to keep them in a safe zone? So an economy is a great example. It's really... you know, economists have been reasonably successful lately at controlling the money supply in a way that we don't have an economic collapse, but they failed at it in the past. And they could easily fail in the future.
So that's a kind of problem we don't solve very well, because it doesn't lend itself to the simple storytelling that we do. We try to tell stories about it. So if you look... if the stock market goes up or down, then they can always come up with a story of why it did, but then it goes up the next day and they come up with a story why it went in the other direction, but they don't come up with the story until it already did what it did. So the story isn't good enough to be predictive.

What we'd really like, if we had another kind of intelligence, I think, would be an intelligence that could look at a very complicated system and suggest how we might change its inputs a little bit in order to keep it operating in the safe zone. So let's take that as a problem. How would we create that intelligence? So I would start out with a very simple version of that problem, which is imagine you have a little box. Technically it would be a finite state machine. And it has some switches and knobs on it. And it has some lights on it. And your job is to control the switches and knobs so that the light... some lights stay on and some lights stay off. Now I can start... I can make that box as simple as I want. I can have one light on it and one switch. It would be really simple. And so it would be easy to make a machine that learned when the switch is in this position, the light is on, and when the switch is in that position, the light is off. And you could imagine that the box might even have some internal states, so maybe I have to turn on the switch twice to get the light to turn on. And the machine could learn that, it could build a model of that. And I could increase the number of switches and lights and knobs and the complexity of the algorithm inside the box, gradually, and have the machine get better and better at learning how to control it. And at some point, I'm imagining that it's doing this and it's accumulating the techniques that it used before, and it's using those as building blocks for the next level of evolution of the machine. And so I could get... maybe the next level of complexity is like playing a video game, which is basically you see some lights on the screen and you have some controls and the state is in the game and you learn to control the switches in order to make the score go up. In that case, you know, you're... so you have a goal state which is a high score, and you have some controls, and you learn by playing with it what to do to get the high score.
And in fact, neural networks have done that, so we know machines can kind of learn to do that, but I can keep on making it more and more complicated, till eventually you have something as complicated as, say, a human body that you're putting medicines into or something like that. Of course, you start with simulations. But I think that's a nice kind of framework that you can make arbitrarily complicated. So that's the framework I think I would use to evolve these machines. I'd start them out on simple machines, they'd get good at it, and then I'd build up a more and more complicated situation. And I might even do a kind of co-evolution thing, where the machines also evolved and they tried to evolve to be inscrutable and picky ways of being controlled and so on, so that... like the sorting programs and the...
And so I think that program, if you didn't just evolve a set of instructions, but what you evolved is something which, by an adaptive process, produced a program. And maybe it's by an automatic debugging and, you know, made a more sensible program from the genes. And then that program learned from interaction with the environment. You get those multiple levels of adaptation. Then I think you would get that kind of hierarchical evolution that I was talking about before. And I think you might be able to evolve a kind of intelligence that would surpass human intelligence and actually help us with some of these big problems that we have that we don't know how to solve. So there's a program of research that I would really love to figure out how to do somehow.
[Q] So when do you start?
Well, I'm thinking of the best way to do it. I mean, obviously, you need to get some great students or colleagues working on it. You need a lot of computing resources. I think Boston would actually be a wonderful place to do it. You need some people that... you know, it's a big programming project in creating the environment and so on. I don't think it's... it's not obvious to me how to build the organisation. I'm at a point... I've built organisations before, but I realise that's not really what I want to do. I'm not like an institute builder, so I kind of need to figure out how to do this and get somebody else to build the organisation and have, hopefully, me work on the actual technology. So I haven't figured that out yet. But that's what I'd really like to do.

The evolution one is one I've had a long-term passion for, going back, in some sense, to when I was an undergraduate. But yes, sometimes there are other subjects that I'm interested and if I had an extra lifetime, I would work on. One of them, for example, is in health. I mean, I could easily imagine I could have become a doctor, and what I'm really interested in the human body... everybody's focused on genetics, and I think that's like looking for the key under the lamppost, because genes are so easy to read and write. But the fact is, the difference between a sick person and a healthy person is almost never their genes, unless they were always sick. They pretty much have the same genes that they always had. It's in their body state. So if I take the computer analogy: when a computer is broken, it's almost never the binary of the computer, it's the runtime state of the computer that's broken. And our runtime state is not in our genes. It's in the... mostly in the proteins in our body. It's the things that are written by the genes. So our genes create proteins and those proteins turn genes on and off and they modify other proteins, and... so those are the things that really do things.
And we haven't paid much attention to them, because proteins are much harder to work with than genes. And they're also kind of analogue rather than digital. A gene really is a digital, literally four-letter code, whereas a protein, it matters how much there is of it. And so it's an analogue amount. And so one of the things that I've spent a lot of time doing in the last decade, is developing instruments that measure proteins floating around in the blood to great repeatability and accuracy. And this isn't a new idea, but it's an idea that's mostly been done by biologists, and biologists aren't really engineers, and so they tended to try to do these measurements in a laboratory by conventional techniques. And they... there are so many steps in the process that they tended to get very inconsistent results. So this field of proteomics got kind of a bad name, because people couldn't reproduce the results and the results had lots of noise in them and so on.

And one of the things I realised is that the problem is very similar to the problem of making a semiconductor line, which is... I remember the days when you could make chips and you could make, sort of, small chips on a lab bench, but as they got bigger and bigger, you had trouble reproducing them and you could only make chips with a few transistors on them. Making microprocessors that had millions of transistors on them required very carefully automating the line and then going through and figuring out all the sources of variation, engineering them out one at a time. It was a big engineering job that always required just pushing down the sources of variation. So we did that engineering job at Applied Proteomics and really pushed down all the sources of variation so that we could put a drop of blood in and get out hundreds of thousands of protein markers, and... but if we put that same drop of blood in or another drop of blood from the same sample, the next day we would get exactly the same answer out. And that had never been done before. So... at least to that level of precision.
So that gives us a view into the body that ought to show what's going on before you start showing symptoms when you get sick, for example. So when you get sick, it's not usually when something went wrong. It's when something went so wrong that your body can't hide it. So usually the sequence is: your body is healthy, something starts to go wrong, but your adaptive systems manage to mask what's going on. Sometimes they manage to just fix it and you never know you were sick. But sometimes that gets out of control so far that your body can't mask it and you start showing symptoms. That's usually when people go to the doctor. But by the time they go to the doctor, it's already way into the process and the doctor has to deal with all these secondary problems that are happening, not just the original cause.
And so doctors treat sick people. Or doctors do a little bit of saying: don't smoke, don't overeat, exercise, never get sick. But actually, the interesting stuff is in between those. The interesting way for doctors to work would be if they could see that you were on your way to getting sick, things are starting to go wrong, but you pre-empt the sickness. The only way to see that would be to measure what's going on inside your body before you start showing the symptoms. So I think this has tremendous potential for completely changing the way that medicine works. If we could constantly monitor what's going on in your body, notice when something is starting to go wrong, help the body fight it off before you ever get sick, that would be fantastic. We could... and I have simple examples where we can do that. The first example is I can see from a drop of blood when you are starting to grow a colon polyp. And a colon polyp is a precursor to colon cancer. So if you know you're starting a colon polyp then you can go in with a colonoscopy, remove the colon polyp, it'll never develop any cancer. So there's no reason anybody should die of colon cancer, if you can see colon polyps growing. But right now, the only way to do that is with a colonoscopy, which is not that accurate and it's kind of dangerous and so you can't do it very often. And so even people that are high risk don't get colonoscopies very often. But if you had this blood test, they could get... you know, once a week, they could test their blood. And you could head off the disease before it ever happened. So there's a very specific example. I think there's going to be lots more examples like that. So I could imagine if I had an extra lifetime, just concentrating on that way of changing medicine. And part of me is tempted to do that, but you know, I think there are other people that will do that.

You know, strangely enough, people didn't do it because they didn't... they weren't engineers and so they didn't make that semiconductor line to measure the proteins. But I think... I think once that line gets built, whether it's from my efforts or somebody else's efforts, then there's lots of people that will step in and learn how to use it for health. And so I think that's a revolution that's coming along that's going to be very exciting. It will be as exciting as genetics has been. Of course, genetics is very exciting right now, too. And so being able to manipulate the genes, that's like changing the order code. That's also going to be a very exciting way. But those two things will work together and we'll get much better control over health. So this may be my halfway-point interview. I'm optimistic. I could live until 120 if some of these techniques work. So that's one area, you know, if I had another lifetime, I'd work on that.
There's another one which I know even less about, but I'm really convinced that there's something great to be done there, which is in the area of economics, trying to understand economic interactions. I think there's a fundamental flaw in the way that it's been formulated. And the flaw is in how time is created. If you think of something as fundamental as, say, an interest rate. Well, the rate assumes something about time. Now time made sense when it was physical time. So let's say in the early days of agriculture, I might borrow money to plant a crop and the crop would take a certain amount of time to grow or buy a cow so that it would have calves, and the calves, or the growth of the crop, was kind of the interest on my capital. And so there was a sort of a natural interest rate that came from the physical processes of time passing. But most of our transactions these days are not like that. So for example, if I'm using money to do arbitrage on trading stocks, well the rate at which I can make money with that money depends on how fast he stocks are trading, how fast I can make trades. That's all controlled by technical things about how computers work and transmission lines work and so on. If I make a faster transmission line between two exchanges, in some sense, the rate of time speeds up. Well, does it make sense for the interest rate to stay the same when the rate of time just speeded up? So in fact, there's many different kinds of time for different purposes that make sense. So I think re-examining time in economics is something that would really change it and hasn't been done yet. So there's a... if I had, you know... if I could clone myself, one of me would go off and sort of reformulate economics with a kind of more relativistic idea of time, not ignoring this concept of time and assuming that it was just a given, that the time is somehow created by the system.

Interestingly enough, there's a relationship between the proteomics and the complicated system that I was talking about evolving, which is that if you really had all this proteomic information, it's kind of overwhelming to a human to understand what's going on and what you should do. But if you remember those machines that I wanted to evolve, that's exactly the kind of problem that they would be good at solving. So they would see the human body as the black box and health as the goal state, and they would measure. The proteins would be indicators of what's going on in the box, clues to the state, and then they would reason about what interventions can I do, you know, should I tell this person to exercise a little bit more or drink more water or take a pharmaceutical or cut out a polyp that's growing or... you know, there's interventions. So those would be, like, the switches. And so that intelligence would be exactly the one to help keep the human in the health space. So those two things are not completely unrelated. Also, by the way, the economic one is not completely unrelated to it, either. If you had a system that really did have this more complex, nuanced view of time, you couldn't just write down simple equations to decide how to adjust the money supply or the discount rate or whatever. You would actually need this kind of intelligence to reason about this complexity in order to say what interventions do you make to keep it in a healthy state.

Actually, there's another one which I'm also interested in, and this one I'm less sure about in terms of the underlying science, but if it is indeed true that we are heading toward near-term global warming. And certainly we have global warming going on. How fast it's going or what effect it's having I think is all very unclear. But we just don't know enough yet. But let's say it turns out that the worst predictions are true and ocean levels are going to start to rise. I think that what we're going to need to do is actually increase the reflectivity of the Earth. And that's a relatively easy thing to do, by putting aerosols up. So we could put up... well, sulphur dioxide is the one that we know works, but I think there are better things. We could use chalk dust or people have proposed using diamond dust, but I like chalk dust, let's say, because it's plentiful and it actually reduces acid rain. So I think that we'll end up putting dust up into the stratosphere. That is politically incorrect to talk about right now, because the moral hazard... people feel like if there was a fix to this problem, then they would keep on drilling for petroleum. But guess what? They are keeping on drilling for petroleum and coal and so I'm pretty sure that's going to happen. And I think it's unfortunate that we refuse to look at that solution.

So another thing I'd be interested in looking at is a way of putting, say, chalk dust up into the atmosphere on a steady basis. It's actually a beautiful solution, because if you just stop, everything goes back to normal. So it's... and you don't have to put up that much. So I've been thinking, for instance, of launch systems for doing that, and I've got one that I really love, which I call a Surfatron. It's based on... there's an idea called a Slingatron, which is sort of a spiral centrifuge that accelerates stuff out. But what I'm interested in is sort of a linear version of this. It works more like a whip. So you know how a whip gets smaller and smaller and it ends up supersonic, which is why it cracks. So what I want to do is make a set of tracks, that the wave velocity increases. So the track just moves up and down, and it actually doesn't move up and down very quickly, but the wave propagation velocity accelerates over the length of the track, so there's something that sort of surfs the wave that's attached to the track. The technical problem is that bearing, which is presumably a magnetic bearing or something like that. And so you wave the track up and down with local motors, and you put this thing that rides the track and accelerates as the wave velocity accelerates, and gets fast enough to fling off and certainly get into the stratosphere. Maybe you could build one that was fast enough to get into orbit, get outside the Earth's orbit. So there's another thing that I would love to build, is this Surfatron.
[Q] And where does it have to be?
It depends on whether you just want to get stuff into the stratosphere or you want to get stuff into space. If you want to get stuff into space, you'd probably want to do it near the equator, and you want it to slant up, so maybe Mount Kilimanjaro, where it flings up that way. But if you're just getting stuff into the stratosphere, actually I think a very likely place for it to be is going to be the Tibetan plateau. And I think the Chinese are much more likely to do this than the Americans, because the Americans are... you know, have lost their sense of adventure about this sort of thing. So the Chinese could save the world from global warming. So part of me is tempted to try to convince them to and explain how to do it.

Another one, of course, I'm really interested in is making the backup to the Internet, the other network.
[Q] That is really important...
Yes. So I think it's possible to make a network that is fundamentally safe and secure. It has a couple of properties that the Internet doesn't have. One of them is that you and I can have a guaranteed bandwidth and latency for communication between us. Another one is that every packet that I get, I know who it came from and I know it's from somebody that I was willing to accept a packet from. And I'm willing to accept packets at a certain rate from. And just those two things, that guaranteed bandwidth and the non-anonymity of packets would allow much more secure infrastructure to build the Internet of things, to control power utilities and route airplanes and anything we actually depend on really ought to be built on a system like that. And fundamentally, the Internet is not a system like that. Just the basic design principles on which it is built, it can never have those properties. So I think we need to build something to the side that has those properties and at first we'll just use it for special things like big financial transactions or controlling the power grid, but eventually, I think we'll use it as the secure layer for, for instance, saying, 'This piece of email is from me.' We'll use it more and more as a basic piece of infrastructure.
One advantage of it, for instance, is I can safely put a piece of software on it without worrying about breaking the system. So right now, a company or any large organisation has to do this kind of quality assurance. Every time they put a new piece of software on the network, they're risking the entire network for both data integrity but also just for performance. It could interact with other things in a way that broke other things, and so there's a quality assurance problem that is becoming unsolvable. And not only that, but the network can now break in ways that nobody can figure out why it broke and what's wrong with it or is it even broken, whereas this other network that I'm building, you can tell exactly what was happening on. And you could put a piece of software on it and know that it could only affect these pieces of software in this way, just by the way that the network was built. So I think it has to happen, so I'd also like to build that.
[Q] And why aren't we doing this?
So it's an interesting question why we're not doing it, because I think it's so obvious, but there are so many people that have so much stake in the current system. There are lots of people who make lots of money fixing the problems in the current system. There are lots of people who have made huge investments, not just in money, but in also their time and learning how to do things in the current system. So they understand that, so there's a huge force of people that understand that and understand how to work around the problems and there are people whose job it is to do this information assurance, who would not, I don't think, would be that enthusiastic about eliminating the need for that. I think the people that designed this wonderful system have a lot of stake, a lot of pride in the system, and they're very clever people and they can figure out ways around each problem as it comes up. So they don't like the idea that there would be another system that violates all of their principles, that works to the side. And all of these people that I just named are the people that you would go to if you don't know about the network and somebody comes up with an idea and says, 'Well, you should make your network this way', you would go to all those experts to say, 'Should I do this?' And they'll all say, 'No.' But in fact, I think those experts are going to start losing more and more credibility as this other things stops working. And eventually, somebody's going to say, 'Well, I've been listening to you and it's not working', and they're going to listen to somebody else, and that's when we'll build this other network. So that's another thing that I would like to do, is build that other network. And I think I see exactly how to build it.

It's an interesting time. I've got a really interesting company that can kind of do anything. We have machine shops and electronic shops and smart mathematicians and biologists and we've built everything from satellites to blood tests, to robots. So... and we can kind of do what we want. We have an interesting model, which is... this is Applied Invention. We have an interesting model, which is what we do is we go to a company that's trying to do some disruptive innovation. And by definition, a disruptive innovation is one that they don't know how to do, they don't have the internal skills and culture to do. And we have a set of interdisciplinary entrepreneurial people, and we work with them to do it. So for instance one of the things that we're doing right now – I can't take credit for this, but it's one of the things the company is doing – is working with farmers... Actually, we're working with the seed company, Pioneer, who sells seeds to farmers. But farmers now have all these information sources, like GPS in their tractors and satellites and they're becoming information processors. So the seed company's realised it needs to help them with that problem, even to sell them seeds, to know what seed to buy and so on. So we make a little application that is the best thing out there at modelling nitrogen in the soil and so it knows about the weather over the farm and it knows about the types of soil in the farm and it knows exactly what kinds of seeds you planted. And it actually uses that to predict how much nitrogen is in the soil at various depths and helps advise the farmer on fertilising. And the great thing about that is that what farmers normally do, since they don't understand how these variables interact, is they way over-fertilise. Which costs them extra money and also creates extra fertiliser which goes into the ecosystem, causes harm and so on. So by giving them this application that does a much better job of predicting that, they use less fertiliser. So they can actually afford to pay us for the service, they use less fertiliser, it's good for the world, it's good for them, it's good for us. So that's the kind of thing that we love doing. We love doing things that... I guess the principle of the company is to work on things that have three characteristics: one is we're excited about it, we feel good about it, we have some passion for it. The second thing is they make sense economically, like that one does. You can actually make money on doing it, so they're self-sustaining, they're not charity cases. Because those are the things that scale, are the things that make money. Those are the things that have a big impact. And then the third thing we always ask ourselves is: is there some reason we think we can do this better than everybody else? And usually that's because we have a much more interdisciplinary group than other groups. Almost everybody else survives by being a specialist, by being good at a particular kind of thing. We're not technically specialists at all. We're actually... we do sort of specialise in the early stage of something, but that might be optics, it might be electronics, it might be biology or more likely it's a combination of all of those things with some math and data processing put on top of it. And if we see something that has that combination, we think we can actually do a better job of it. That meets the third rule. And we actually have turned down projects for all three of those reasons, because they didn't hit on all three of those. So it's a great base of operations with me, and I've got kind of amazing people with me, so that's also fun.

Applied Minds was... when I left Disney, I really didn't know much what I wanted to do and I left with Bran Ferren. And so we did all kinds of things. One of the things we did was this kind of commercial thing. I mostly did that. Bran tended to do more kind of vision projects, where he'd make a prototype of something that was sort of... maybe it wasn't really engineered to really work, but it looked like it worked, so that people could be inspired by what would happen if it did. It was kind of a demonstration of what was possible. So we did a mix of different kinds of things. We did a lot of work with the... we did a lot of work with the government, not by intent, but also because the commercial work would get finished, whereas the government work was infinite, and so it just kept accumulating.
But I ended up having... getting a bit disillusioned about that for a couple of reasons. I have an interesting history with that. I mean, I still do work with the government. I try to help, but I got discouraged at how much good I was doing. So I guess I started doing government work very early when I was doing supercomputing. Actually, the AI lab, the Logo lab was on the same floor the CIA was on. But the CIA was secret. They didn't acknowledge they had... they had an unacknowledged office there, but people would always wonder in looking for the CIA, to our office. And they would say, 'Excuse me, where's room 301?' And I would say to them, 'The blue moon jumps over the purple sky.' And they would always look a little worried, like they didn't know the code words. And eventually, I'd say, 'Oh, if you want the CIA, it's across the hall.'
But the CIA... it was funny, I had a little thing going with them, because I was curious about them and I picked locks, so I would go in at night and I would pick the lock, but all the papers and everything would be put into the safe, so all the desks would be empty and so on. But they knew I would do this. Occasionally I would leave them a little note or something like that, but I got curious of what they were doing, because their phone system came through the phone closet as ours, I was curious if they had a way of seeing if you were bugging their phone, so I clipped, like, a little resistive load to their phone, and sure enough, like in ten minutes, a group... some people came over from the CIA into the phone closet and looked at it and took off my clip thing and looked at me and said, 'Damn kid.'
So that was interesting. So we had a little thing going, and they would... we'd share the men's room with them. And they actually carried guns, which I'm not sure why that made any sense, but they did. They had holsters with guns, or some of them did. And I remember once, this was during the Cold War, I got invited to a conference in the Soviet Union and this was a time when the Soviet Union was being pretty nasty and I wasn't sure if I wanted to go there and I thought one of these CIA guys would have an interesting perspective on it. And so I was in the men's room and he was at the next urinal, and I said, 'So, do you know...' I didn't know the guy's name, but I knew he came out of the CIA office, I said, 'You know, I have this problem you might have an interesting perspective on, which is I've been invited to this conference in the Soviet Union and I'm trying to decide whether to go or not.' And so the guy zips up his fly and goes over to wash his hands, and he says, 'Well – he says – actually two other people in your lab have also been invited to the same conference and they've decided to go, so it really probably doesn't matter whether you do or not.'

So I had this slightly... sort of... not exactly adversarial relationship, but then I really started thinking about it, and when I was making the supercomputers and people were using... the intelligence people started using my supercomputers, and I got to know what they were doing. And I started thinking about it. And I said, am I for this or against this? And I realised wars almost always happen because somebody misestimates something. Somebody misunderstands something. And that probably having more information about what people are doing is better. And we're less likely to get into wars. And so I decided, you know, I'm for intelligence. I'm... I don't want to work on weapons systems, but I do want to work on people having a clearer understanding of things. And so I started helping out in various ways with the supercomputing and doing that. And then I got really involved in Thinking Machines, got really involved in... well, Thinking Machines got involved in providing the computer, but then later, Applied Minds got really involved in trying to build some of the software. And I got very concerned about this problem of how we put together a picture out of all the information that we're getting. And I realised really we gather lots of information, but it tends to not come together in the right way to make a big picture, and I got to see the whole process of how we gathered the information and how bad it was at putting together the picture. And I started worrying about this, because I realised we might actually have the information but not be able to act on it, and we might fool ourselves into getting scared. And in fact, I had a slide deck prepared that I used to go to the intelligence agencies with, which was a scenario where there was one joker who was putting bad information in the system, but it sort of came up in different ways, through different pipes, and came back together so that it looked like we were getting this information from lots of different sources and that we convinced ourselves, in my scenario, that Iran was building a nuclear weapon when it really wasn't. And that that would be a scenario where we could get into a war just because of our inability to kind of trace the way that information flowed through the system and combined through the system. And so I worked really hard with the intelligence agencies to try to put in better system for bringing together intelligence and so on. And it was a frustrating experience. And I actually built software systems for them and... One thing I did is, for example, I built... you know, they believed in sort of Bayesian reasoning of evidence weighting, but I was like, 'Yes, you say you believe in it, but the way that you weight evidence, the way your analysts do this, is nothing like Bayesian.' And they were like, 'Well, would you give us a tool?' So I actually built them a tool where you could put in the probability of things and then it would tell the probability of it. And they tried using the tool, and they said, 'Oh, we don't want to use that.' And I was like, 'Why not?' And it's, like, 'Well, it gives us the wrong answer.' And I'm like, 'What do you mean, it gives the wrong answer?' And it's like, 'Well, the analysts looked at it and they don't believe the answer it gave.' And I was like, 'Yes, that's because they weren't doing Bayesian. You know, they don't have good intuitions as to how probabilities combine to create probabilities, so the fact that it contradicts their intuition is why you need the tool.' But they didn't use the tool. And I made lots of systems for trying to put different kinds of information together where it could be compared, and it was very hard to get these systems in, for lots of different reasons.

And in fact, on 9/11, I was sitting in the director's office at the National Security Agency, meeting with the head of Analysis, talking about this problem and talking about how we couldn't get the information together. And while I was talking with Mo, the... somebody came in and brought here a little piece of paper. And she said, 'Oh, you know, an airplane just crashed into the World Trade Center.' But it was just the first one, so she's like, 'This is probably an accident.' She said, 'But you and I both know that if this turns out to be a terrorist act, we have information in this building that could have clued us into this, but we haven't put it together. And there'll be a congressional investigation and everybody will get called up and why didn't we put it together and...', you know, but this was all kind of hypothetical. And then somebody came in with the second piece of paper, and she sort of blanched and then she's, like, 'I have to go figure out what we do about this', and she gave us the code. There was special security code for turning on the television set and we watched the second bombing. And then they went and met with the director and decided to evacuate the building, because the Pentagon got bombed and so on. But that's what I was doing on 9/11.
And then I was stuck in Washington. And Bran had actually been down at the Pentagon that day, so I got together with Bran and we borrowed a car. You couldn't rent cars. We borrowed a car and we drove up to Bran's place in East Hamptons, so we drove through New York, so I was also in New York City on 9/11, too. And, you know, saw the... yes, it was... On the way, of course, all the traffic was jammed. You couldn't go through Manhattan, so at some point we stopped at a fire station to ask directions of how we could get around the city. And we walked in and everybody was crying, because their buddies had just... they had been in one of those building that had collapsed. And so that was a pretty scary moment. But it was also a moment where I felt a tremendous sense of personal failure and guilt, because I had seen the problem. We did have information that we could have put together that would have stopped that. I think everybody felt that sense of guilt. And yes, we had failed to solve the problem.

And so I worked on it some more for a while, but it was very frustrating and it seemed like that, surely that would galvanise things and it caused lots of activity, but not lots of progress. And then we ended up having the second Gulf War, which was exactly the scenario that I had been using as an example, although it was Iraq instead of Iran. But it turns out my curveball was just exactly what I said could happen and what people knew would happen. And somehow all that work, and I... everything I had done failed to have any effect on that, and we went and fought what I think was a very unnecessary war, by fooling ourselves. And I think we genuinely did fool ourselves, thinking that he had chemical weapons. But you can go back and look at the errors in logic that we had, but at the time, I think everybody in the intelligence community really believed it because of the bad ways that we put together information, interpreted information.
So that all... you know, that felt like a personal failure to me. I felt bad about that, that I put an awful lot of effort into that and in the end it led to nothing helpful. So that got me kind of discouraged about working on that stuff. So I got less and less enthusiastic about the government work. And then the thing that really pushed it over is when the George W Bush administration came in. The tone of everything changed a bit. Because I had been doing this, like, since the Reagan administration, gone through Democrat and Republican. Generally the science advisors who were really trying to help were left out of the politics, as it should be, but when George W Bush came along, we started getting asked questions like, 'Have you donated any money to the other party?' 'Have you...' People who were like Baptist preachers started getting onto scientific committees and it just felt bad to me, so I pulled away from it.

Applied Minds was still doing a lot of work in the government stuff, and Bran still liked it a lot. So I said to Bran, 'You know, I really want to do the commercial work.' And the commercial work and the government work is hard to coexist, because of all the rules that happen. For instance, it's very hard to hire a foreigner and things like that. And I was just like, 'We need to separate these up. We need to stop doing the government work or I want to take the commercial group out and do that as a separate thing.' And I think... I mean Bran, I think, was sort of hurt by that, because he felt like I was sort of abandoning him, but... and giving him an ultimatum, but fundamentally I felt it had to be done, so that's what we did. We split the company. I left him with the brand name and split off. By then, most people naturally either wanted to come with me or stay with Bran, so it was pretty obvious who went with who. And so we split the company and Applied Invention doesn't do government work, and Applied Minds still does government work. So I admire Bran for continuing to try to make that better. And I still try to volunteer and help with that, but I don't mix it with my business. I think the government is a pretty lousy customer, but I think it's also important that they do a good job. And I'd like to help them do a good job.

The other thing I got very disappointed is during the W Bush administration: we started breaking the rules. And up till then, for instance, the intelligence agencies had been very, very careful never to spy on American citizens and then they started doing that. I wasn't aware of it, but I could kind of sense the different tone that happened there. That was partly why I quit. Later I found out that we started. And I would say nobody was more shocked by that than the people who worked at those agencies, because it was so built into the culture before then never to do that. And then the other thing that was... it was pretty awful, that I also felt some personal guilt about, because I... it was a problem I failed to stop. But after 9/11, everybody panicked and we captured all those people that went to Guantanamo Bay and, as it turns out, tortured them. And most people... very few people in the government were aware that that was happening. In fact, there were people in Defence that were worried it was happening and tried to see if it was happening. And one of the things I feel bad about is at one point I actually had some senior people at Defence that were kind of worried about what was happening down at Guantanamo Bay and didn't know. And they sent a small group of us down there to look at it. And we went down there and got a very sanitised tour, but in retrospect, they... of course, we had no control over what we saw, so they showed us what they wanted us to see, and they showed us prisoners being treated very well, and kids getting educated, and... They, of course, didn't show us people being tortured or things like that. And I remember not really trusting it very much and not getting along with the guy that ran it, this guy Miller, who I disliked. But not seeing anything that wasn't very reasonable, kind, treatment of prisoners. And going back and reporting on what I'd seen.
But I've always felt like that report ended up being misleading, because I think it assured some people in the Pentagon that things were okay when, in fact, they weren't. And so again, my efforts, I think... in that case, not only didn't do good, but they probably did some harm, because I made them feel like, okay, well, they had looked and it was okay. So that was also partly what got me discouraged about the government work. And so I think the tone of it really, really did change during that administration. People really started breaking the rules in a way that had never been true before. So I hope it's gone back. I sense definitely the leadership at the level of the Presidential level has tried to push it back toward real government by law and following the rules, but it's a fragile thing.

Remember I said there were two ideas of artificial intelligence. One of them was kind of this neural network idea and the other was the symbolic idea. Well, I've always been interested in the symbolic idea, too, but the sort of big, emergent version of the symbolic idea, which is: if you actually had a semantic network that knew information, like it knew your name is George Dyson and it knew all of the connections to all the other events. You know, your connection to Bellingham, your connection to Baidarkas, your... that knowing all these entities and the connections between them is an important part of what intelligence is about, is knowledge. And so that was another thing I wanted to do with the Connection Machine, I was kind of inspired by this thing that Scott Fahlman had done, of a way of searching through networks like this, semantic networks, and reasoning from them. So I was very, very interested in representing knowledge this way in the Connection Machine.
But it never really played out, because the Connection Machine... there was no commercial market for it. But I always had that dream of building a big knowledge graph of all this information. And then, when Neal Stephenson wrote his book, Diamond Age, it had a story in it about the illustrated primer, which was a book that kind of knew everything and adapted to the student that read it. And for years, I had been interested in education, elementary education. And I just loved this idea. I was very inspired by it. And so I started thinking about how you would go about building it, and I realised well, one thing, it would need to know everything. It would need this giant network. And so it would need to know what there was to be known. And that connected with something else that I've always had as a dream, which is I've always imagined having a map of knowledge so that I could see a map of my ignorance. I mean, imagine... I remember looking at the globe and thinking, 'Well, I've been there, I know what that is, but I haven't been there, I don't know what that is.' And so in some sense the globe was a map of my geographical ignorance, but imagine you had a map of all the things that could be known and you got to see: oh, there's this whole region that I don't know about. You know, this is like the algebraic topology. You know, the mountains of algebraic topology are unexplored. And so that idea has always fascinated me, but then I was thinking about how to do a Diamond-Age-like book. I realised that if I made this network, I could finally print this map of my ignorance. And so I got very excited about that idea.

And by then, computers were much faster. And I'd actually tried to do something like this at Thinking Machines. And I'd tried to do a project with Encyclopaedia Britannica, where I took all the information in Encyclopaedia Britannica and put it into a computer so that you could find if there were contradictions in Encyclopaedia Britannica. And that project got started and the guy that I had hired to work on it was named Doug Lenat. And who ended up having very strong ideas about his own ways of doing things which I disagreed with, and so he didn't work for Thinking Machines for that long. He went on and took that project with him and started something called Cyc, which really had started with that Encyclopaedia Britannica thing. But the wrong idea he had was that he wanted to make everything so that it was logically consistent, so that you could reason about things, you could make deductions and so on. And knowledge is too complicated for that. So I always knew that was the wrong idea, so when I went back to it, I did it completely differently. What I recorded in the relationship was that somebody asserted this relationship, so you didn't say that Taiwan was a province of China, to pick a controversial example. You said, 'This person said that Taiwan is a province of China.' But somebody else may have said it wasn't a province of China. So you said who said it and when they said it. And so you could have contradictions in it. And then you could... you didn't have to have consistent information, so it was very easy to add information. So unlike Cyc, which got more and more difficult to add information to without breaking it, this was totally scalable and many people could add information to it, and then you could decide afterwards how to deal with the contradictions and who to listen to and what.

So that was, I think, a fundamentally different idea that wasn't... people had talked about building a semantic web, but it didn't have that idea. People had talked about building semantic networks, but it didn't have that idea. But that idea was, I think, the thing that made it work. So I started building it first. Actually, first for the intelligence agencies, as a way to get them to organise their information, but when I realised they really weren't going to get it together to do that, I just started building it myself for this education project, which didn't really have money for it. But it was an audacious enough idea to sort of capture all the knowledge of the world that we managed to get venture capital funding for it. And so I started a company, originally with people like Robert Cook and Kurt Bollacker. And we started building this, and we realised we needed better engineering and I didn't really want to explain to people what we were doing because it was so kind of in the stealth stage, but I wanted to find if there was other people that would be interested in this. So I made kind of an abstract drawing of, sort of conceptually, what would be a great goal. And I just showed it up in a whole bunch of slides. I was showing pictures of robots at some O'Reilly conference. And it was just kind of a troll, really, to see if anybody would pick up on it. And nobody at the conference picked up on it. So I thought, 'Man, that was a failure.' But then I got this call from this guy John Giannandrea, who was a fantastic person who had been one of the early people at Netscape, who said, 'Hey, I noticed you had this slide in your talk, I was wondering if you meant this by it', and he had, like, a whole concept and he saw what was important about it. And I said, 'Yes, why don't you come join us?'
So he turned out actually to be the key person that really put it together and made it work and so we built this thing and started putting knowledge into it. We made it all free, in fact we tried to come up with a name. We called it Metaweb at first, because it was sort of information that was about the stuff that was on the web initially. And that was the name of the company. But then we began to build this database, and we made the database free and open, so we joked around of what would you call it, and I suggested, initially just as a joke, 'Oh, we should call it Freebase.' Which at the time was the slang for crack cocaine. And everybody told us we couldn't do that. So we did. And I was like, 'Don't worry, someday, we're just going to change the meaning of the word and there'll be a generation that thinks Freebase means this.' And sure enough, today if you think for Freebase in Google, you get our Freebase comes up higher than crack cocaine.

So we made this free database that had all kinds of information about astronomy and sports scores and I, of course, thought that the scientific information was going to be the information that people would be most interested in sharing. But actually scientists are pretty bad at sharing information. They sort of hold onto their datasets. It turned out that the information that people were most willing to put in was about pop culture, music. People who were interested in operas would put in: 'This person sang in this opera.' Or architects or movie stars or television shows. So it started building up until it had, you know, knew about billions of entities and relationships between those entities. And we had this idea that an entity had this sort of loose idea of a type, where you would expect to know things about it. So let's take somebody like Arnold Schwarzenegger was an interesting one, because he's a politician, so you expect him to have political affiliations and offices that he's held and he's also a movie star, so you expect him to have movies that he's in and roles that he's played. And he's also actually an athlete and you expect him to have prizes that he's won for being Mr Olympia. And so every entity had different aspects which would create different expectations as to what relationships you would expect to see. And so it was a very flexible system, and then relationships were sort of automatically bidirectional. So if you said, you know, Arnold Schwarzenegger's wife is Maria Shriver it would automatically say, well, Maria Shriver's husband is Arnold Schwarzenegger. So that was the way that it was built up. So we started building it up and then we made it available for free, which was kind of the business model in those days. And sure enough, people started using it for all kinds of things.
The Wikipedia actually started mining it and putting it into Wikipedia articles and we had... but the search engines started using it because they didn't really know much about the things they were searching on. In particular, they didn't know what ads to put on them. So if you were searching for the Washington Redskins, they didn't necessarily know that was a football team in Washington, so they didn't know to put football ads in Washington on that page. And so they had a business problem that we solved for them. So all the search engines started using our database. And it was also had the potential of making search much better. So up till then search was based on keywords. So if I searched for, say, museums of New York, it would search for pages that had the word museum and the phrase New York on it. But if, let's say, you happened to say about the Met, didn't happen to use the word museum on the page. So the Met's exhibits in Manhattan, it didn't really know that Manhattan was in New York or the relationships between exhibits. It didn't know what the Met was. So in order to really do a search, you really wanted to know what these things were and what their relationships were. You wanted to know Manhattan was in New York. And so that would be a kind of semantic search. And so search engines were just beginning to realise they needed that. And so eventually what happened was that we didn't have any business model, but the search engines needed us, so we eventually sold the company to Google.

It was a very controversial sale within Google, because they'd never bought a search engine thing before, and it was kind of contradictory to the way the founders had made search work. Fortunately, there were a few very visionary people in that wanted to buy it, but they didn't actually pay nearly enough for it compared to the value they got out of it. Because as soon as they got it, they also got John Giannandrea, who eventually became head of search at Google. I mean, we used to joke that either... if they bought us, they'll either destroy... they'll just make us go away or we'd take them over. And I think eventually it became a very significant part of the way they did search. And now, when you do a search, you actually do two kinds of searches. You... it spawns the old keyword search, but it also does a semantic search. So it really does find the museums of New York, even if they don't have the words museum or New York on there. And it mixes those in the search results it gives to you. But I think the click-through rates of the semantic searches are actually better than the keyword searches. And I think they're getting better and better all the time. So I love it that I built something that billions of people all over the world use every day.
[Q] Like pinch-to-zoom?
Yes, well that's another one. But that's... so that's a... that's fun and I think it really has made search better and it's made humans smarter, and that is probably the most fundamental thing that you can do because it lifts all boats if you make people smarter. And I think better search makes people smarter.

One of the fun things about working with the government, even though there are some unfun things about it, is you get to ride around in lots of interesting vehicles, and so at one point, I got to go out for a few days in a nuclear submarine. And an admiral had basically... the admiral arranged to come with me was the head of the Pacific Fleet, and he was the commander of the Pacific Fleet. But of course he's not the Captain of the submarine. The Captain of the submarine is yet another thing. So the Captain really gets to decide what goes on on the ship, but of course he listens a lot to what the Admiral wants.
So I was the guest of the Admiral, and so one of the strangest things was that we were completely out of contact, because there's not communication when you're under the ocean. And it was a little hard for me, because I'm a bit claustrophobic and there's not a lot of room. And the captain was very kind to give me his headquarters, but even that I could barely fit into. I would have been much happier out sleeping on the torpedoes with the enlisted men, but everyone on a submarine is incredibly polite. They're very easy to get along with, but it's very close quarters. Everyone knows everyone and everyone was very aware we were on the ship. And so the Admiral mentioned that every submarine once a year gets to do something called an emergency breach manoeuvre, which is where they blow the tanks and they shoot up out of the water and bounce. And of course you have no windows on a submarine, so it's all just how it feels, which mostly is nothing. It's all very silent. It's nuclear reactors turning electric motors, so it's the quietest, most isolated environment you can imagine. But... so it gets a little boring. So submariners read a lot and play chess and things like that, but...
So I think the Admiral wanted something exciting to happen, so he mentioned in front of the Captain that every year every submarine does this once. And so the Captain said, 'Well, actually, we could do it right now.' And so we did an emergency breach manoeuvre. But the interesting thing is it amazed me how much trouble they went to to make sure nobody was up above. So first of all they used sonar to listen for ship engines in the area. We're out in the middle of the ocean. And no ships in the area. But then they went up to periscope depth and looked around and physically looked before they dived down. And then they shot up. And that was very exciting, because everything slants up and you feel yourself rushing upwards, and you feel yourself actually popping up above the water like a whale. Of course, you don't see anything, and this is all kinaesthetically you feel it. So it was very exciting, but I thought it was a little silly how much work they went to to make sure it was empty. But then, two weeks later, there was another emergency ascent manoeuvre where they actually hit a boat. They skipped the visual step and they hit a boat that had its engines off. And so I don't think anybody else, any other civilians are going to be getting those tours any more, but it made me realise that a lot of this belt and suspender stuff that they do really makes sense, even though it's very counter-intuitive.

Another thing they did, and it turns out I was early on it, was they do something... they're always doing drills of various sorts, and one of the kinds of drills they do when they're up above surface, is they do a man overboard drill. So you're up on the sail, which is the tower, and somebody's supposed to keep watch, and if somebody falls overboard, that person gets on the speaker and says to the whole ship: 'Man overboard.' And if it's on the right side, they say, 'Man overboard, starboard side, all ahead right', so that you can turn around and get them. And so there's somebody constantly watching whenever you're up above for somebody man overboard. So they decided to let me do the man overboard duty. And because they do drills, they throw dummies overboard, and so I knew they were going to do a drill while I was watching. So I'm thinking, 'Okay, I just have to remember: starboard is on the right. Okay. Starboard, port, starboard, port.' I'm going, 'That's all I have to get right. But I have to get this right, because everybody on the submarine, who I'm going to be with for days, is going to hear this, right?' So I'm watching and then sure enough, they throw the dummy overboard on the right side. So I say, 'Man overboard, starboard side, all ahead left. I mean right.' And of course the whole ship does this, and there are people that are... and there's like a hesitation, the ship starts to go to the left and then right and then left and then we lost the dummy. So they drowned. So everybody on the ship knows that I've, like, blown this. But of course everybody's incredibly polite, so nobody says anything, and everybody just pretends like this didn't happen. Submariners are just so polite. But this is sort of looming over me. I'm sure that when I walk down the hall, everybody's looking at me as the guy that said left instead of right.

We spent a few more days on the submarine and we were actually on the bridge, where they actually steer the submarine. And we're watching it and I mention to the Admiral that Al Gore once told me that the most fun he ever had as Vice President was actually getting to steer a nuclear submarine. And this is something the size of a 50-storey building lying flat. And it all works by total discipline of everybody doing exactly what they're supposed to do and they're all super-trained and they all follow orders instantly and it's kind of a big deal, because you have nuclear reactors when you do the throttle. So it's kind of amazing that they let Al Gore steer it, so I mentioned that. And the Admiral says, again in front of the Captain, he says, 'Well, I'm sure if the Captain wanted to, he could let you steer it.' And the Captain, of course, picks up this immediately and the Captain says, 'Helmsman, give the helm to Doctor Hillis.' And every other thing that the Captain has ever said, people are just like, 'Yes sir, yes sir, yes sir.' But the helmsman turns around and says: 'Sir?'
He's like, this is the guy that doesn't know right from left? He didn't say that. He just said, 'Sir?' And the captain said, 'You heard what I said, helmsman', and he gets out and I got to steer the nuclear submarine. And the cool thing is the throttle, because when you hit the throttle, it really feels like... I mean, you've got a hundred megawatts of nuclear reactor come online and it really feels like you surge forward. And it's pretty impressive. I mean, this thing the size of a skyscraper. So I got to steer the nuclear submarine. But then later, when I was in the reactor room, I discovered that when you pull the throttle it doesn't actually control the nuclear reactors, it just changes a dial in the room and then all the people who control the reactors turn them up and so on.

When we first started programming the Connection Machine, we figured out actually what was wrong with Amdahl's Law, which is Amdahl's Law always assumed that you broke up the program so that different parts of the program ran on different parts of the computer. And of course there's only so many ways to break up a task, and you can't break it up in an even way. But the more interesting way to program the Connection Machine was to break up the data and kind of do the same thing to all the data. So we worked out this program paradigm, which we called Data Parallel Programming to contrast it with Controlled Parallel Programming, which is breaking up the program. And basically it's now what's called MapReduce. The basic idea is that you have lots of pieces of data in lots of different processors. So the first operation you do is you do a Map operation. You apply the same function to every piece of data. And then what you... so it might be say a filter function. So let's say that I'm trying to count the number of things that are greater than five. So the first function is: I map the test if it's greater than five across all the pieces of data. Now I want to count them, that's a reduction. So somehow you bring all that information together into one number. And so I might add them up, I might count them, I might average them. And so, actually, because we knew we wanted a program and I designed the Connection Machine so that it had special hardware for doing those two functions... It had special hardware for mapping a program across everything, so you could broadcast out the same program to everything. And then it had a special network for reducing. So that was built into the hardware of the Connection Machine, MapReduce. It was basically a MapReduce machine. And in my thesis, I called that map and reduce Alpha and Beta, that you could... basically, you'd reduce over any associative function, like add or average. And you could map any function. You could just repeat it on each of the data elements. And so that paradigm for programming, MapReduce, is actually used... actually it got popularised, probably through Sergey Brin, who was a Connection Machine programmer. Google used it to do their machines, even when they went on and didn't use Connection Machines, they still used that MapReduce paradigm and then some people that spun out of Google created this thing called Hadoop, and so now that's basically the way an awful lot of parallel programming is done. But it's all kind of derived from the actual hardware of the way that the Connection Machine worked.

Now basically, almost every big data computation on the Web or on the Cloud is done with this MapReduce paradigm, so any time you process big data, you use this method. It's a very simple method of parallel programming. The more general method of parallel programming that we developed did more complicated things than reduced. It did things like scan, where you got the partial products and so we actually developed a bunch of parallel programming techniques for the connection machine that many of them have been kind of forgotten. So it's sort of strange seeing technology go backwards, but on the Connection Machine you could take a FORTRAN program that was written as a sequential program and automatically compile it so that it would run in parallel on 64,000 processors. And as far as I know, that really doesn't exist now on the Cloud. So in some sense, the technology of parallel programming has kind of gone backwards. One thing that's happened is that in the early days of computers, the same people who designed the hardware did the programming. So there were many computers where I designed down to the transistor, actually the chip, I wrote the assembler, I wrote the compiler. You know, I wrote the operating system. So I kind of knew everything in the machine. And so when you programmed something, you knew exactly what operations were happening and how long it takes. An awful lot of people that program these days, because the machines have gotten more complicated, they're designed by lots of different people, so the people that designed the compilers are not the same people that designed the assembler, not the same people that designed the hardware, not the same people who are writing the programs. None of them really have a full knowledge of exactly what's going on at the next level. So a lot of people who are programmers these days don't have a real clear sense of exactly how their programs are getting executed. Which is one reason why many computer programs haven't gotten that much faster, even though computers have gotten millions of times faster.
So for instance, take a word processor. When computers did less than a million instructions a second, I used to use a word processor and it was generally fast enough, but occasionally would be annoyingly slow when I wanted to move a lot of text or something like that. Now computers are thousands of times faster, if not millions of times faster than they were in those days. And yet the programs that I use are often just a little bit too slow. And most of that is not because they're doing anything more complicated, but because the programming has gotten much less efficient. So somebody who writes a program in a high-level language may use an instruction that does something extremely complicated that they're not aware of in terms of how it's translated into the operations of the machine. And in fact often the programmers aren't even aware of like which computer is actually running the instruction. They just have some API and it does something and they don't really know how it does it. And so programming is no longer what it used to be. What it used to be is total control of the system that, although you didn't always think it through in detail, you always could think it through in detail. Whereas now it's more like magic, in a sense. I mean, the programmers know certain incantations and they know they have this effect and so they sort of cast spells without really a detailed understanding of what makes that spell work. And it sort of has to be, because the machines have gotten so complicated that no single human can understand them anymore.

In fact, I think that we're fundamentally changing our relationship with technology because of that. It used to be that machines were very simple things that a human could understand. A car. My first car, I could take apart, I could figure out what everything in it did, I could fix it if it broke. A car today has all these mysterious modules that even the car mechanics don't understand what they do. They just turn it on a test machine that was written by somebody they don't know and it tells them to replace this module. They have no idea what it did. So our relationship to machines has changed. They've become kind of incomprehensible in the way that nature used to be incomprehensible. I mean, nobody knew how a beanstalk grew, they just knew how to get a bean to grow. And now nobody really knows how a computer draws a picture on a screen, they just kind of know how to get the computer to draw a picture on a screen, in the way that the farmer used to know how to get the beans to grow.
And so that's one sense in which biology and technology are kind of becoming more and more alike. It's also they're becoming more and more alike because we're, of course, engineering biological things. So we can now edit the genes in the bean plant and kind of engineer to do what we want, or we can augment ourselves with peripherals like hearing aids and pacemakers and I'm pretty sure, pretty soon we'll have mental peripherals, so that we'll add memory and communications and calculating ability and so on to our minds. And so the distinction between what is a natural object and what's an engineered object I think is already starting to blur. And in some sense, our relationship to technology is becoming much more like our relationship to nature used to be. So I got to be alive in kind of this amazing short period when we could make these fantastically complicated machines, but we could still understand them. I got to... I'm getting to see the kind of end of that period, where now the machines are so complicated that they're like the Internet: nobody knows exactly what they are. They kind of understand about them, but they don't understand them in great detail. And so I got to be alive at that short period of time when we had complicated machines and could still understand them. They were something special. But I think we're going to go back to the relationship we used to have with nature, where we live in a very complicated world that we kind of negotiate with and kind of understand, but don't really understand in detail. I think that's almost inevitable.

I've taken to calling this idea the Entanglement, by analogy to the Enlightenment. So the Enlightenment was that brief period of time when we thought we could understand what was going on and control it. And we could reason about everything and design everything logically and it was the Age of Reason. But now, as things are getting more intertwined and complicated, we can't reason about them anymore, we have to negotiate with them, and so I think we're getting into what I'd call the Age of Entanglement instead of the Age of Enlightenment, where we no longer can make these hard distinctions between what's born and what's engineered or what we control and what we garden. So it's all becoming kind of like gardening. Our relationship with technology is more like the relationship a farmer has with his plants. We can kind of get it to do what we want, but we don't really understand quite how it's doing it.

The paradigm of the Enlightenment was that you understood something and then that gave you the power to control it. So for instance you could understand F=ma and gravity and you could control a rocket and aim it exactly so that it landed on the Moon. And that was kind of a fantastic paradigm and it got us a certain distance, but it only works for very simple systems. And in this new age we've got now the Entanglement, where we're dealing with these much more complicated systems, where it's not even clear that you break them into objects and causes and effects, but they're complicated bidirectional relationships with things. We need a different kind of paradigm. We can no longer take them apart and then break them down and understand them in their pieces. We have to deal with them as a whole, as an interconnected thing. So something like our global climate, we would like to be able to write down F=ma and the equations and say this is exactly how we're going to understand how CO2 affects the atmosphere, but I think that's unlikely that we're going to understand it in detail. I mean, of course we try and we should try, but the truth of the matter is a very complicated system that involves the oceans and it involves plants and it involves the chemistry of the atmosphere, and we're probably never really going to understand that whole system, but that doesn't mean that we can't influence it. We probably can't control it like we send a rocket to the moon, but we can influence in the same way that a farmer can grow a crop without actually understanding how the plants work and that we can learn ways of influencing it to come out in the direction that we want. So actually, I'm very optimistic about climate change, not because I think we're going to understand it and fix it in an engineering sense, but because I think we're going to learn how to kind of nudge and influence these complicated systems. And we're naturally good at doing that, and that's really the way that we've normally related to nature. It's the only way we've related to nature before the Enlightenment. And that way can work, and I think it can particularly work if we have the help of computers that have bigger capacity to think in that sort of systems way.
So I'm very optimistic that we're going to deal with climate change, not because I don't think it's real, but because we have way more capacity to adapt and intervene and respond than we give ourselves credit for.

Everybody has a kind of bucket list or a life list of things they want to do, and long ago I actually wrote mine down, of things I wanted to do in life. And for instance, 'drive a nuclear submarine' was on it. A lot of them are very implausible. I'll probably never get to do them. Like 'fly into space' or... but some of them that seemed implausible, like 'learn to fly a helicopter', I would find an opportunity to do. And whenever I got an opportunity to do something on my life list, even if it was really inconvenient, I would go and do it.
And one of the crazy ones was I always wanted to climb to the top of the Great Pyramid at Giza, but that's completely illegal these days, because it's kind of dangerous. It's pretty hard to climb. The blocks are like a metre tall and it takes you, like, half a day to do it. And they used to let you do it, but people would fall off and roll down and kill themselves, so they stopped allowing people to do it, and it probably wasn't that good for the pyramid, either. But it was always on my life list to do. And I had a friend who was an archaeologist in Egypt, down by the Great Pyramids, that I went to visit. And when I was there, I was telling him about my clock project. And he said, 'Oh, you should tell this project to the head of Antiquities Department', because this was before the year 2000 and he's trying to do in the year 2000. So there was a guy by the name of Zahi Hawass, who sort of controlled all the antiquities in Egypt. And so I had dinner with him and I told him about my clock project, and he said, 'Oh, well, you should put your clock on the top of the Great Pyramid of Giza and we'll have a celebration in the year 2000. It will ring in.'
Of course, I thought this was a really terrible idea, but of course I immediately said, 'Well, I'll have to up there and inspect it to see if it's suitable.' So Zahi Hawass wrote me a handwritten note giving me special permission to climb the pyramid. So I went up with my friend Matthew McCawley and Mark Lerner, who had written a wonderful book about the pyramids, who was really probably the world's expert on the pyramids. And we had this special permission that we could climb the Pyramid of Giza.
So we got there early in the morning and started climbing up, and it's actually pretty difficult, because it's a very inconvenient height. You had to pull yourself up every stone and then up to the next level. The pyramids were originally built with a marble cover, but that was salvaged off and used to make mosques centuries ago. So you sort of have the bare stone blocks underneath, and it's really pretty high. So we spent all day climbing up and sometime in the middle of the morning, the Egyptian Army, who was very carefully guarding the pyramids, notices these people climbing it. And they come out with bullhorns and tell us we have to get down and wave weapons at us. And by then we had climbed up about a third of the way and it really seemed way too difficult to go back down and explain to them that we had permission, so we just kept climbing and they got angrier and angrier and they started bringing more and more troops around and they called in the other troops and they started, like, aiming artillery at us. And of course, we knew they weren't going to shoot at us while we're climbing the pyramids. But they had what seemed like a whole division down there waiting for us. So we climbed up to the top of the pyramids and there's actually an area of about 20 square feet on the top. If you look at the Giza pyramid, it's sort of flat, because some of the best rock was on the top, and so they salvaged it by rolling it down. So it's a flat area, which sure enough would be big enough to build a clock, but...
So we hung out there and it was quite windy and then we climbed back down and, of course, by the time we got down, this whole division was waiting for us and they immediately came with all their rifles, and they'd been watching us all day, just waiting for us to come down. And then they surrounded us and then we pulled out our handwritten note by Zahi Hawass and they read it and shrugged their shoulders and cleared the way and we walked off.

Well, actually flying a helicopter was another thing I had always wanted to do, but it's not so easy to learn how to fly a helicopter, but when Dean Kamen was making the little thing that he eventually called the Segway. He went... he wanted suggestions as to how he should market it, what he should do with it. So it was very secret then and I went up to Dean's lab and I said, 'I'll tell you what, Dean, I'll do free consulting on this if you give me a lesson, you teach me how to fly a helicopter.' And he made this deal with me, Bran and Nathan Myhrvold, which is actually not so easy to teach people how to fly a helicopter, because it's sort of like riding a unicycle except if you fall off, you die. So he taught the three of us to fly helicopters in exchange for a bunch of advice we gave him about the Segway which he didn't take. Our advice to him was to license the technology and let other people figure out what products to make out of it, but he decided to do it himself. But the great thing was that we all got to learn to fly helicopters together and it's a harrowing experience to be in a helicopter with somebody learning to fly, because you're just always right on the edge of flipping over and it's done with two sticks. So Dean would always grab control just before we crashed, and that happened over and over again. And I wasn't particularly good at it. But then at some point what happens is that you click in and it works. It's like riding a bicycle, and you feel like you're doing nothing. So that was another thing that I got to check off, was helicopter flying.

There's still a lot of things on the list. There are some things that I've partially done that I want to do more of, like see the Northern Lights was on my list and I'd never seen the Northern Lights at all. And they're kind of hard to see, because you have to get the timing right with the phase of the moon and the weather and so I would watch when solar flares happened, when the moon phase happened, and actually just last year all the right things happened and I realised I would have a good chance of seeing them if I just flew to Alaska, so actually... I'd booked a flight to Alaska and I'd called... I was going to stop over in Seattle on the way. And I think I called you. I called... I'm not sure I reached you. I reached Neal Stephenson and said, 'Meet me at the airport, we're going to see the Northern Lights.' And we flew and he just had hours to meet me, so I flew from Burbank to Seattle, he got on the plane, we flew and we arrived at ten o'clock at night. We went out into the Yukon, we flew to Fairbanks and sure enough, saw the Northern Lights and it was just incredible. And then we left the next morning and flew back. So it was a lot of flying, but I also felt like it was so beautiful that I have to see them again. So that's still... there are some things. That's one that's on my life list that's sort of half done. I don't feel like I've really done it yet. I didn't get to see enough of it.

So there are things that are not done... we should go over the list sometime. There's still plenty that aren't. I check them off pretty regularly, but I add them even more often. Like another implausible one that was on it was the Ise Shrine, was something that in some sense is most like the 10,000 year clock. There's a shrine in Japan which is constantly being rebuilt. So every 20... it take them 20 years to build a copy of the shrine and then they move the gods from the old shrine to the new shrine and then they disassemble the old shrine and they build a new one, and that sort of tick-tock happens once every 20 years, and it's been happening for millennia now. And so... and they reconstruct all the treasures inside the shrine. And in fact, you've heard of national treasures, of the people in Japan, like a great potter or somebody who can weave kimonos. So those national treasures actually construct the treasures of the Ise Shrine. So for the next tick... and they bury the old ones. So around this garden are buried the treasures for centuries and centuries. So I had always wanted to be there for the tick, but of course only a few people can physically be there. It's very small and you have to be invited.
But a friend of mine, Dan Erasmus, heard this was on my life list and somehow made friends with people in Japan and the last tick, I got invited to be there and so we were some of the few Westerners that were actually there to witness the moving of the treasures, the tick of the shrine to the new shrine. So that was a fantastic event and we decided that... there's a tradition in Japan of a bottle keep tradition, which we've copied in the Long Now, which is you leave a bottle in the bar that's your bottle and then you come back and... so we decided to leave a... to buy a bottle at Ise and then come back in 20 years and see if it was still there. And, you know, we weren't sure that they would like this idea, but we went to a very small bar that does this and we bought a bottle of whiskey and of course we ended up telling them what we were doing and they loved this idea, so we signed the bottle and they put it like in front of them, this half-empty bottle of whiskey and they put it there right behind the bar and the barkeeper said, 'You know, if we're still in business next time the Ise shrine ticks, you can come and drink the other half of the bottle.'

I always had strange vehicles in Cambridge, but one of the strangest I had was, again, something that had been on my life list I always wanted to own, which was an amphibious car. When I was a kid, I saw one of these Amphicars drive into the water and I was, like, I want one of those. And so when I became a grown-up, I remembered that and would always look for them for sale. And I finally found one for sale up in Maine, and so I got it and brought it down, and I'd love it because it looked kind of an ordinary car, except it had two propellers in back, but it was a convertible. But people didn't necessarily realise what it was until you drove it into the water. So for instance I, one time, had picked my friend up, Ottavia, at the airport. She came in from Italy, she was a little jetlagged, and we were driving along Memorial Drive and there was a lot of traffic and I was just like, 'Oh, I hate this traffic, let's just take the river.' And I drove off across the grass and just drove into the Charles. She completely freaked out and started taking off her shoes to jump out. But it worked fine.
And the first few times I would do it, people... they would call the police. And the police would show up, because people would report a car had driven into the river. But what I did was just offer to give the police rides. It was never a problem, and after a while, they knew about me. And it was good. This was in the days when I was dating and I could just drive along the river and see the girls on the beach. And any time I ever... like, I would just say, 'Hey, you want a ride?' And I was never refused. They would just always hop right in my amphibious car. But it was a very marginal thing, because it leaked a lot, so it had a pump that was constantly operating to pump it out, because it had lots of seals for the wheels to come out and the doors and so it was very dependent on that pump operating. And it was an electric pump, but the engine had to be running to charge the battery to run the pump, and it was a pretty unreliable engine, and occasionally the engine would get wet or something, and stop. And then I'd have sudden death auto repair out in the middle of the Charles River, where I'd have to pop the hood and climb over and climb into the engine and I'd have to get the engine repaired before the battery ran out and the Amphicar sunk.
And so I had my ether to wash off all the water and I'd fiddle with the wire and adjust the fuel pump or whatever and every time, somehow, I would manage to get it working, so it never sunk.

One day Dave Paterson came. So Dave Paterson was a consultant to Thinking Machines, because we were building a new kind of disks. I just... I couldn't find disks that were fast enough to keep up with my computers, so I designed RAID disk arrays, and Dave Paterson was really interested in that, so he was coming to visit. And in those days, video cameras were very large, so he had a big shoulder-mounted video camera, and I offered to take him out onto the Amphicar, and so he brought his video camera, his big huge video camera. And he also happened to be wearing a shirt that had Russian lettering on it. It said: Peace on Earth. I don't know why he was wearing it, but he was wearing a T-shirt. It was written in Russian. And so we drove out onto the Charles in that area kind of down by MIT. And I was really surprised, because usually there's lots of boats on the Charles, but it was completely empty. And that was interesting. So I was driving along and then I noticed this big marine helicopter start to land on the heliport that's across on the Boston side. And the marine helicopter starts to land, and then all of a sudden it takes off without landing. I thought, that's really strange. And then another helicopter, another marine helicopter comes, and it comes right over us and starts hovering. And there's all these marines with guns pointing at us, and saying, 'Put your hands up immediately.' And it turns out, we didn't notice, but Dave had been filming all of this with his big shoulder-mounted... and so we put it down and it's like, 'Yes, put that down.' We're following the instructions, but the helicopter is starting to wash up on... and I only had that much freeboard, and it's practically about to sink us. So we go to shore as they instructed and there we're met by a whole bunch of other marines. And it turns out that the president, who was Reagan at that point, was visiting Boston. We didn't know about this. And they had cleared off the entire river. So they had cleared all the boats off the river so that they could land the helicopter with no-one around, and they had it blocked off on either side. And what had happened was that we had just driven in between the roadblocks and just happened to head toward the helicopter, because it was interesting seeing this helicopter landing, with this big shoulder-mounted, could have been a rocket launcher, with a Russian T-shirt. So when they saw that coming in, they... they scrambled the helicopter, they pulled Reagan out of there, sent in the marines to get these guys. But so they held us for a while, while they interviewed us, until they established that we were totally innocent, and they let us go.
[Q] What happened to the car?
Well, so when I left Boston, there was another guy that had amphibious cars, and he offered to take care of it for me, so he had a warehouse where he kept it, and so I put it in his garage, but he's moved away, I've lost contact with him, so someplace out there I still have an amphibious car and I still have the registration. Actually, I have two registrations, because I had to register it as a boat and as a car. And sadly, I had to pay tax on it twice. But... so I still have it registered to me. Someplace out there is an amphibious car that I own. Maybe someday I'll find it again.

When I was a little kid, I told you read Have Space, Will Travel. But there was another Heinlein book called Rocket Ship Galileo, which was about some kids that decided to seriously build a rocket ship. And that was always something that appealed to me, but it actually really sort of, kind of happened, because Jeff Bezos decided to really do it and the same time Jeff called up and told me that he was going to fund the clock, he also said he was going to make a space company, because he thought that was sort of a fundamental piece of human destiny and it was something important to get going on. And so we had a wonderful time. He got... he had Neal Stephenson, we had you, a bunch of very interesting people that were sort of broad thinkers, that we all got together to think about how would you get into space.
And what was wonderful in the beginning is it was no holds barred as to what we thought about. So we thought about, for instance, laser propulsion or nuclear propulsion or firing out of giant cannons, slingatrons and crazy ways of making rocket engines like Gatling guns. But I think maybe my contribution with it was because I had done a lot of work with NASA, modelling engines and I think I'm the one that kept saying, 'Well, you know, chemical rockets actually work.' And so maybe... I feel a little bad about that, because in a way I think it would be much more interesting if we had done other things, but eventually somebody came along with this scheme called BSSTO, Boosted Single Stage to Orbit, that was an evolution of... somebody figured it was just barely possible to make a single stage to orbit rocket, but if you just... a little booster stage that got it going, then it became almost easy, and so we decided that was going to be the concept, was to do the Boosted Single Stage to Orbit. So the first part was to build the first stage, the booster stage, and then once we decided that, then a different set of people was kind of necessary to do it. Because up until then, it had been people like Neal and some machinists and, you know, Neal would make... I remember Neal made this crazy thing which – I forget what he called it – but it was a chain, basically. It threw a chain up into the air and rolled the chain very fast, and weird, really crazy stuff like that. And we bought a bunch of old surplus equipment from a gear-making company that went out of business, and so it was all very much an amateur operation. But once we actually started building rocket ships, we sort of needed to get more serious about it.

So there was a kind of overlap when the initial kind of hackers were building something, but the new real aerospace engineers were coming in. And we were... one of the things that Jeff [Bezos] decided was going to be different about this is that we were going to recover the rockets, which of course has to be, if you're going to have sustainable presence. You have to not use vehicles just once.
And so we decided we were going to have a vertical landing system, rather than a kind of space shuttle kind of horizontal landing system. And that we needed to test that out, so before we were actually going to test that on rockets, somebody had a crazy idea, I don't know who, but: let's just get some jet engines and try it with jet engines. And one problem is jet engines are not really designed to be operated up and down, but we got some old surplus, I think, Harrier jet engines. And we made this crazy thing. I say we – the Blue people did. I just watched. But made this crazy thing called Charon, which was four jet engines which had a laser gyroscope in them so that it could take off and then land vertically. And that was the first vehicle that Blue made. And it was the first thing that we had flown. But it was kind of an overlap project, because it was kind of done by the initial hackers, but the aerospace people were already coming on board. And they kind of looked down on this admittedly stuck-together thing. But Jeff made a great decision, which was, you know: let's go ahead and fly it, if we can fly it by a certain time.
And so the criterion went... the aerospace wanted to have, well... we have to able to prove this thing will be able to fly before we fly it, but we sort of ran out of time, so by the time it came to test it, we all showed up and they switched the criteria to: well, we're going to fly it unless we can prove that it doesn't work. So we all showed up. You were there. Neal [Stephenson] was there. Jeff was there. And we woke up early in the morning and this crazy jet system, which really seemed to have almost no... it had never been tested. The chances of it working seemed very, very slim, but it took off, hovered, flew beautifully and then came back and landed perfectly. And that was just such a thrilling moment, because it had no right to work and we were just all excited. And it is still one of my very favourite pictures in the world, is the picture of you, me, Jeff, Neal and Mark [Lerner] sitting, smoking cigars in front of this recently-landed thing, which is probably full of jet fuel. I mean, it's crazy that we're sitting there smoking cigars in front of it as it just came down.
And Blue... after that, we realised we really didn't have good safety procedures in place. We didn't. So we got considerably more tightened down after that and everything else Blue did from then on was much professional. But I'm not sure that any launch has ever been as fun as that one, because none of them have ever been so unlikely to have worked.
[Q] It was in a farmer's field in Moses Lake, Washington?
Yes, that's right. Farmer's field. It was quite wonderful. Of course, now Blue has gone on to make the very first... well, I remember that first vertical landing was successful. That was a huge deal. We were so excited about that. And then, yes, the first recovery of the flight capsule, and now that thing flew five times now. But some of the early launches, it was really... I remember some of the early ones did not go well.

But I remember how exciting it was, that first vertical landing, because we really didn't know it was going to work.
[Q] That was before drones?
No, I'm talking about the first rocket vertical landing, and the first recovered rocket. That was extraordinary, because the previous one had blown up, basically. Not... and so we really weren't sure if it was going to work and we didn't have a spare if it didn't. And we really would have set things way back if it hadn't worked. And we understood the reason the previous one had gone wrong. I mean, you just learn by practice on these things. But I remember that first landing, because it came down and it did this little kind of... as it landed, it was programmed to land not just on the landing pad, but in the exact centre of the landing pad. So it came back down at supersonic velocity and you heard this boom, which was delayed. So you heard the boom just as the puff of smoke went up from just blowing up the smoke from the desert. And so what we saw was it came down – it comes down very fast – and then, just as it's coming down, it did this kind of little Marilyn Monroe scootch as it... and then the clouds went up, because it blew up so much dust. We couldn't see what had happened. And then we heard this boom, which had nothing to do with the landing. That was just the sonic boom of it coming in. And then the dust cleared and there it was sitting, like, right on the centre of the launch pad in perfect shape. That was a great moment.

You know, I worry about drone warfare, because I worry about... what's happened with warfare is it's all conducted by remote control now. So for the people who are doing it, it's like a video game. And I think it's very... it doesn't have the visceral... I mean if you have to stab someone with a spear. With a spear, you sort of get to see their suffering and there's a human element to it that I think limits warfare, but if you're just operating a little cursor on a screen and push a button like a video game, I don't think you really identify with that person in the same way. So I think, well, it certainly makes warfare safer. It kind of sanitises it in a way that hides the horror of what's really going on. So I worry about that from a moral standpoint. I've never worked on those weapon systems and I really don't want to.

My kids were always builders and they were always kind of ingenious in the things they would construct, but they weren't always safe about it. I remember once we had this long, long stairway that was almost two storeys high, but it was a straight stairway at Toluca Lake, and Pati and I went off to some dinner party, and I don't know where the nanny was or whatever, but we came home and they had constructed this kind of slide down the stairway. They'd put blankets so that it was slippery. And they had put, in a cardboard box, India with a helmet on, and put padding around her with teddy bears and everything like that. And they were just to, like, do the great sled experiment of pushing India down the stairs. So we arrived just in time to stop that one. But they were always building things and actually it was kind of wonderful that very often for Christmas presents, they would give me things that they had constructed, and those were always my most precious Christmas presents.

The kids were always getting into accidents, particularly the boys, but the boys were quite immune to pain. So if they complained about something even a little bit, we had to take them to the emergency room immediately, because they always had a broken bone or something like that. But they rarely complained, so sometimes they would go for a while with a broken bone without saying anything, or... I remember once I was building a treehouse with the boys, back in back of our house at Toluca Lake, and we were running with boards and hammers and nails and Pati came out and started screaming and, like, 'What is going on?' And I hadn't noticed, but Noah had gotten like a big gash in his head and he was covered with blood, and he didn't say anything and he just kept on working and I was so unobservant I didn't notice, and she rushed him off to the hospital and he got 12 stitches. But left to his own, he probably never would have even complained.

India, whenever she did something, she would concentrate on it until she perfected it. And it killed her to have any tiny little mistake. And so for example, when she learned to jump horses, she really was just fantastic at it and practiced it and she actually became one of the very best pony jumpers in California. And in fact she was in the finals in picking the very best pony jumper. And at the last minute, she pushed the horse just a little too hard, and it stumbled a little bit, and she lost by one point to somebody else. And it just absolutely killed her that she wasn't the perfect... that she'd made this tiny little mistake or the horse had made a tiny little mistake. And I could just see that she was all ready to double down on it, and I have to get more serious about training. And I just... and I thought, well, this is really probably not the very best thing for her to be spending her time on right now, so I let a day or two go by and then I asked her if she'd go for a walk with me, and we went for a walk. And I said, 'I know how upset you are about coming in second in California.' And she's, like, 'Well, no, it was my mistake. I'll just do better next year. I'll...'
I was like, 'Okay, well, I'm sure you could do that, and certainly you can do that if you want to, but I just want to say that I think you can do more important things in life, and you need to choose how you spend your time. But being the very, very best pony jumper is maybe not the most important thing for you to do.' And she's like, 'No, Dad, this is important to me.' And I was, like, 'Okay, well, you decide what's important to you.' And then about a week later, she said: 'I've decided to put aside pony jumping for a little while.' And she started working on graphic arts and something else that became important to her.
I hope she does go back to horses sometimes, because she was really good at it, but she had sense enough to realise that maybe that wasn't the thing to double down on. But it wasn't her natural instinct. Her natural instinct was always just to get it perfectly.

I had just been separated for a very short time and hadn't really started dating yet. I kind of knew I needed to, but I was a little hesitant to figure out how online dating services worked or get friends to introduce me to friends. I was... just hadn't dealt with any of that. And I was up in San Francisco and I went to a party, which was a birthday party for my friend Norman Lear. And when I was at the party, I met a woman that looked familiar to me and I'd kind of seen her at TED and I kind of knew her first name was Taylor. I didn't know what her other name was, but she seemed really nice. So I thought, 'Okay, well, maybe this is the way I should start dating again, or...' So I asked her for her phone number, but being somewhat out of practice, I wasn't really sure, like, I had written it down right or how to... so I, like, right standing there, I called her just to make sure what it was and connected to her. I guess I had her call me and that way I got her last name, too, which was important. Anyway, I had her phone number and her name and then I left the party and I thought, 'Gee, I wonder how long after you get a girl's phone number you should wait until you call them these days.' And so I waited 45 minutes. After 45 minutes, I called her up and she was walking home from the party, which a little bit surprised me, because nobody walks in San Francisco and it was pretty late at night. And I realised, 'Gosh, I don't really know that much about her' and so I said, 'Would you like to come over to my house for a drink?' And she said, 'Yes, sure.' And I said, 'Well, would you like me to send an Uber for you?' I didn't know how to do any of this. And she's like, 'No, I can get an Uber myself.' And so she came over to Sausalito. And I was a little nervous and she walked in, and I said, 'So can I get you something to drink?' and she said, 'Sure, I'd like some wine.' And I'm like, 'Would you like red or white?' And she said, 'White.'
And so I go down to the basement where I used to keep the wine and discover all the wine is gone. There is no wine. So I go up a little, I'm saying, 'I'm sorry, we don't have any.' She's like, 'Oh, that's okay, I'll take red.' I'm like, 'Well, actually, we don't have any wine at all.' And she's like, 'Oh, that's alright. I'll just have some tea.' And so I go into the closet and of course there's no tea. And she's like, 'Well, just some sparkling water.' And of course, no sparkling water. So eventually I gave her some tap water and I think she kind of realised I wasn't really... I didn't really have my routine down for dating here, but she was smart enough to suggest that maybe we should have another date on Saturday and that she would provide the food and the drink. And so we agreed to get together for a hike, and so our first real date was the next Saturday and she brought a picnic lunch and we hiked up through Muir Woods and really hit it off and had a wonderful hike. And then it became clear, actually, we're a pretty great match. And... which was a little scary to me, because I had just decided to move to Boston and she was in San Francisco. But she picked up and moved here and it's been just wonderful. And the interesting thing is after about a year I was going through my pictures, and I actually had some photos that I'd taken on my phone from that first hike we took. And I looked at the date and realised it had been Valentine's Day. So our anniversary is Valentine's Day.

One of the fun things about Applied Invention is that we don't hire people because they have a particular skill. We hire people because they're good at learning new skills and they learn lots of new things. And one of the ways that we interview people... Bran and I invented it at Applied Minds, which is we had this box of really interesting weird things, like a Space Shuttle tile or a variable gradient lens or a microwave device and we'd just open that box up in front of someone and see what they do. And there's a lot of people who are just paralysed and they wait for instructions, and those aren't the people we hire. The ones we hire are the ones that immediately reach into the box, start grabbing things, start talking about the things. They don't need any instructions. And they... 'What is this? Oh, that's a strange... this has a high density... oh, is that actually an amorphous diamond?' And they get... you can sort of tell both about what they know, but also about how they approach things that they don't know. So it was a great interview technique, but the funniest person I ever interviewed on it was once Robin Williams came by to visit and I, just for a kick, said, 'Oh, let's put you through our standard interview.' And I opened up the box and Robin, like, picked up this microwave. He says, 'Oh, an alien artificial insemination device' and he just started from there, and he just had us all rolling over, going through every item in the box. So it was a fun thing to watch. But it was also sort of a sad thing to watch, because he was kind of always on. He couldn't turn it off and it was clear that underneath he some deep sadness that he... he needed to cover up. So he was, in a way, a lot of fun to be around, but after you were around him a while, it became very difficult. So probably not somebody we would have hired, but it was fun to do the interview.
[Q] And what percentage of people passed?
Well, I don't know that it's exactly a pass/fail thing, because some people would zoom into a certain kind of thing and show deep knowledge about it, and other people would not have a lot of knowledge but have a great deal of curiosity and innovativeness, so I don't know that we did quite a pass/fail, but it was definitely a factor that we'd take into account. You know, interviewing people is something that... you know, I've hired thousands of people now, and you would think I would have gotten better at it, but it's a hard thing to do, and it's a funny situation, because in some sense, it's very important to them, and so... and they feel like they need to put on a certain view of themselves.

The best interview is if you can convince people you're on the same side as they are, trying to figure out whether the job is right for them. Usually, by the time I get to interview someone, they've already been technically vetted. So they're qualified for the job, but the question is much more, are they a fit? And sometimes that's a matter of intuition, and there's a fine line between intuition and prejudice and I... actually, one of the most successful interviews I think I ever did seemed like a disaster at the time, but I was interviewing for a senior software manager and I had a woman who had been recommended to me that had worked at one of the big software companies, and had had really a career that showed that she had been very successful in her projects. She kept on getting bigger and bigger projects, more and more promotions, and this was a very, well, it was Microsoft, a very hard-nosed company, so she clearly was competent, because she kept getting promoted in an environment like that.
And so I interviewed her, but something seemed a little off, and so there's a question that I ask sometimes of: what would you do if you weren't doing this? And when I asked her that question, she lit up and said, 'Oh, I would be a sculptor.' And I said, 'Really, tell me about that.' And she started talking about her sculpture and she just got all bright and happy and whatever it was that had been bothering me went away. And then I said to her, 'I was like, you know, you seem much happier when you talk about this than when you talk about software management.' And she sort of went back, 'Oh no, I'm very serious about being a software manager. Sculpture is just a hobby.' You know, and so I'm thinking, 'I don't know, my intuition is this is not right, but do I have a... since women are so rarely software managers, am I being prejudiced against her, or...?' But something just didn't feel right. So I listened to her for a while and I said, 'You know, I just have to tell you, you're just not convincing me. You just don't seem as enthusiastic about this as you were when you were talking about your sculpture.' And then she started doubling down, talking about it. But then she started... I could see that she was starting to cry and she realised I could see she was starting to cry and then she got all embarrassed and she... and I felt terrible and she's like, 'This has never happened to me.' And I was like, 'Yes, I know Microsoft. I realise. And I know your career and I know this has never happened to you.' And she's like, 'Yes, this is really...' And so I felt really bad and I said, 'Okay, I'm sorry I really touched on... I got too personal there, let's... why don't you just come back tomorrow and we're going to just start the whole interview over again. Just from the beginning. We'll forget about today. And I got her some Kleenex and we agreed to get together the next day. And she left and then, sadly, she cancelled the interview the next day. And I thought, 'Oh, I kind of blew that, because she was incredibly qualified and I really felt like I had mis-interviewed her.' So I felt really bad about that for a few days, but then after about three days I came in and there was this huge, beautiful bouquet of flowers on my desk and a note from her, saying, 'Quit my job at Microsoft, off to be a sculptor, thank you.' And I don't know what happened to her, but I think whether she decided to stay a sculptor or she just tried it and decided she wanted to go back to software management, I'm sure she's fine. I'm sure it worked out for her. And I'm glad she did that.

I was actually thinking this story happened with Chris [Sykes], but it happened with somebody. I was coming... I think from... it was a BBC crew that came to Thinking Machines. And they had heard about my fire engine and so we did the interview and I had a radio mic on. And then whoever was doing it said, 'You know, I've heard about your fire engine. Can I have a ride in it?' I'm like, 'Sure, I'll take you for a tour.' And so I climbed into the fire engine with the filmmaker, and unbeknownst to me, the sound guy just followed along with the radio system, and he climbed on the back of the fire engine. And so I had a hot mic on. I'd forgotten about the mic. And he was listening just to get the sound quality or whatever. And I was driving along Memorial Drive and there's a spot where Memorial Drive has a very, very low bridge, a very low underpass. And I said to the person sitting next to me, I said, 'Don't worry. It looks like we're going to crash into this bridge, but I've done it before. We actually have a couple of inches to spare.' And I drove under the underpass. Well, apparently the guy that was listening to the mic, he said, 'It's really unusual, I'm not usually listening to the content of what you're saying, but suddenly I heard you say this, and I'm sitting up on the back of the fire engine, and you're heading toward this underpass.' And he... so he plasters himself to top of the fire engine and he said, 'No, you exaggerated, you had at least a foot to spare.'
[Q] And you didn't know he was there?
I could've killed a radio guy, a sound guy. I felt really bad about that one. I would have felt bad.

Actually, the first time that I met Chris [Sykes] and Lottie, I was staying over at Feynman's house and it was when they were filming that original Nova show about Feynman. And in those days, of course, scientists had heard about Feynman, he was very famous to physicists, but he wasn't really that well known to the world. And I knew what an amazing person he was, but he really hadn't had a lot of forums to talk to the public. And so I got to watch them shoot some of those interviews in the garden and I don't know if they remember, but I remember meeting them then and thinking, this is kind of a great thing. And of course when the film came out, it really was great, because it had Feynman talking about the pleasure of finding things out and science, and I remember when he was talking about the beauty that he saw in a rose versus the beauty his artist friend Zorthian saw in a rose. That... I remember that being filmed and then I remember seeing it in the film. And it really kind of captured something wonderful about Feynman and shared it with a lot of other people. And that, I think, was kind of a turning point for Feynman, because I think it made him realise and I think it made other people realise that what he had to say was more than just to scientists. And so when he wrote that book with Ralph Leighton, that was a... that became sort of a follow-on to people who got interested in him through the Nova thing. But I've always felt like the Feynman that survives and is still alive and with us today was very much a collaborative creation of Feynman himself, but it never would have happened without Chris and Lottie making that film.
And it sort of pushed it over and caused him to stay alive in a way that influenced a lot more people. And I know that was very important to him, because when, toward the end of his life, he had cancer. And I would always go visit him in Pasadena and he'd always tell me funny stories. One time we were walking in the hills above Pasadena and he was telling me this funny story about how he had read his blood pressure charts and said that when his doctors came, he said they said, 'How are you feeling today?' And he was saying, 'Well, I feel sort of like my blood pressure is up about three points' and they said, 'That's amazing, Doctor Feynman. You know, most people can't actually tell their blood pressure.' You know, he was telling all these silly stories about what he was doing with his doctors. And they were funny stories. But in the course of it, he was also telling me, like, his condition and he was telling me that the cancer had come back and was kind of out of control and I was realising he was also telling me he was about to die. And I got kind of sad and quiet. We were walking along. And he said, 'What's the matter?' And of course with Dick you just always had to be truthful, so I said, 'I'm sad because I'm realising you're about to die.' And he said, 'Yes, that bugs me sometimes, too.' But he said, 'You know, but you realise that, even though you're going to die, a lot of the good stuff about you is in the stories you told or the stories that you created in other people's minds, and that lives on after you.' And so I feel pretty good about that. And so I always felt like that was really a great gift, not just to the rest of the world, but also to Dick, that they made those films and we still have him. And in many ways, he is very much still alive and still inspiring people and still influencing people. So I'm grateful for that.

This is my life list. It's actually got... most of the stuff on this is actually crossed off, I'm noticing. Or half of it is, anyway. It does keep getting longer faster than it gets shorter. So it's kind of in categories. The first category is rides. So things I still have never done: I have never landed an airplane; I've never ridden on a rocket ship; I've never gotten to drive a tank, and I've never gotten to ride in a deep sea bathysphere. So those are on my list, but I see the rides, I've done an awful lot of them, like flying a helicopter and hovercraft and blimps, so... Like driving in the nuclear submarine, that got crossed off, so I think I'm doing pretty well in that category.
The next one is places to go. I recently got to cross off the Galapagos. I didn't really cross off Papua New Guinea. It was on my list, but I feel like I still have to go back, so it's in the sort of half crossed off version. But you know I still have some places like the South Pole, which I really want to go to, I've never been. Easter Island, I've never been to. Actually, I see I still have Borneo. I can cross that off. I've now been to Borneo, although I don't really feel... I think that's going to have to go in the halfway list. I don't really feel like I've seen Borneo. So... and yes, I've never really spent time on the Amazon. I definitely have to do that. And I've never been to New Zealand, so... Those are definitely in the category to be done.
And then there are sort of man-made sites that I want to go and see. Like here, well, like the Truk Lagoon is supposed to be a really interesting place to go diving, where all the sunken ships are. I've never seen the carving of Crazy Horse, and that's definitely on the category. Or in Budapest, there's the... there's supposedly a place that has still tube carriers, a tube where... pneumatic tubes, and there's the switching station where they take an envelope out of one tube and move it to another tube, and I really want to see that while they're still doing it. I've never been to Luxor, I've never been to St Petersburg, so there's a very long list here of places like that that I need to go visit. I've actually never even seen Mount Rushmore, so... Like, I really want to go into the... some of them are sort of half done. I just went to Afghanistan, but I've never to the lapis lazuli mines in Afghanistan, so that's on the list. And I would love to go to the Gobi Desert in China. I've never seen the Great Wall. So there's a long list of those. I've definitely... like there's St Patrick's Well in Orvieto, which I think is a lot like my spiral staircase, except it's a much cleverer design. It's a double helix so that people can be going down to the well and other people can be going up that Leonardo Da Vinci built. I've always wanted to visit that. And I've always wanted to go into Water Tunnel Number Three that's going into New York that's being constructed, that's going to bring water into New York. This huge construction under New York that most New Yorkers don't even know exists.

On the other hand, I have gotten to go to lots of place like Yucca Mountain and the Ise Shrine and Petra, places like that that were on... they were aspirational. Machu Picchu, that I went on just because they were on the list. So I've got a very long list of those, some of which were even more exciting than I expected, like Monticello. I actually... I always wanted to go to Monticello and I got... the Smithsonian invited me to give a Monticello lecture, which came with, like, having dinner sitting around Jefferson's table at Monticello, which is something I'd never even dreamed of doing, so it was pretty exciting.
Some of them I got just in time, like there was something called the Time Museum, which I visited because it was on my list, and it was really out of the way in some little shopping centre in Illinois, one of the greatest collections of clocks ever gathered together. And then it closed down and disbanded right after I visited it. So I've learned that if something is on my list and I get an opportunity to do it, I definitely do it. I don't delay, even if it's very inconvenient, which that was. Lots of big telescopes are on here, like the Keck telescope or the giant Magellan telescope. Those have been some of the most fun visits. And I still feel, you know, there's a few things... actually, the Trinity site, that was on the list for a long time. I should cross that one off, but I wanted to go to the Trinity site, you know, the actual spot, which you can only do one day a year, but I did manage to go. And that's quite a strange scene, of the strange people that show up there. But I used to hike in the Oscura Mountains, very close to there, and I actually had gotten some Trinitite already. But it was fun going to the site, as much for the social scene of the people that show up there as anything else.
So there's a whole category of places where things are made. So for instance, I've never really wanted diamond cutters in action. I want to visit the SNO neutrino detector, which is down in a mine in Sudbury. I've actually been down in the mine, but I never got down to the detector. It took too long. So that's on my list. I want to see those giant machines that make Cheetos. There are not very many of them in the world, they make all the Cheetos. But... and I've never actually seen a ball bearing mill. On the other hand, there's lots of other things that were sort of on that list that I got to see, of car factories or the set of Star Trek. JJ Abrams took me around on that one. That was always... that's one I got to cross off. So I think factories are pretty fun. The watch factory, the Swatch watch factory, that was amazing. So those were things formerly on the list, now crossed off. Oil rigs, goldmines.

There's some natural phenomena that I've never seen that I really want. Like ball lightning or sprites. I've never seen a sprite. I've never seen breaking ice into the sea. I definitely want to do that. And I've actually never seen a total eclipse. I've seen annular eclipses and I've seen partial eclipses and I've seen total lunar eclipses, but I've never seen a total solar eclipse, so there's not too many more coming up in the next few decades, so I've got to get on that one. I've tried to, a few times, but never had the right alignment of weather and... but yes, I would definitely like to do that. Like I said, the aurora is still on the list. Even though I've seen it, I want to see it more. I don't feel like I've seen that enough. But I have seen things like active volcanoes, lava flowing into the sea, quicksand, the Magellanic Clouds. You know, they're all kinds of things that I'd dreamed of seeing and actually got to, so...
[Q] Have you seen the green flash?
Green flash is on the list to do. It's right there, but I have never actually seen it. I've looked for it many times, but the closest I came, there was once a perfect setup to see it, I was out on the beach, and then one of the kids needed a diaper change, and I ran inside to change the diaper and everybody else saw the green flash except for me. So I've never seen a green flash. It's a... that's a tough one.

Plants and animals. I've never seen orangutans in the wild. I was hoping to do that in Borneo. I didn't. That's why I don't feel like I've really been to Borneo. I've never seen glow-worms in a cave. I've never seen a giant squid. Not many people have, but I want to see one. I've never actually seen a tiger in the wild. I've never seen a platypus in the wild, either, so... And I would love to see the migration of the Monarch butterflies in Mexico. That's apparently quite a sight. I haven't seen... they're sort of partially done, I've never seen enough blue whales. I want to see a lot more whales than I have. And there lots of variation of whales that I've never seen. And I do want to do a visit where I get up close to the gorillas in the wild. I saw gorillas in Africa quite a lot, but they were always in captivity. I've never come up them close in the wild, so I'd love to do that. But I have seen a lot of these others of Komodo dragons and giant sea turtles and toucans in the wild. Big sharks, that kind of thing. Those were on my list. I have seen a platypus in the zoo.

Writing and publishing. You know, I've always wanted to publish a poem. I've never done that. Or publish a cartoon. Or write a script of some kind. I've never done that. I've never published a science fiction story, although I've written a few. And of course everybody wants to write a novel, and so one of these days. Fiction, piece of fiction novel. I've never really published a good theorem. Not that I felt any good about... I had a good theorem once, but I didn't publish it, and then it became widely known about sets and multisets. But I have written a book and I've written lyrics for songs and actually gotten paid royalties for them. So there are some things like that. I've been a press guy with a press pass covering a news story. Those are pretty fun.

So there's a category called 'Build and create'. So I've always wanted to make a lightning strike, for instance, cause a lightning strike to happen. I've never done that. And actually this is one that's getting close to getting done, but I've always wanted to build a new kind of telescope and actually I guess I'm very close to have done that. I've got a very cool new telescope design that is perfect for doing the thing that you really want to do with a telescope, which is show a child the stars, and show a child the planets, actually, the rings around Saturn and the moons of Jupiter. And actually, telescopes are terrible for that, because if you had it set up on that magnification and the eyepiece is so that you can see it, by the time you lift the child up, they jiggle the telescope and they can't see it. So I want the telescope that you can set up in the backyard and it's perfect for showing a child the rings of Saturn. And I think I've figured out how to do it and I've actually built a prototype, almost finished. So I'm looking forward to showing you that. I want to build a submarine one day. I've never synthesised a virus. I've always wanted to build a different kind of helicopter that has a counter-rotating... it doesn't have a tail.
And there are various... there's a lot of to build things. Those are fun things. I've sort of vicariously gotten to build a rocket through Jeff [Bezos] building a rocket, so that's not... that's on the list but, you know, I put that in the kind of halfway thing, since I didn't really get to do it, but I kind of got to be around it being done. I've built little bottle rockets, I suppose, but I'm talking about a real rocket.
Actually, this is a pretty long list of stuff that I wanted to build and a pretty long list of stuff that I built. You know, designing chips, building a robot dinosaur. Actually, yes, these are some of the most fun ones. Actual building. I love building things. One thing I realised about myself is I'm happiest when I'm building something.

I've got a lot of things to learn on the list. I do want to learn how to land a plane. I want to learn how to tango. I actually have always wanted to play 12-bar blues on a piano. That just looks like a lot of fun. I wish I was really good at some magic trick. I'm not really good at any sleight of hand tricks. Some of them are easy. I should learn how to snowboard. I want to know how to build a drystone wall. I've never done that. I want to build a house. I've never done that. That's an ambition.
And actually I wish that I knew how to touch type. In fact, I've even thought of... this isn't on the list, but it should be. But I kind of want to learn to read again, because the way that I learned to read, I read pretty slowly. And I think it's because I learned how to read it phonetically, and so new words that I've learned I read much faster than old words that I learned as a child. And I realise there's sort of two different ways of reading: one where you make the sound and one... so mostly I read by making the sound and that slows me down. But I wish I could sight read like Chinese read characters, just see the whole word at once. And I thought maybe the way to do that would be to learn to read again by learning to read upside down. I'd just start all over from scratch, but try to do it the right way so I learn to sight read. So that's on my list. I should try to do that one day. And maybe I'll be able to read much faster if I start from scratch, sort of knowing where I'm heading, rather than starting by sounding out words.
So there's lots to learn. There's a lot of things in that skills category. I want... I'd love to learn how to draw. I never really learned how to do that. If I had my life to do over again, I would have done that one early. That would have been really useful. Right now, when I design things, I make very, very crude sketches and then I hand it to people who really know how to draw and they make them into better sketches, and I've always felt that was a handicap I had. I should really be able to do that myself. I'm very... I have done a lot of these things that are fun, like learning how to find my position with a sextant or making a dovetail joint. You know, there are some skills there that were on my list and I finally got around to doing. I sort of have a thrill category, which are things like paragliding and bungee-jumping, kitesurfing. I should probably do those pretty soon, before I get too fragile. I'm not so good about doing those. I'm actually not much of a thrill-seeker. That's not a very long list for me, things I want to do there. And actually, I see that, even on that list, there's not that many that I've done. I do want to ride on one of those waterjet platforms that, you know, the sort of flying saucers that are driven by waterjets.
[Q] What about wingsuit flying? Do you have wingsuit flying on there?
Ah, you know, that's not even on my aspiration list. I think that's too scary for me. But I notice, it's interesting, an awful lot of these... like there's... I have as many done as not done, and on the thrill-seeking thing, I have very few that are actually done. So maybe I'm a physical coward. I actually am probably not much of a thrill-seeker, but some of those I'd really like to do. I mean, I have parachuted. I did race car drive with a race car driver, but I didn't like it very much. I didn't have any inclination to do it again. You know, there are some things... I've always wanted to walk the whole Appalachian Trail, climb Mount Kilimanjaro. I've never climbed Mount Fuji. So I don't have, like, climbing Everest on the list. I have no ambition to do that. But I would like to climb Kilimanjaro. That's a very doable thing.
I've always wanted to walk up to the top of the Washington Monument by the stairs. And they don't seem to let you do that anymore. But I remember walking down it by the stairs and thinking, I have to one of these days go up it. Never gotten to do that. One of these days I want to read the Bhagavad Gita and the Quran and the Bible, but I haven't actually read any of those from start to finish, just little pieces of them.
[Q] What about diving, Danny?
I've got... well, diving, yes. I've done quite a... I've done... I mean, I've got my scuba license and I've done a lot of fun diving things like swimming with giant turtles and with seals in Galapagos and so I've gotten a lot of my diving things out of the way. I do like that. But I still haven't dived at Truk. And I've never had ambition to go freediving, that's just scuba diving. But I do love diving in the water. I did some diving in Papua New Guinea. That was nice.

You know, in terms of things to own, that's a very short list. There's been very few things I've actually wanted to own and most of them I have. And they're things like a theodolite or an amphibious car. But I have always wanted to own a mine. I don't know why. I sort of do. The Long Now Foundation owns a mine, but that's not quite the same. The only thing I've actually got on my list that I really want to own that I haven't is an island. For some reason, that's always appealed to me. And I guess another unfinished one is a good library, but that's probably always unfinished by definition. And then foods, pretty much I've eaten all the foods that were on my list. Things like truffles and fugu and abalone and absinthe and... yes, those are all in the done category.

I actually have another list, which is 'Perils to survive'. And these are not exactly things that I want to do, but are sort of ones that I want to have behind me. Like being divorced is on the list.
[Q] Appendicitis?
Yes. Or surviving a big earthquake is on the list. Those are my undone ones, but I've got a few, like a plane crash, which... although the plane crash is sort of in the halfway point. It's not really I want to be in a plane crash, but I'd like to have survived a plane crash, just to not worry about it anymore. The closest I came to a plane crash was a very strange thing. I actually got hurt in a plane crash, but I was on the ground. So I was flown... flew into St George, Utah in a Baron, which is a twin engine plane, and we were refuelling and I went over to look at the plane next to it, which was also a Baron. And you know how when you're in an airport and planes are coming down and it looks like they're going to land on you? So I looked up and I thought, 'That's funny, it's just amazing how they look like they're going to land on you.' And I realised: it is going to land on me! And I jumped as fast as I could, I didn't have time. I started to run away, but I realised I wouldn't get away fast enough, so I just jumped, because the wings were coming down. And it went right over me and it smashed into the plane that I looked at and it smashed into the next plane. It destroyed three planes. And I actually hurt my knee. It's been hurt ever since then. I was fine, all the planes were out of gas. It crashed because it was out of gas. So there was no flame, so I was very fortunate in that, but my knee has never been the same since. And it was a very strange feeling, because I was perfectly okay. I mean, the person who was flying the plane wasn't, but except for this minor knee injury. But somehow it felt like something big had happened and I should learn some big lesson from this, but I could never figure out what it was. And for a long time I just went around looking up a lot. You sort over-learn from a situation like that.
But yes, perils to survive are things like: getting lost in the wood, being robbed at gunpoint, breaking a limb, going through bankruptcy, surviving a tornado, getting sued, so... A lot of those are not so pleasant at the time, but they're good to have done.
[Q] You made it this far without being sued?
No, no, no, no. Those are in the done category. I've never lost a suit, but yes. No, those are all in the done. I went bankrupt. Of course, I didn't personally go bankrupt, but Thinking Machines went bankrupt. That's an experience to survive. Totalling a car. Actually, that's a... that was a strange story.

I got in trouble. When I was in high school I had a girlfriend who was in college, which was a big deal. And when my parents were out of town once, I took the car and drove her down to her dormitory. And on the way... this is in the days before people wore seatbelts and stuff, and I was sleeping while she was driving, and there was a rainstorm and she drove off the road and smashed the car into a culvert and my body went up and went through the steering wheel and... and apparently I was still conscious, because I got up, I flagged down a truck and got the truck to come and get her out of the car and then the truck driver was putting us in the back of the car and I said, 'Oh, I'm sorry, I'm bleeding all over your car' and I fainted. This I've just been told. I don't remember any of that.
What I remember of the story is that I woke up in a hospital and I looked around and there were all these nurses and doctors. And the last I remembered, I'd been driving in a rainstorm. And so I figured out there must be a car accident. And I realised that my girlfriend, Charlotte, wasn't there, and that maybe she had been hurt. But I was afraid if I jumped up and said something they wouldn't tell me what had happened, so I decided I needed to be very calm. So I said, 'Excuse me, I know there's been an accident. Was anybody hurt?' And everybody just ignored me like they didn't hear me, so I said it again. And it was like the Twilight Zone. All these people were moving around me, but it's like I wasn't talking. And I said it a third time, same thing. And I was like, what... this is weird. Am I dead or something? Am I...? And finally I said, 'What's going on here? Why isn't anybody paying attention to me?' And then they all started paying attention to me.
Well, it turns out I had been in the hospital for three days, and every few hours for the last couple of days I had woken up out of whatever state I was in, apparently gone through this exact same line of thinking, said exactly the same thing, and then fainted. So they were just used to this. But apparently I'm very consistent, because I would go through the same thing. You know, this was my boot-up sequence. But that last... so I only remember the last time, but they remembered all the ones that came before it.
But then I had to tell my parents that I had totalled the car, or actually my girlfriend had totalled the car, which was even worse, because I wasn't really supposed to have a girlfriend that I was going down to her dorm. So I got into the biggest trouble I think I ever got into on that one. And I probably deserved it. But that was a peril to survive.

I've actually got a list. My last category is: things that would matter over the long run. And most of these are undone. The one that's done is a shared database of everything. That's MetaWeb, that's the Google Knowledge Graph. So that one's in the done category. But the ones that I haven't done yet is build a clock that will last for 10,000 years, build a technology that will make groups of people smarter.
[Q] You did that.
Groups of people are usually not as smart as the smartest person in the group, certainly not as smart as the sum of the smartness. I don't know how to do that. Build a better way to choose treatments for cancer and other diseases before they happen. That would matter. Create a backup network for the Internet. I think that would matter. And the last one is build a machine that would be proud of me. So that's my life list.
[Q] That's an amazing list. What about reading all of Proust?
I never had the ambition to read any of Proust, much less all of Proust.
[Q] Proust, if you're listening...
I would like to read all of Shakespeare, though, I think.
[Q] Oh, you haven't done that?
I've never read all of Shakespeare, but I've been pretty impressed by what I have read.
[Q] I did that in my first winter in the treehouse, I read all of Shakespeare.
Really? Was it worth it?
[Q] It was definitely worth it.
Yes, I should probably add that to the list. Read all of Shakespeare.
[Q] And all Captain Cook's journals.
All what?
[Q] All Captain Cook's journals.
Okay.
[Q] Put that on the list.
Okay, good. Yes, I'm open to additions.

I have a lot of friends that are nuts on privacy and they think it's terrible that we have all these technologies that keep track of our credit card charges and it's hard to be anonymous. And I have a lot of friends that are nuts on openness, about being open about everything and access to all information. And strangely enough, many of those are the same friends. In other words, they have these two contradictory absolute principles, that everything should be open and shared, but that their own data should be private and hidden. And I think neither of those principles is correct. I think that information flow is, if I look at it from a kind of cybernetic point of view, information flow is a tool, feedback is a tool. And we want to design a society that has the right kinds of feedback and doesn't have the wrong kinds of feedback, and in some cases that means keeping things private. Sometimes it means information more open. There's no absolute principle that openness is good or secrecy is good. But we have to think about each case as to whether we want a society in which this thing is a secret or that thing is a secret, or this thing is open. And so it's kind of a design problem. It's not a simple principle problem.
Certainly we've... the world has shifted with computers to being less private. I think much more commercially than government-wise. I mean, commercial capacity to invade your privacy is way higher than the government's capacity to do that. And their motivation is to... the government actually only cares about a very little bit of information about certain people, but the commerce cares about as much information as they can get about you. So Google wants to get all the information about you, much more than the government does. So I think this, you know, is going to be a negotiation of finding the right balance point, but if I could live in a world that it was impossible for anybody to keep any secret, there was no privacy; versus a world where anybody could keep anything they wanted secret, I think I'd choose to live in the open world. So I think I tend to lean toward openness. I think a lot of things that people are afraid of becoming public ultimately would probably be better for society if they were more public. I mean, take, for example, when I grew up, people were very, very secret about homosexuality. Homosexuals tended not to reveal their sexual preferences. And it was something that they felt it was very, very important to keep secret. But actually, now that we live in a world where people are more open about it, and you realise how many people are homosexual, in fact I think that's a better world. That is not a world in which people feel like they need to keep that a secret, because they actually understand the reality. And so in general, in these things, it's not that I think nothing could be kept a secret, but I tend to lean toward openness.

And I also have a general principle. You know, there's... there are very few general principles that I feel like I've learned in life. People talk about how you get wiser as you get older and I can think of very few ways that I've gotten wiser. But the one way that I've gotten wiser is I've learned that the truth is your friend. I've learned to embrace the truth, to be on the side of the truth. And if something is true, then I think we should be open about it. And I think it's better to live in a world where the truth is exposed, is acknowledged, rather than a world where we try to hide it or cheat it or fudge it, or... and so in some sense, an awful lot of privacy ends up being fudging the truth, pretending that things are other than they are. And I'm fundamentally, when it comes down to it, on the side of the truth.

I've changed my idea of what I think artificial intelligence is going to be like. I think when I first started thinking about it, I kind of imagined the science fiction I Robot of an embodied artificial intelligence of being very much like a human, but made of electronic parts or something like that. And it's not that I think that's impossible to build, but I don't think that's the interesting thing. I mean one of the great things about an intelligence that's freed from the bounds of a human body is it can do things that humans can't do. It can have much larger memory capacity. It can be in many places at once. It can use as its eyes all of the sensors that it's connected to. It can learn something in one experience and apply it to the others. So if there are self-driving vehicles, I don't think of it as an intelligent vehicle. It's a system of vehicles. So if one of them learns a lesson and realises there's a pothole someplace or a dangerous intersection, there's no reason all of them can't know that. And so I think we fall into the trap of imagining an artificial intelligence as being too analogous to human intelligence. So people ask what seem to me silly questions sometimes, like they say, 'Well, there's a self-driving vehicle. Would it be willing to sacrifice the driver to prevent running over a pedestrian?' As if it's going to have a little brain in it like the driver does. But actually, that decision is going to be made the system, by society, by the laws we set, by all the experience of all the self-driving vehicles. And so in some sense, that's a much better way of making a decision than having the driver sitting in the driver's seat make that decision. It's going to be a much more informed decision that a lot more participate in and is done for much less selfish reasons. So because that decision is going to be made by the system of all the artificially intelligent vehicles, not by a single individual self-preserving AI brain.
So I now think of intelligence as kind of extended intelligence. It's the intelligence of all the machines working together and all the people working with them. So it's the kind of intelligence, in some sense, like is in Google right now. Google isn't really machine intelligence, it's not really human intelligence, it's some combination of humans and machines that are able to find things that you're searching for. And I think AI is going to be like that. It's going to be a combination of machines and people and so it's that extended group of intelligences that's going to be the thing that does the thinking. So that's how I see artificial intelligence now. And that's the thing I want to be proud of me.
[Q] So you're pretty far along.
We're getting there.
