david.weatherall

British Scientist Sir David Weatherall (1933-2018) was a world renowned expert on blood diseases, in particular thalassaemias, and used his expertise to help control and prevent these diseases in developing countries. He founded the Institute of Molecular Medicine at Oxford in 1989 and was knighted in 1987.

						The family came from Liverpool on both sides, and we, we lived in a little outskirts of Liverpool called Walton, and my father had been, came from really quite a poor family and had to leave school early, but he went to work as a technician in a lab with a big company called Bibbys, who make cattle food and soap, and he went to night school and got a degree in chemistry and gradually kind of worked up, his way up, and became eventually manager of the analytical lab at Bibbies, but his real love was music, he was quite a good amateur musician. What he really would have liked to have been, apprenticed to a kind of cathedral organist, I think, but he was a very good organist and choir master, so he had various church jobs and finally ended up as organist and choir master at the Liverpool parish church of St Nicholas in the famous sailor’s church on the waterfront, which has very close connections with the Anglican Cathedral so he could take his choir up and do evensongs there, and it was only ten minutes walk from the lab, so he oscillated it between the two, and he ran these very good music, lunch hour series of concerts for the city, so we were constantly having the great artists through the place, and it was a very interesting life, musically. And my mother was also quite a talented singer, one of these great, deep sopranos, which have gone now I think, due to the oestrogen in the tap water or something. And, but I had a elder brother who was brain damaged at birth, and so she gave up everything really, had to look after him for many years, so she gave up her musical life, but, so her brother acted as my elder brother and he was a, rather a literary character, he’d got a scholarship from some dilapidated grammar school in Liverpool to Oxford, just before the war, so it was quite an amusing bunch to be brought up with, but my father, I don’t know whether he foresaw what was going to happen to Liverpool, but he moved us over to the Wirral peninsula, to that little fishing village in Hoylake, on the water. 

Yeah, I think it’s very nice [unclear].

Yeah, and, but my grandmother stayed in Liverpool, and so we were constantly going backwards and forwards, and I suppose-  

On the ferry, in those days, I guess?

Well, the, yes, they had built one tunnel. 

Oh, they had?

Yeah, the first tunnel which my parents walked through backwards and forwards the day it opened. In fact, I think it opened in 1933 actually, as well. But- so we had to go and stay quite a lot with the old lady during the war, and my most vivid memories of that, because the, the Germans tried to flatten Liverpool in the May blitz in 1941, because it was the main port for the Atlantic, and on the, on the Friday night our house had, all the windows were blown in, a couple of incendiary bombs lying in the garden, so we went over to patch it up and stayed that night, and that was the night when they dropped- they absolutely flattened Liverpool, and it was all kind of bombs raining all around, so the next morning my mother and I had to, there was no transport, we had to walk back through this kind of blazing Liverpool to get back over to the Wirral. Extraordinary memory, it’s the kind of smell of burning or shops on fire, great Lewis’, you know the great stores, that was the night Lewis’ got it, and so, so yes, so I went to a little church school over on the Wirral and then to a place called Calday Grammar School, which-

[unclear]?

Yeah, which, I think its only claim to fame when I went was that it had the highest prison record among its old boys, and the only grammar school in the north, they were a pretty rough lot. 

Right.

But um-  

They [unclear] got caught, really, basically. 

Well, they did get caught, yes, in fact, this is absolutely true, I mean they stole from the Liverpool shops, sold, and one guy stole a suit for himself, which it didn’t fit him, so he took it back to get it changed, and, they were not very bright, and that’s when they all got arrested. But these, because education in war time was tough, because all the younger men were away, so they brought dear old ladies out of deep retirement, and science at the school was somewhat limited. We did physics and chemistry, you couldn’t do biology, you could do zoology. You had to go to the local girls school to do biology, and my predecessor had disgraced himself so I wasn’t allowed to do botany, so, but the school was a very good sporting school, and, and a wonderful social mix like those kind of north country grammar schools were, but my objective was to get out as quickly as possible. I did much better in English than anything else in those, what we called the school certificate those days, and they wanted me to focus on that. I said no, medicine, and so I did science, but they let me do English right through to the A Levels, which was nice, and so I went and was interviewed at the age of 16 I think, for the medical school in Liverpool. I didn’t get replies from any of the other places I wrote to, so, we had a most bizarre interview, which was a kind of mixture of the novels of Thomas Hardy and Liverpool Football Club. I thought the chap who was questioning me knew a lot more about Liverpool Football Club than Thomas Hardy, actually, but anyway, they, I got in.
					
						But in the first year, because I’d not done botany, you had to do botany in those days to be a doctor. 

Oh, to match the zoology you’d done, or something-

So I had to spend a year at Liverpool doing botany and I did, I attended the English courses that year, and some organic chemistry, but the, it was an interesting time, because a lot of the people who’d been through the war were just finishing medical school, and they didn’t give a damn actually, how long it took them. There were chaps who’d been there about ten years, however there was no failing you, throwing you out if you failed, you just went on and on, so it wasn’t a very intellectual atmosphere, I must say.
					
						So the, the the medical school was not, there wasn’t a great kind of academic atmosphere about the place, but there were one or two memorable teachers. The physiologist, Rod Gregory was quite outstanding, he was the man who discovered gastrin and in fact they finally kind of purified it and got the protein sequence, but he used to come out of his lab to teach, in a filthy old white coat and even to somebody as kind of, stupid as myself, it was clear that this man just wasn’t teaching, he was making physiology happen as he taught it– very stimulating. And then there was a, a very young professor of, of anatomy called Harrison, who’d come from Oxford. His main interest was the effect of temperature on spermatogenesis, very exciting, and I think I upset him a bit in one of the student pantomimes by saying that his great invention was the built-in scrotal Bunsen burner. And then we had quite strong biochemistry with R.A. Morton, who was a Fellow of the Royal Society and done some of the classical work on Vitamin A and so on, so it was quite good, and a memory of going for a kind of prize viver in biochemistry, and they said, this is our external, and it was Hans Krebs, and so you know, I had to learn the Krebs Cycles, and I thought, my God, you know, this is, I know this is just totally tongue tied, he asked me, you’re not, you’re sure, how do you organise an experiment to measure a protein turnover in a human being? Anyway, it didn’t go too well. And in the clinical years, I suppose the clinical teaching in Liverpool was quite good, and of course, wonderful clinical material, as we call it, from the city. The- we had Harry Sheehan of Sheehan Syndrome, as our Professor of Pathology, and he was very good. We used to meet him every Saturday morning for what was called the meat class, and they used to bring bits of post mortem material in and demonstrate them, and he used to constantly smoke his pipe, and the pipe drippings used to kind of drop onto the autopsy material, and it used to kind of gently sizzle, you know, it was, they were very interesting sessions.
					
						Sheehan was a remarkable man actually, and he, he, it was, worked out the post pituitary necrosis in pregnancy and to do that he wanted a great deal of autopsy material. I remember when I was doing my house jobs with him, and there was an old lady who was, had rather scanty body hair who was expiring and we let him know and he came and sat in the ward all night waiting, because he wanted his autopsy’s very fresh, and the old dear let him down and recovered. She said to me afterwards- gosh it was a wonderful hospital; there was that wonderful white haired old man who sat up all night with me. I, I didn’t have the courage to tell her why he was sitting there. And the clinical teaching was eccentric, and one of the most eccentric teachers of course was Cyril Clarke, who you know well. And I, I did Cyril’s house job and it was an interesting time, because he’d just got fired by genetics, and we were, it was at ABO and duodenal ulcer, where the secretor status, so everybody was spitting into tubes and coming passed tubes around and, he was deep in the literature, and very kind of wired up about this, so even though you were doing a busy house job, you couldn’t help getting some kind of feeling that genetics might be quite interesting at that time, and so I managed to get myself accepted as his house physician for six months, and it was a completely crazy six months, because clinically he was very eccentric. All he Weatherall final did when he did rounds really just was cross out anything I’d actually prescribed for a patient, because he said that he’s been trained by a chap at Guy’s who claimed that he’d only used two drugs in his life, one was morphine and one was sodium bicarbonate, and you know Cyril had this lovely stammer. When I knew him he wasn’t using mmuch bicarbonate. So he was a bit of a therapeutic nihilist actually, but certainly it was that, and when I, when I, because when you did house jobs in that time, you were expecting your call up papers, because of national service, and mine never came, for some reason. So I thought it, you know, be a bit kind of pompous for me to write and remind them, so I didn’t, and a job came up as a senior house officer up in Bootle at the old Stanley Hospital, so I applied for it and got it, and they told me to have, we could have a thrash at their membership exam in the first year. Anyway, right, halfway through the first year the call up papers came and so, the- I had to go furiously for this exam, and in fact finished the membership on the way to the army at Crookham, literally on the same day, and that was the beginning of the Far East.
					
						Because we were medically qualified they gave us some kind of officer rank, and we went for a basic training, and learning how to march, and shoot and all that, and, and then you had to talk to them about where you might spend your two years, and I was terrified, I’d never been in an aeroplane, I didn’t want to go in one of those, and I didn’t want to be shot either, particularly, so I volunteered to stay in the UK, and two weeks later I found myself in the docks, I was boarding a ship for Singapore. They were short of what they called medical specialists, and because I had the membership I was a medical specialist, so off I went to Singapore on this troopship. That was a cock-up, they normally flew people to Singapore, but they put me on a military ship by chance. A very interesting ship actually, because the British had taken this from the Germans at the end of the war, it was called The Empire Fowey, and it had been one of Hitler’s pleasure ships. You know, he had this system for taking the young beautiful male and female Aryan’s out to sea and let them breed, so the Fowey had quite an interesting history, but even a more interesting steering mechanism, because they couldn’t steer it in a straight line, and this is, I had this confirmed quite recently by another ship’s captain I met, who’d actually sailed it. So you had to go to the left, and then correct, and go to the right, so you zigzagged and the British army had never used it before we went to the Far East, and they didn’t realise that the Suez Canal was slightly narrow, so we ran aground, and it was of course just after the Suez war and we were surrounded with jeering Arabs for days. Anyway, we got to Singapore and I guess, because I’d no paediatric experience, they decided to put me in charge of the paediatric ward in the big military hospital in Singapore. I went, did a locum up in North Malaya for a couple of weeks, and that was the only bit of war I saw, because the Chinese terrorists tried to derail that train, sort of shoved a log over the line as a bit of excitement, but we survived all that. But the, because looking after the children in that, you had children’s from all parts, you had the military, the children, then British military, but you had, we had the Ghurkha’s, and Malay’s, and then of course a lot of the Commonwealth kids, and one of the first children I had to look after was a little Ghurkha child called Jaspir Thepa, who’s father was a sergeant in the Ghurkha’s, and she’d come down to, with her father, and she’d been down for about two or three years, and she was just profoundly anaemic, and she just lived on blood transfusions and there’s no diagnosis, and it was in fact getting very difficult to transfuse her because there’d been no real paediatric experts, her veins as you can imagine were in an awful mess.
					
						I’d taken to going on my afternoon off down to the university in Singapore and met a biochemist called Frank Vella who subsequently became Professor of Biochemistry in Saskatoon, but he spent some time in Singapore, he was from Malta, and he’d been, became interested in haemoglobin electrophoresis and he’d been looking at abnormal haemoglobins in the local population, and so we looked at this girl and just found a bit of foetal haemoglobin, not very much, but it was about a year after the first paper came out on starch block electrophoresis and measuring haemoglobin A2 values, and so we thought we’d have a bash at this, to study this child and the family, I mean, I don’t know, you probably passed starches, you may have seen a bit of starch block electrophoresis later, but you’re covered in the bloody stuff, and it was awful actually, but we finally, to cut a long story short, found that the parents of this child both had thalassemia trait, and that the child undoubtedly had thalassemia major. Well, at that time, there’d been one report from thalassemia from Thailand, and otherwise it would, I just thought it was a Mediterranean disease so better tell the world, so I wrote off my first paper, sent it off, published in the BMJ, and it’s great, how you felt, but it’s a great feeling, your first paper, however trivial. And so I was kind of wallowing in glory and waiting for the phone call from Stockholm, and, but the phone call that came was from the Director General of the Army Medical Services for the Far East; come and see me, you see, so I thought, gosh, he’s seen this and he’s, instant promotion, and he had it out on his desk and he’s one of these men with a little kind of, congenital absence of the upper lip, and tiny moustache. Did you write this? Well he had my name stuck on the top you couldn’t deny it, I said- yes. Did you get permission from the war house? I didn’t know what the war house was, but apparently it was the War Office, so I said- no, I didn’t. Do you know you can be court marshalled for publishing material about the British Army without permission from the war house? No, I didn’t, I said. Well, don’t do it again he said, and then he said, and anyway, damn bad form to tell the world our best regiments have got bad genes. So that was my scientific triumph, and I went to, after the first year, they’d sent me up to look after the medical wards in Taiping, which is a little town by the Thai border in north Malaya, and they were rooting out the rest of the Chinese communists who’d kind of slipped over the border, and that was a wonderful experience clinically, because I mean, the lads were coming out of the jungle with malaria, leptospirosis, scrub typhus, and the lot. I tried to go on with the haemoglobin interest up there, of course there was nothing in the lab, and I managed to construct a rather crude apparatus with car batteries so you could study haemoglobin electrophoresis, and of course when I got an abnormal haemoglobin I didn’t know what to do with it, so I posted it to Herman Lehmenn in London and the other thing, we saw an awful lot of unexplained neo-natal jaundice out there, and, that was just the time when G6PD deficiency had been described in the States, but of course, to do an assay for that in a military lab that, you didn’t have any of the reagents, so I rather cheekily wrote around to some of these authors in the States and said, you know, could I have a bag of tris buffer, and they were amazing actually, I think I got, you know, the Methylene blue and everything from, the package came, so I did a lot of assays, and did write a second paper on neo-natal jaundice and G6PD deficiency, by which time the miserable old guy had gone and nobody told me off.
					
						After the army, I wasn’t quite sure what I was going to do, but I had a letter from Cyril Clarke saying that they had developed an arrangement for swapping research Fellows with Victor McKusick at Johns Hopkins, and that David Price-Evans was there, leaving shortly and would I like to take his place at Hopkins. So yes, good idea, so I went home, I spent a week or two with my parents and then went straight over, well, straight over, I, because there was no way I was going to fly, so I went on one of the old Cunard steamers to New York, and then travelled down to Baltimore, and you know West Coast winters, and I’d just come after two years in Malaysia, it was awful actually, and I was not terribly happy at first in Baltimore. They put us in a place that was called the Peoples Palace, it was this medical residency where you had miniscule rooms and communal bathing, and I won’t go into details, but communal bathing in the United States is not pleasant. But Victor, I told him I wanted to work on thalassemia, because I was really hooked by then, and we discovered there was only one patient in Baltimore with thalassemia, so he put me into Ned Boyer’s lab. Boyer, I think was a terribly underrated scientist actually, he was a biochemical geneticist, he’d had some training at the Galton, and his genetics was very strong, but he was very good with his hands and an excellent teacher, and he had just started developing starch gel electrophoresis, which had been described by Oliver Smithies a year or two before, and he used to try to get me to work on stuff he was working on, but I said I’ve got to work on haemoglobin. So, we looked at the situation, and at that time haemoglobin genetics had just really started to be understood. Yes, there were two alpha chains and two beta chains, and there was a family from Baltimore which suggested that they might be on different chromosomes, that was about it. So, one of the key questions, you won’t believe this, it sounds so stupid now, was, it was not clear whether the alpha chains were controlled by the same genes when you’re a foetus, in foetal life, as in adult life, and, because clinically this was rather important because it would suggest that if you had bad alpha chain genes you’d be in trouble as a foetus. So we, oh dear, we decided to look for a foetal alpha chain variant, in other words, if, if there were alpha chain variants in the population, they would be expressed in foetal and adult life if they were controlled by the same genes, so I went trooping around the obstetric units in Baltimore, collecting cord blood, and running them on electro- on starch gel, and also collecting adult bloods, looking for somebody with a haemoglobin-like sickle, which didn’t sickle, haemoglobin D, because it could be alpha, it could be beta, and I was very lucky actually, because I found some families very quickly, and also found a couple of cord bloods with two major haemoglobins. The question was, how do you do the analysis, those days, because peptide mapping was not, there was nobody doing that at that time in the States, at least probably, no, certainly not in Baltimore. But what we used was something called symmetrical hybridised, or asymmetrical hybridisation, which was way before your time. If you take haemoglobin A and you put it in an acid PH it dissociates into sub units, and then if you raise the PH, they come back together again. So it had been shown by, by Schroeder and people, with moving boundary electrophoresis and all these fancy methods, that you could get this re-association, so if you mixed somebody with an alpha chain variant and somebody with a beta chain variant and dissociated and come together, you’d get four haemoglobins. You’d get normal, you’d get the two, and then you’d get a hybrid, so I thought well, let’s try and do this on starch gel, and it was very crude, just purified the haemoglobins and then, and then exposed them to some ascetic acid, and then dialysed them for a long time up to a normal PH, and it worked beautifully, we got beautiful bands on the gel, and then therefore you could then take the abnormal foetal haemoglobins and do the same thing. It turned out there was an alpha D gamma foetal haemoglobin, and we found that the adults had two A2s, so it was pretty clear that the genes must be working right through development. Not all that exciting really.
					
						Unbeknown to me, McKusick sends an abstract of this to the Association of American Physicians meeting, which was the great meeting of the year. Atlantic City, they had the, all the American med- clinical investigation meetings, all at the same time, all careers were made and broke, you had to be at Atlantic City. They never told me any of this, nor did they rehearse me. I just found myself in a hotel bedroom the night before, and I looked at some of the, and had these big glass slides you see, and I noticed a couple of errors, so God, what do I do, so I rushed into town, bought some electricians black tape and cut little squares out and jammed them onto this slide. 6AM the next morning the phone rings, Mc Kusick, will you come for breakfast– 6AM. So I met him, I thought you know, this is going to be the great American breakfast experience, a cup of coffee and a piece of toast, and we were off on the boardwalk at quarter to seven. And then he suddenly veered off the boardwalk into this enormous building which is called the Steel Pier Theatre, and that’s where the meetings were held. I didn’t know that. Totally empty of course, walks down, sits on the front row, gets his papers out, starts writing. Completely ignored me, so after about half an hour, I said- Victor, what are we doing here? Oh, you’re talking here in about an hour’s time, he said. Can you imagine? So anyway, I gave this talk, and the inevitable happened. About, as these patched up slides came, with the heat of the projector the glue melt, and these black blobs started descending down the slides, and it was even worse than that, because the guy who’d preceded me was a very eminent American Professor of Medicine, who did- showed some experiments claiming to have transformed normal human bone marrow with sickle marrow. In other words, swapped the genes around, and he’d completely sold this to these physicians. They were up on their feet waving their papers and then of course, this rather banal Englishman with the bizarre slides followed, so there was a bit of polite applause. But after the lecture, Park Gerald, who was one of the great founders of haemoglobin field in the States, came up to me and he said- well gee he said, at least I heard a bit of science from you, that rubbish of the lecture before, but then he said- but why those black descending objects on the slides, you haven’t had a death in the family?
					
						I stayed with Victor a little bit longer, but it was clear that to do anything further in haemoglobin, I’d have to really join the haematology department with Lockard Conley, and I continued the cord blood stuff, and found this fast haemoglobin in some of these babies, which was the same stuff that Lehmann had described a few years before as Barts. We didn’t know it was Barts, but a lot of the babies had it, and we, I, that did have to have some proper structural analysis, and by that time they’d just opened the department of biophysics at Hopkins, and a crazy Irishman called Mike Naughton was there, and Mike had been Fred Sanger’s PHD student in Cambridge, and had, was very bright, and he’d actually started as Fred’s technician and then his PHD student, and Mike was quite interesting, was working haemoglobin with Howard Dintzis, and so he taught me how to fingerprint, and I fingerprinted this stuff, and it was Barts, and I had a lot of family studies, and showed there was some obvious kind of thalassemic changes in, in the family members and that, and kind of put the kind of start on alpha thalassemia and Barts and the different carrier states, but I then had to go back to Liverpool and I knew than that-  

What time of, when was this?

This was about '63, and I had, or '62, and the fellowship was an 18 month fellowship really, and there was a senior registrar, locumship at the Royal Infirmary going, so I went back, but at that stage I was really hooked on this problem, and I realised that we weren’t going to get any further unless we could start measuring what was happening in those cells. And, you know, going back to a senior registrarship in Liverpool, and it was quite busy, and there was no lab. I ended up with a, I don’t know, just a kind of little kind of a corner of a laboratory, with a couple of kind of refrigerators. But about two months or three months after I got back from Liverpool, I had a letter from Conley, from Hopkins, saying, if I’d like to come back for another spell, I could come back as an instructor in medicine or something. I’d lived on $4,000 a year in my time with Victor, and it was not easy. Drove me to marriage, because I, that was when I met Stella who was working-  

So it was the first time you met her?

Yeah, she was working in a lab in what they called the School of Hygiene, and in fact, she was working on DNA transformation. She was a kind of technical assistant to the group there who did some of the first transforming experiments, and we met at the International Club, and so we got married just before I came back to Liverpool the first time. And this letter came, would you come back. I didn’t know, everybody said, oh, you can’t go twice, ruin your career, you know, you know what medicine’s like, so I went to ask Cyril Clarke’s advice and Cyril was not too great, by current kind of mentor standards he didn’t say very much. I went into his office and he was writing; what do you want, well what do you want? So I said- I have this offer to go back to America, but people think it would be unwise. He didn’t look up, he said- well, what do you want to do? So I said- I’d really like to go back for a few years. Well, bugger off then. That was, I think that was the only career advice I’ve ever had actually, so I buggered off.
					
						We went back to Baltimore, and Stella went back briefly to work with Roger Harriet, and I was in the haematology Department then, and there was some methodology developing for looking at haemoglobin synthesis in the test tube, but it was all very much reliant on getting rabbits or other beasts and injecting them with phenylhydrazine till their red cells were kind of collapsing, and we got this enormous reticulocyte response and then labelling the cells, but with human beings of course, to get somebody with 50% reticulocytes is not common. So one had to do a lot of fiddling around with making reticulocyte rich preparations, but after a while it worked, and you could label them with leucine, and you could get linear synthesis in the test tube for at least an hour, an hour and a half, and while you’re looking at linear synthesis, you can feel reasonably assured that you’re looking at something close to the real world. But the problem was that to study thalassemia you really needed to be able to study the synthesis of the individual alpha and beta chains, and there were no methods available for separating them. There was, so initially I went back to my old asymmetrical hybridisation just to see, and so you could separate the haemoglobins that way, and then look at the labelling, and, and then another awful method, it started to be used, mainly I had some interaction with MIT with Vernon Ingram who’d moved to the States by then, and of course, Vernon was not in haemoglobin, but he was, he had a very bright research fellow called Lorado Baglioni who still worked on haemoglobin, and they’d been trying to do some separations with what they called counter-current distribution. This was a kind of differential solubility and they had machines to do it, but when I tried to do it, of course, I had to do it, what you did, you put your globin in these different concentrations and then shook like hell and then looked at the optical density of the supernate. You got something, and I imagine there was unequal labelling undoubtedly, but without real quantitation you’re never going to be sure, so this is when chance hit me, really. This was about 1963, at the end of '63, and Mike Naughton rang me up one day and said, there’s a young guy called Clegg coming over here, he’s in deep trouble, do you know him? So I said, no, and apparently this John Clegg had been a PHD student in Fred Sanger’s lab, and had done his PHD on separating fibrinogen chains, and he went over to do a post Doc with Hans Neurath in Seattle, the famous protein chemist. Neurath ran a very Germanic lab- you will be here at 8.30 for a journal club every morning. And you know John, that was not Clegg, I mean, in Cambridge we didn’t do that; we went in when we felt like it, and we went home when we felt like it, and we worked hard, but in our time. So he didn’t turn up, and he’s only been there about three weeks and he got a note on his desk, your presence is disturbing the morale of my laboratory, I would like to, you to go. So here was a young post doc, penniless, on the west coast of the States, nowhere to go, the only person he knew in America was Naughton, so Naughton got some money and he came over to this department where, with, it was run by a chap called Howard Dintzis, and a very clever guy, appointed very young, it was a new department of biophysics. A lot of talented people, and they put John on an impossible project actually, which was to try and pulse label, look at insulin synthesis basically, to put it crudely, and he’d been only there a few weeks and we started meeting for coffee, and he said to me one morning- that this is ridiculous, I’m not going to get anywhere with this, and what are you doing? So I said, well, I’m not getting anywhere either really, because I’m trying to measure haemoglobin synthesis, and I can’t get the globin chain to part, so he said- well, I wonder if that stuff I used in Cambridge, the 8 molar urea, mercaptoethanol might do. So we, we tried, and it worked a dream, it didn’t take, it only took a couple of weeks actually, and I had lots of labelled globin from thalassemics, so who knows, that I used to have to go to New York to get the thalassemics, come back on the evening train, incubate their cells, but anyway, we had the material. So, I started to do the chain separation over in the haematology department, but we had no equipment, and John didn’t have much equipment at the time, so I used to do the chain separations, but I had no fraction collector or anything, so I used to have to sit catching the drops off any of the tubes, and if you look at that first "Nature" paper on this subject, you find, you know, you usually get nice smooth peaks in chromatography, but they’re very bumpy, and those bumps I think, just represent the fact I dozed off, and so the volume in these tubes are slightly uneven. Anyway, we looked at beta thalassemia in normal people and alpha thalassemia, and found that what was really happening was that it wasn’t so much the defect in haemoglobin synthesis, as imbalanced globin synthesis. You made alpha chains that apparently at a normal rate in beta thalassemia, and then of course they precipitated and that fitted in very nicely because Phaedon Fessas in '63, I think, just a year or so before, had described these big chunks of junk in red cell pre-cursors as they called them, Fessas bodies, for a while, and of course, the question was what were they. Were they some unstable haemoglobin, when it turned out that they were alpha chains then the whole thing started to look sensible, and lots of people started doing that kind of thing.
					
						The next problem of course, was, well, if they’re not made at the right rate, why? And at that time, there were lots of people throwing theories around, but the question was there was no way to test them, and just after I got back to Baltimore at that time, it was just when Dintzis, Howard Dintzis, was being appointed, and they had a kind of professorial lectures, inauguration lectures, and I went to his lecture and he had done the most beautiful experiment, I think one of the most elegant, his paper, that I had always told students to read, because at that time people knew that there was a gene, they knew there was message, and they knew there was some kind of adaptor molecules which brought the amino acids to the message, that far, but nobody knew how a protein was put together on the template, I mean, did the amino acids just get jammed in randomly all over the place, or did it start at one end, or did it start at the other end and move sequentially? So the Dintzis experiment was to take very anaemic rabbits, at reticulocytes, and expose them to a very short period of label with leucine, and he used tritiated leucine, and then he made some absolutely uniformly labelled rabbit globin, and so used to, he took these peptides, at one minute incubation, three minutes, five minutes, and mixed the tritiated with the uniformly C¹4 labelled globin, and then measured the ratios of tritium to carbon, the long-labelled globin. And what you found, was that at very short periods of incubation, the N-terminal ends of the chains were hot, and then this hotness gradually spread through the chain, indicating that they must be synthesised from the, the N to C terminals, and you get very nice curves at, and the curves gradually dropping till you got uniform labelling, and there was no curve. The question I thought, well, could we do this with human material, because if the thalassemia defect saying initiation or termination of the chain, or maybe as people were suggesting, it’s a silent amino acid substitution that makes a wonky- So, the big problem was material. You could get the odd normal, with a high retic count, but to do this you needed a lot, and I, it was just impossible actually to do before we left Baltimore. But it, but I, I, went back to Liverpool knowing that, really wanted, we must do this, and by chance the WHO sent me out to Asia in the, about '66, I guess, '67, and I met the group from Bangkok, and of course, all these extraordinary patients, and I talked this experiment over with them and the, because we didn’t have the equipment in Liverpool at the time, but we gradually built, I got a spare room from the Department of Pathology, and, because the Nuffield Institute was being built, and we were going to have space by the late 60s, and Clegg went back from the States to work with César Millstein, and on immuno-globulin instruction, he kept ringing me up saying he was bored and wanted to get back to globin, well, do this experiment, so we managed to get Clegg a senior lectureship, and he came down to Liverpool, and I went out to Thailand, taught them how to incubate cells, how to purify retics so we could get some real hot material. And eventually we got the equipment and were able to do the experiments. It took about three years actually, and at the end of the day, the real problem was that when we finally got the results that the assembly of beta globin chains was completely normal, and which meant that termination and synthesis was unaffected, and there are a few more fiddly experiments to show that initiation was normal.
					
						So that took us really up to the late '60s, at which time, one could say with some certainty, what was not wrong with thalassemia, but we still don’t, didn’t know what was wrong. You could, either there was going to be, for some reason, a decreased amount of normal message, or there was going to be some subtle molecular abnormality that none of us understood. And then we of course moved into the Nuffield, and into the, into the, the Institute of Medical Genetics in Liverpool, which you came about '69 I guess, yeah, that’s right. And there were two interesting, I think those early years when you were in the lab, that’s between about '60 and '65, were really exciting years actually, because we were able to diversify our interest a bit, obviously. Like everybody else in the field, we were interested in foetal haemoglobin, and looking for natural models, like the ones that you looked at in pregnancy and so on, and we were still looking for natural models which might lead us into the thalassemia molecular field, and something came along, I think it was about 1971, it just was a letter from Jamaica, from a chap called Paul Milner who said he’d got this family with alpha thalassemia, with haemoglobin H disease. And he’d, he’s had a funny electrophoresis, because there was some tiny amounts of a funny haemoglobin, which he’d not seen before, and I was just looking at the correspondence the other day, and I wrote back and said, well, could this be a very badly synthesised alpha chain, let’s have a look. And, that was, again, by this time, Clegg and I, we really did work extremely well together, but we knew how to split the work, because Clegg hated blood, or anything red, it made him sick, so I used to do all the kind of initial preparations and then give the purified white powder to Clegg, and making purified amounts of this tiny amount of material, it’s about 1% of the total haemoglobin, but we used to do a lot on amberlite exchange columns those days, and if you fixed the molarity of the phosphate buffers adequately, you could separate a lot of different haemoglobins, and we knew that with conditions where things like A2 and that would stick tight, and you could wash off everything else, so prepared an enormous amberlite column, you know, kind of pornographic thing, and shoved grams of this haemoglobin from one of these patients on top of this column, and just went washing it day after day until it was clean of everything that would come off it, and then just poured some concentrated salt across the top, and this band came down, and so I was able to present Clegg, I think in end with about three or four milligrams of semi-pure haemoglobin which we later called haemoglobin Constant Spring, because the family came from Constant Spring, which was a little suburb of Jamaica- of Kingston. Anyway, Clegg was very surprised when he fingerprinted this to see that, you know, a few extra peptides which weren’t there normally. And when he strung them together it was clear that this was an extended alpha chain of about 30 residues, and if you looked at the structure, what clearly had happened was that the normal termination code, which is UAA normally, had changed to CAA or something like that, and had put glutamine in instead of terminate. 

[unclear]

Yeah, and this suggested that there was message beyond the normal termination code, and which was not normally used till you reach another in phase stop codon on, and actually, you could even, from the amino acid structure, anticipate what the, what the nucleotide sequence would be. So we, we published this stuff in, in Nature, and the, our friends in Cambridge at Fred Sanger’s lab were all working on the structure of human message, Nick Proudfoot and Tito Baralle, and they told you, you know, bloody amateurs that there’s a load of old rubbish here. It was really great actually, because when they got alpha globin message sequences exactly what I predicted from Constant Spring. So that was one molecular defect, a chain termination mutant with the production of a tiny amount of mutant haemoglobin.
					
						And then, at the same time, we started reading about these new methods that were being used for DNA hybridisation, but the idea where you would make complementary DNA based on an RNA template, label it, and then you could mix it with DNA and see if you could get hybridisation due to sequence immology, and it had been, started to be used in the States for a lot of evolutionary genetics by then, and a number of other things, and we wondered if there were deletions of globin genes, whether you could show them by this method, and the obvious one was going to be alpha thalassemia. The not so obvious question, how do you get the material? So this was another trip to Thailand, and, because they get a lot of these hydropic babies and what we needed to show, A, was that the hydropic baby didn’t make any alpha chains at all, it didn’t seem to make many, and the other thing of course, was could we get DNA for our hybridisation. So we did, we got some highly labelled material and found it absolutely no alpha chain synthesis at all, and no sign of any peptide fragments or anything, and we didn’t know how to do molecular DNA hybridisation, there were very people in the UK who doing it, but John Paul in Glasgow, at the Beatson was doing it, so I wrote to John, and said we have this material, could you help us, because I think it’s a good question now to ask whether this baby’s got any alpha genes. So we trundled up on the train, and to Glasgow, and had a long talk, and he had a number of, couple of bright post-docs in his lab at that time, one of whom was Bob Williamson, and the, and they decided to, that they would provided we got this stuff properly labelled and purified, they would have a go, and it worked out very nicely, because the hybridisation curves showed that there must be virtually no alpha chains at all. And so this was nice, because it was the first demonstration of a deletion in a human being. So that went off to the, and it was easy to get things into "Nature" those days, and, but completely unbeknown to us, YW Kan the Hong Kong Chinese geneticist haematologist who’d moved to the States, very bright, in fact, later he became an FRS here, because it was Hong Kong citizenship, and thank- he’s the only, there’s two Chinese FRS’ in the register, one was an, a kind of emperor who was passing though sometime, and YW, anyway, YW had got together with a, with a group in, in San Francisco, Harold Varmus  who was working there, you know Bishop and Varmus who got the Nobel prize for the work on oncogenes, and Bishop was using this DNA, um, CDNA hybridisation, so he helped YW just to, in the same way as John Paul had helped us, and got the same result, so they came out back to back, in "Nature", which was, which was nice. And I think that was what you might call really the end of the, what you might call, protein RNA DNA hybridisation era, and again, all we were doing was following the molecular biologists with new technology, and of course, things blew completely in the late '70s when Ed Southern developed southern blotting, and, and, but our interests were expanding in other directions as well at that time, because I guess we’d always been fascinated by the old Haldane hypothesis, about, you know, why these disorders were so common, and although there’s been a lot of work done on sickle, a bit on thalassemia, we were, the story was by no means clear cut, so, and by the time you’d been through and a number of other nice people who we had in the lab at that time, people like Knox-Macaulay, you remember-  

Yes.

He, because Huxley, I got a letter from Boston about Huxley who, I saw this Huxley, Knox-Macaulay and I, they never told me where he’d come from, and of course I thought it was some kind of posh English public school boy is going to appear, and this fantastic looking black guy arrives, and he was wonderful value, he used to sing hymns didn’t he, while he was doing his experiments, and so we did quite a bit of work on red cell metabolism in thalassemia at that time, and we did what we could in the foetal haemoglobin field, and some of that of course, as you know, took us to the Middle East, and we had Thailand, and so we were building up these kind of connections all over the world, and that really was a way of starting in, to start to have a serious look at the population genetics of globin.
					
						Well I didn’t think very hard about Oxford, it just happened. The, in 1973 or '74, beginning of '74, somebody came down to give a seminar from Oxford in Liverpool, and said they want me to ask you whether you’d be interested in the Nuffield Chair. I didn’t know what the hell that was, I’d only been to Oxford once on trip, on a day trip with my parents, so I said- oh, yeah, tell them I’d be interested, and nothing happened, and then the phone rang one day and they asked me to go down, and Oxford does things in the most peculiar ways, I was taken to a dinner, and grilled, well, first we had a dinner and then the chaps wife was thrown out, and there were three of these people and they grilled me for about two hours, and then I heard nothing. And then one day the phone rang, we’ve just had a meeting of the electors of the Nuffield Chair, and we’d like to offer you the Chair, could you let us know by tomorrow? Silly Oxford. So anyway, I chatted with my wife, chatted with John, we decided to, what the hell, be a change, and then nothing happened for six months. I got slightly embarrassed, you know, did I dream all this? And I don’t know whether you remember that wonderful secretary called Mrs Cogley?

Yes, yes, yes.

I couldn’t ring up Oxford and ask them whether it was all a big mistake, so I asked Mrs Cogley to ring them. And she was away a rather long time, she comes back, she says- you can’t go there. I said why? She says, well, I said to them, he thinks he’s been made a professor in your place, but he’s had no papers, is it a mistake? And she says, there was a lot of rustling, and then this posh voice comes on the phone, it was announced in "The Times" wasn’t it, what more does he want? So that was Oxford, and so, and John was very happy to come down and we’d had another excellent student with us in Liverpool, Bill Wood, who’s gone to Seattle, and he decided to come back, so we trundled down to Oxford and started working things up there in, in about '75,'76, and started with a tiny lab in the old Radcliffe infirmary, but moved up to the John Radcliffe in about '79, where we had reasonable labs. And, and that was a good time, because it was just the time when the current DNA era was really breaking, and one could start to move into Southern Blotting and then very quickly into DNA sequencing, of course.
					
						I think I got a feel for Oxford the very first morning, because I, I don’t know whether you know the old Radcliffe infirmary, but there’s an enormous long corridor which takes you up to the Department of Medicine, and I was trundling along this, my heart sinking, and before I ever even got into my office, a little old man shot out and said- you must be Weatherall. So you know, again, it was no use denying it, so he said- your predecessor gave me space in the department when I retired, I assume you’re not going to take it off me. I hadn’t even got in the office. So, so no, I’m sure we can arrange something, good, and he stumped off down the corridor, then turned around and said- oh, I should have introduced myself, my name is Hans Krebs. Well, I discovered later that I’d given away half our available space already, I mean, he was kind of metastasising all over the department, but no, it was great to have him actually. No, it was strange, and because the college life was even stranger to me, my first meetings at Magdalen were really odd, I mean, asking whether I could take my wife in, and the answer being, his exact words which I’ve never forgotten- we don’t have any college regulation which says you may not bring your wife in, but if you’re thinking of doing so, some of us would like at least 48 hours notice to make other dining arrangements. Can you imagine, this is 1974? So that side of Oxford, I never actually felt entirely comfortable with, but what was really good about Oxford was the quality of the people in the Department of Medicine and the quality of young people. I mean, in Liverpool we always had a few excellent young people, but it was just enormous numbers of young people, and also the, we had all these other extraneous sources like Rhodes scholars, Commonwealth scholars, and so on, so it was a wonderful place for grooming young people.
					
						We started off in the Department of Medicine with very little space, but my predecessor, Paul Beeson had got me there a little bit early, so that I could help in planning the John Radcliffe hospital, the new hospital in Oxford, and the Department of Medicine had a little bit of space and by then we’d kind of recruited, we had Doug Higgs developing his alpha chain interests, and we were starting just in that period before we moved to Oxford, with the preliminary kind of sorties into prenatal diagnosis. People had tried to use that chain method for globin chain analysis that we developed, and, because Bill Wood, when he was doing his thesis had shown that there were very small amounts of normal beta chain made very early during development, in some ways it makes you think about intelligent design almost, I mean, why on earth do we make, start making our adult haemoglobin that early, you know, right back at 15 weeks, 14 weeks, even earlier? And so it was becoming clear that if you could do globin synthesis on some form of foetal blood, there might be a chance, and I must say, our group, we were always more cautious than other people I think, and we were very nervous that that method would never be sensitive enough, but Kan, in the States and Modell here, just came and banged on our door, and said do it, and teach us how to do it, so we did, and both sides of the Atlantic, it started to work. And that was all just happening in that changeover period. It was, I, I think actually, looking back on that, it was I suppose quite gratifying at the time, because the methods for obtaining foetal blood, I mean, at first they were just prodding the placenta, and then having to try to purify the foetal cells and then, but then when the actual foetal blood sampling became, from the cord, became possible, that technology worked, and it worked for about ten years really, and was applied very widely in the Mediterranean, and here of course and in the States, and the foetal loss rate was gradually came down, the error rate came down, so it was quite a gratifying period, and of course it was taken over by DNA analysis. So that was the period of kind of interregnum before moving up to the John Radcliffe labs, and we had more space there, we started to recruit one or two more people and Kay Davis came and joined us for a while then, and we had an extraordinary character called Steve Reeders, who was a nephrologist who joined us. Just plonked himself down in my office, and said- I’m going to find the gene for polycystic kidney disease, so I said- oh, yeah, good luck, and of course we had this strong alpha chain group. I was particularly interested at that time in trying to expand our work, we were already kind of interested in malaria from the population genetics point of view, but more actually into the, into the kind of cellular mechanisms involved in all that, and so we were starting to diversify basically, and so during that period, I suppose the most interesting work was the beginning analysis of the alpha and beta thalassemias by Southern Blotting, and Doug Higgs got into that very early and it was very competitive with the Americans and in fact, over the next few years I think, it was really our group that characterised most of those important common deletions in, of both alpha zero and alpha plus thalassemia. As regards the malaria programme, I’d started that down in the John Radcliffe with a post-doc Rhodes scholar actually, Geof Pasvol, and again, we followed technology, because it just, in the kind of early 70s became possible to grow malarial parasites in culture. Ridiculous, people had tried for years, and then the group at Rockerfeller just found by accident that if shoved some of them in a bowl at reduced oxygen tension, they grew fine. And so we could, you could start to do in-vitro invasion studies at that stage, and we found that poor old Haldane was probably wrong actually, the, because he’s suggested that those little red cells the parasites wouldn’t, couldn’t get in, or if they got in they got kind of squashed, but they seemed to grow and develop beautifully in thalassemic cells. But the sickle cell story was quite interesting, in that if you did the incubations at oxygen tensions were, you would fine in the kind of venous cell to the circulation, the parasites didn’t develop and there were similar conclusions by the New York group, and also by Luzzatto, with a, using another method, and the idea of kind of suicidal infection and a parasite gets in a sickle cell and can’t complete its life cycle. It’s not bad, you never absolutely prove that, but it’s not a bad mechanism.
					
						Just before I got- left Liverpool, I got a phone call from a technician from a hospital over on the Wirral, saying that, he’d had a blood from a child, a mentally retarded child, and seen some lumps in the red cells and could they be haemoglobin H. A bloomin’ good technician actually. So, I, so and he sent over a sample, and this was clearly mild haemoglobin H disease, and I went over and saw the family and the parents, and it didn’t look kind of quite right. The child- Inherited the pattern in the parents, and I, I didn’t know what to make of this, so like a lot of these things, I put it away in the drawer, and just after moving to Oxford I got a letter, again, out of the blue, from a Colonel Nicholas Bethlenfalvay from some military hospital in the Deep South of the States. He said he’s got a patient that he thought had haemoglobin H disease, and he was mentally retarded, could we help him sort it out. So, I remembered the Liverpool one, and then I saw a paper in some rather obscure haematological journal, which clearly had been rejected by most of the other journals, about a group in Scandinavia where they’d seen a patient with H disease and a mental retardation, and was just thrown into a group of patients with H disease. So I began to wonder, and so we worked up these, we got samples from the Scandinavian family, we worked up these families as best we could, and the mental retardation varied very widely, there were two of them were quite mild, one was quite severe and had dysmorphic features, and, but, and we did the biosynthesis and we obviously at that stage could, I think we could just, I’m not sure whether we were quite ready with Southern Blotting, I think we were, and we couldn’t find alpha thalassemia in some of the parents, that was the problem, oh, at least, not that we could identify at that stage. So I thought, well, should, you know, should we just sit on this, or should we write a paper, and I thought I will write a very cautious paper entitled Mental- "Haemoglobin H Disease Mental Retardation – A True Association or A Chance Association?" And they, we sent it to the "New England Journal", rather cheekily, and of course, Americans don’t like kind of, sexy titles, and they didn’t like the title at all, and they were going to reject it anyway, and I have to say that the paper would not have got published, except David Nathan, who’s on that editorial board, he thought there might be something, he told them they had to publish it, so they did. And of course, once something happens in a journal like that, you start to get sent patients, and they started to come in, and we had a series of very bright post-docs, Andrew Wilkie particularly, and Richard, and two or three others actually at the time, I think Richard came a little later, and they gradually started to take this apart. Andrew was particularly helpful phenotyping because he was, unlike me, a proper geneticist by then, and they did good genetic studies, and collected long series, and then did the genetics, and it became clear there were two types. There was one that was coded on the chromosome 16, usually due to deletions, and then the more interesting one, which was coded by the X chromosome. And then, much to their credit, they isolated the gene, and it’s been a very interesting story, hasn’t it?

Indeed.

So, but that again, it was just a kind of, having a look at something that doesn’t quite make sense at the beside, kind of approach, but I, I think that’s a good approach actually, sometimes, but anyway.
					
We had another interesting experience at about that time, was this chap Steve Reeders who was going to find the gene for polycystic disease, and we had that... very few markers really, but by that time the alpha gene grew, done, got a lot more structural data on the alpha globin genes and I found these hypervariable regions and we had an excellent student at the time, Steve Goodbourn whose... whose PhD was to characterise these regions. I remember when he finished he came into my office one morning, great strip of paper, and said, 'There’s me thesis'. You know, I think he was getting a bit fed up by then. But he was on the next bench to the Reeders, and they were talking about this hypervariable region next to the alpha globin gene, so Steve had these Boston families with polycystic kidney disease, so he plugged them in, and there it was, it was very tight linkage. And at that stage it was difficult to keep good people, within I think a few weeks of that Nature paper, he’d been offered an Assistant Professorship at Yale, and the swine left. But fortunately, bloke who was helping him was not put off. In fact, we were told to stop working on it, by the MRC [Medical Research Council], but we went on, and as you know, they found this interesting patient from Cardiff, who had the nice deletion.
[Q] Originally from Portugal.
Originally from Portugal, that’s right. And so... so that was a really a bit of serendipity, and the nice thing of having people kind of working on different projects on the next bench.

						It became clear, once Kay had arrived and we were expanding in the malaria field, and getting really into the cell biology of malaria, that there was not going to be enough space, and all sorts of other departments in clinical school were starting to see the importance of this new technology. So by the mid '80s it was clear to me that we’d have to do something, and it was just the time when there was a research building, on the John Radcliffe new site, it was the Nuffield Research building which had been the famous foetal physiologists building, Geoffry Dawes, and he was retiring, and Oxford University decided that they would close it. They couldn’t afford to keep a research building, so I thought, well, what the heck, why don’t we try to make an institute, a small institute of, for people to work with a mixture of kind of, basic scientists, PHDs, and medics, working on the same problem, where both can learn off each other, because one of the problems I found in the early '80s was that there were not many places where young people, young medics who were bright and motivated, could go and learn this new kind of molecular technology. They could go to Cambridge, some of them went to the LMB, but there was, the atmosphere there was slightly different, and you obviously, if you’re primarily focused on medical research, you would like to go in a place where the, however basic the work was, it was somewhat sited in that direction, and so I put it, this suggestion, up to the university and we went on fundraising. The MRC, Jim Gowans was the secretary at that time, were quite enthusiastic, but didn’t have enough money. So we went out to Wolfson and then the university, the Abraham Fund in the university gave us some money, and we were just about enough to get a one floored building, and so they sent, the MRC sent a external review group to see if this should be done, consisting of Sydney Brenner, and a few other, well, not quite but almost equally terrifying people, and Sydney gave me hell actually. He’d given me hell several times. I remember when I talked at a meeting in Cambridge about the globin synthesis stuff in the very early days, he came up to me afterwards and he said- well, you know, if we wanted to, we could solve these problems at the LMB in a few weeks for you. But they didn’t want to, and they couldn’t have done actually, at that time. But he, I think old Sydney was quite sceptical of these doctors mucking about in the laboratory. In the end, actually, when I wrote to him after he got the Nobel Prize a few years ago, and reminded him of this, he was quite cross, he wrote back and said- I never gave you a bad time, you have got me to thank for that building, the MRC didn’t want to do it, and I persuaded them to do it. Anyway, whatever happened it was done, and then right at the last minute, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, as it was then, Walter Bodmer came along and said they’d like a bit, and they put in a lot of money, so we had a second floor. And so we opened it, and the kind of founder groups in there were, there was, obviously there was our own group, and then there was, we’d got a very strong immunology group together by then, with McMichael and Townsend, and Kay Davis’ group settled in there as well. We got a malaria group, Chris Newbold, and he, Chris is a molecular parasitologist basically, so we, we’d been able to develop that, and then our new Professor of Paediatrics, Richard Moxon, who had a long training in microbial genetics at Hopkins, and he was head of Paediatric Infectious Diseases, so he, he brought his group. And there were a few smaller groups, and then of course at the top floor we had a very strong cancer group from the ICRF, with Adrian Harris, and others. So that’s how it took off, and I, obviously some of the people came and went, which is only right in a place like that, there’s been quite a lot of turnover. I think overall, looking back, that at that time it probably succeeded in its objectives, because we did train an awful lot of young people in there, some of them have stayed on obviously, and some of them have left. 

Was there anything about the design of the building and the way it was grouped or put together that made it work? or-

Well, I think, but this is a, purely a personal feeling, no other people have mentioned it, that we had a large tea room, I’d picked this up partly, well, partly from its absence in any lab in the States, I mean, it was thought kind of indecent to have a tea break in America, but they do have one at the LMB in Cambridge, and it seemed to me that if we could produce a large staff area, and if we could make some kind of rules about not drinking in laboratory, I mean, not drinking coffee and stuff in the labs so much as in this tea room, and produce some simple food for them, that this might be a way of bringing groups together. And I think a lot of people have, I think there was a lot of interaction in there, and still is, actually. When I retired we raised a bit more money and have expanded the building now, but we’ve kept that, and the granting bodies were furious, all this wasted space, you know, people drinking tea, God. But I, I think it’s vital actually. And then of course, the obvious things, like mutual cross seminars that everybody goes to, and so on, and a lot, I think quite a lot of cross-talking went on.
					
						I took on the Regius Chair of Medicine in 1992, and the groups, obviously people like Higgs, expanded on their own very much, [unclear] had done some really beautiful work right into the kind of molecular era. I think we, John and I focused quite a lot latterly on the population genetics, and again, that started a bit by chance, because a chap called Bowden wrote to me from Vanuatuan Islands, saying that there was an awful lot of hyper-chromic anaemia there, and the WHO are going to come along and fortify the diet with iron, but he didn’t think it was iron deficiency, so, and that’s how we got started in Vanuatu and Papua New Guinea and that region where there’s huge frequencies of alpha thalassemia. And the initial studies, we just ran one, poor old PHD student after another on these studies, because, I mean, I love working in the tropics, but not for a long time. I like to get back into a bath and so Adrian Hill and later Jonathan Flint and others went out and they did that very nice study showing that there was a kind of cline, a fall in distribution in alpha thalassemia from the very high frequencies in, in, in Papua New Guinea, and down to places like the Solomon Islands, where there’s virtually none. And that there was excellent malaria demography data in that region, and it coincided with the fall in malaria. Very nice, but doesn’t prove it, just says that there’s an association, so, but you could have, the little man could have come down from the Asian mainland, brought the thalassamia genes with him, got in their boats, sailed across, and diluted them out as they went across. But then another group of our students found that the mutations in Vanuatu, the alpha thalassemias were totally different to he Asian mainland, and then John’s students did some very nice studies. The other problem was, there were lots of thalassemia out in the Pacific Islands, where there’d never been malaria. Anyway, that turned out to be a very nice story, because the exact- the type of alpha thalassemia in those islands was precisely the Vanuatuan form, the Vanuatuan haplotype. So they wanted to, and it was very varied levels of carriers on those islands, so obviously the story was that the little chaps got in their boats again and as John nicely put it, they left alpha thalassemia on the islands like a visiting card, and it caused deep- and a lot of that work was linked up with the anthropologists view of the peopling of the Pacific islands, and in the end it came together as a very nice story. More recently the, that whole field’s broken wide open, as you know.
					
						I suppose one’s regrets in this field have been partly that so far, in, in, we know so much about the kind of molecular genetics of the thalassemias for example, and over the kind of, last ten years that I was working in the field, we started to gain, I think quite better insights really, into the extraordinary number of phenotypes that can be under the heading of just one simple monogenic disease. The- we had, that had been an interest of ours, of course, right through, but once the DNA era broke, it was at least possible to confirm some of those previous impressions, and as I’ve been working, started to work about ten years ago in Sri Lanka, I think I really started to get a feel for the extraordinary phenotypic diversity which, and realised that the literature in our field probably a little bit missing on that. What actually happened, was when I went to Sri Lanka it was initially for a lecture, and the paediatricians asked me to go up to this place called Kurunegala where the, the, they have the bulk of the thalasemic patients in Sri Lanka. I reckon there’s probably about 3,000 affected children in Sri Lanka and probably about eight or nine hundred of them all in that one centre, so at the time it was not clear what they had, or a kind of thalassemia, but to cut a long story short, I think about a third of them on the island have haemoglobin E thalassemia and of course, this is the commonest form of severe thalassemia in many Asian countries, in Bangladesh it’s the commonest, Thailand it’s by far the commonest. I think the Thai’s are reckoning they’re having about 3,000 new cases born in Thailand of that each year, and we found roughly, not quite so many, but it’s certainly a very high proportion of the bad thalassemias in Indonesia. And it’s a funny disease, because the spectrum goes from ghastly disease, which is totally transfusion dependent, to something that is very, haemo phenotypically very mild. And I was struck by this when I first went to this clinic in Kurunegala, that here were kids on transfusion, but, you know, I was seeing 45 year old farmers who’ve never been near a hospital, I mean, until this wretched man came from Oxford and started studying their family. Who was living at a haemoglobin of about 7 grams, but you know, a perfectly normal life, normal development, normal fertility. So, I started to watch these children, really study them a little bit more carefully. It meant going to Sri Lanka at least four times a year and doing the things with your own hands, I never kind of, I don’t think people know how to measure spleens properly, so what you read in notes is absolute rubbish, usually, so, I mean, I may get it wrong, but if it do it myself every time, it’s wrong, it’s a consistent error, but it’s stuff like that, and measuring growth and growth velocity and all the things paediatricians do. And when I, struck me, was the instability of the phenotypes. You couldn’t just go in there and say somebody’s got mild disease and somebody’s got severe disease, after a short period of observation.
					
						One needed to think a little bit more broadly about, okay, some of it could be genetic, but what about, we’ve really totally ignored the environment. I’m sure you haven’t in your genetic practice, but in that field it’s been totally ignored, so we did the obvious things and found that some of the obvious modifiers were active in Sri Lanka, like alpha thalassemia, and foetal haemoglobin, but then it’s becoming clear in the thalassemia field, that the complications themselves may be modified by other sets of genes, and there was one beautiful example in Sri Lanka, because I saw a thing there I’d not seen anywhere else in the world, and that was that a lot of these patients with moderately severe thalassemia were deep yellow I mean, when I say deep yellow, I mean green, with jaundice, without liver disease or obstruction. And couldn’t understand this at all, but then just wondered, could it be genetic and could they have anything of a similar kind of polymorphism that people with Gilbert's have, UGTA1A, and it was a bit of a long shot, but we analysed that UGTA1A, promoter polymorphism and much to our surprise, I mean, not normally as you know, a, there’s a, the repeat in that polymorphism, most of us have six repeats. If you have, if you’re homozygous for seven, you may have something like very mild Gilbert's. Turned out that about quarter of the population of Sri Lanka are homozygous for seven, and that these children with this intense jaundice, were nearly all seven homozygotes and of course, they have a very much increased propensity to get gall stones, but even worse, the older ones, the girls, were completely socially ostracised. They walked around in dark glasses, they don’t share their kind of eyes to anybody, they’re not getting jobs, they couldn’t go out, so I remembered one valuable thing about doing the membership, is you have to learn a lot of stuff which will never be of any value to you. But I did remember this old paper by Sheila Sherlock, way back years ago, saying that if you could give people with Gilbert's tiny, very small doses of Phenobarbitone, and for some reason they’d clear. And there’s a Phenobarbital responsive motif in that gene cluster, the UGTA1A, so we gave sub-drowsy-making dosage of phenobarb to these kids, and many of them bilirubin came down quite dramatically, actually, and it was nice, because the girls could get out again, and get jobs, and things like that, so there’s a lot, there’s a lot of kind of noisy genetic polymorphism in the, in the complications of the disease. The bone disease, as you know, there are a lot of different, the actual genetic variation as a basis for osteoporosis has been a bit of a mess actually, hasn’t it, but there is obviously some effect in thalassemia, and iron metabolism as well. But when you’ve said all that, you still don’t account for these extraordinary changes in, and instability.
					
						What happens to you, happens in very early life. If you’re very anaemic, if your spleens come out, it’s coming down there, and it’s coming down very fast, and extraordinarily fast in some of these children. Once you seem to get past that, then everything seems to slow up. So we wondered obviously why, and one of the things we decided to look at, was the way these children respond to anaemia, by, and of course, anaemia response is partly through the red cells shifting its oxygen affinity, and partly through the kidneys then getting a hypoxia signal to produce more erythropoietin and once that’s all done, then the old heart starts to bang in, and so we’d done all that, well, we’ve done two of those things– we’ve not yet, we are now looking at the hearts of these people compared with age match controls but, the interesting thing is that, is the erythropoietin response. So if one looked at them, one’s got duplicate, triplicate examples over time, the first observation was totally surprising to me, that, that age and haemoglobin are independent variables for erythropoietin response. And then if you start to draw erythropoietin response curves at different haemoglobin levels, they seem to be age dependent. So if you’ve got five grams of haemoglobin at the age of two years, on average your erythropoietin response will be much higher than if you’ve got five grams of haemoglobin at five years, and that’s the thing that’s just seen the light of day in the PNAS. Now, that was really fascinating, but then the question was, well, is this something that’s just due to thalassemia, some quirk of the disease? It’s not, nothing to do with foetal haemoglobin, we know that, but, so we went back to Papua New Guinea, where we’d been doing a study of alpha thalassemia response to malaria, and did exactly the same measurements, and fairly exactly the same thing, that there is an age-dependent effect on your response to profound anaemia, and that the younger you are, the greater the EPO response. So, in terms of thalassemia, that’s making us wonder now, well maybe in these slightly milder forms like E thalassemia, we could possibly start attempting to do what you might call transient transfusion. If we could see those, see them through those developmental phases of maximum response, could we stop it? And so, we have stopped transfusing quite a number of these children that have got older now, but that would be quite anecdotal. They’ve stayed off, they’ve grown well, they’ve developed well, but one has to now do this in a proper, controlled kind of way, I think.
					
The obvious thing when you’re thinking of environment, of course, is malaria in these countries, and we’ve been so obsessed with seeing whether carriers are protected against malaria, nobody’s every bothered to look what happens to the more severe forms. Because a lot of the E thalassemics... I mean, the rates their spleen went down was extraordinary, and...There has been a drop in malaria transmission in Sri Lanka, it disappeared completely, of course, with the WHO training programmes, but then the... when the war started there it came back... because there were big problems after the tsunami up in the north, but by and large there’s been a kind of declining, but steady rate of transmission, both vivax and falciparum. So, we decided to look at the E thalassemics with age-matched controls, both for whether they had PCR evidence of parasites in the blood, or whether they had... and we did anti... lgG antibodies, which is a useful life story of your exposure, and fascinatingly, the E thalassemics seem to be much more prone to malaria than the normal children in the population. There are a lot of reasons why that might be the case, particularly vivax because plasmodium vivax uses a receptor which is really on the red cell surfaces, related to the duffy blood group, which is only expressed on young red cells. So if you’re sitting... living with a constant rapidly turning over cell population, you might well be more prone to vivax. So, I think that is data fairly secure, and what I think we’re going to have to do now is to do a prospective malaria control trial, and really ask the question, what effect does this have on these children’s phenotypes over the first five years. Because if this is right, and if you can do a transient transfusion period as well, then the saving for... kind of management of these children in Asia will be enormous, actually.

						I’ve never been awfully happy about prenatal diagnosis, as you remember, we talked a bit earlier about our early entrées into prenatal diagnoses and of course moved into the DNA era very much, and with John Old set up in Oxford a kind of DNA centre for the government, which has now been taken over by others of course, but we trained people from all over the world in that technology, and there’s been a lot of interest, it’s been slow in Asia, of course, both in the Islamic and in the Buddhist countries. Much to my amazement of course, it’s taken off in a big way in the Middle East, in the Islamic populations. Whether that is partly this kind of teaching that the soul doesn’t enter the foetus till about, is it 12 or 14 weeks, and the breathing of the soul, I don’t know what, why it took off, but Buddhism is very interesting, and in Sri Lanka, of course, it’s one of the great homes of the southern Indian Theravada Buddhism, which spread across into Thailand as well, quite different to the north Indian kind of Buddhism which went north into Japan and so on, and Theravada is very vigorous about the value of life, so in Sri Lanka as well as doing a bit of so-called science there, I’ve also been building new treatment centres for them and all that, and trying to develop a control programme. But we don’t talk about prenatal diagnosis, although there’s masses of illegal abortions going on all the time. The abortion is formally, well, it’s not frowned on, it’s disallowed. And what’s happened in Thailand is quite different. The same form of Buddhism, and the Buddhist priests have talked to some of the really fine people in Thailand, like Prawase Wasi, who was one of the fathers of thalassemia, and said look, if you can make a case that this is for the benefit of the mother, and that it’s in your conscience, we will turn a blind eye on this, and the government have not legalised it, but they’ve said the same thing, I think it puts the doctors in a slightly difficult position actually, but, so in Thailand they’ve set up a major prenatal diagnosis programme in Bangkok and up in Chiang Mai in the north. And doing quite a lot of work in India as well, at the moment, and of course there’s a number of centres there. So this question of, if it’s thalassemia major, it’s not difficult, but if it’s E thalassemia or if it’s sickle cell anaemia, where you cannot look the parents in the eye and said, there’s a very strong chance your child will be very debilitated and live on blood, I have a problem as to where prenatal diagnosis should stand. I don’t have a- you should, I mean I’ve been sat on by people like Dr Modell in this country, who believes in, that if a parent wants a perfect child and it’s possible, they should have it, but it does worry me a lot, and with E thalassemia, although we know some of the modifiers and we’re starting to understand the environmental modifiers, I still don’t know, and you see those children and adults, because they don’t make so much foetal haemoglobin as a lot of people with milder forms of thalassemia, their oxygen affinity is higher, and they can cope with a life at seven grams of haemoglobin quite well. Now is it right, or is it not, to stop prenatal diagnosis programmes for E thalassemia, at our present state of knowledge? The Thai’s think it is, I think, as purely very practical people, and, but I think it’s going to be a big problem for Asia, and certainly where, in the stronger Buddhist populations, I see no change of thinking in Sri Lanka, for example. So in Sri Lanka where it’s an education programme, in the hope that people will change their reproductive– they do, they make a lot of reproductive decisions there, by, through the help of the astrologer, so maybe the genotype will be one thing that the astrologers may take on board, I don’t know, when we do the population screening.
					
						I suppose we ought to just say a few words about the Department of Medicine in Oxford. It was a big transition from the days of Liverpool, when we, there was a man and a boy, and I think one of the reasons I moved there was it looked like there was never going to be anything else but a man and a boy. When I got to Oxford my predecessor, Paul Beeson the American, had set up a very good clinical department and it looked to me as though one had to try and maintain and expand those standards, but to move it into the kind of more modern era of research. And to do that, it’s very difficult, I think, to be a kind of clinical professor running a department, trying to run a research group and all the other stupid things you have to do, and I was very fortunate because we had a, the senior readership  post in the department was available, and I was able to appoint John Ledingham, who probably is the best clinician I’ve ever worked with, a very fine clinician, and also a very good nephrologist, so, and we worked very much, very much together as a team, and we had at the time, the great lady Sheila Callender the haematologist who’d been one of the great iron figures in literally both iron, personality and metabolism, and when I got there they didn’t really want me to come in the haematology department in the, in the hospital, they didn’t want another really stupid clinical haematologist, so I had to make the peace for several years with all that. And we had a very strong gastroenterology and there were one or two areas that needed strengthening and I managed to find a respectable geriatrician in John Grimley Evans, and he set up a very big programme for the aged and so on, so we gradually expanded clinically, and I think we did manage, I think the job of a department of medicine and academic centre is really to set standards, in this country anyway. You don’t, you can’t run it as in the States, because you’re sharing a lot of the services with the NHS folk, and it’s trying to bring all that together. One or two of the oddball things that happened of course, was I suppose the most peculiar event was "The Oxford Textbook of Medicine", which, I’d only been in Oxford for a short time, and my secretary came in one morning and said- there’s an extremely agitated young man outside, I think he’s been weeping, you better see him. And, as you know, in Liverpool, we’re not used to weeping males, so I thought I’d see him, and he was one of the senior editors of Oxford University Press, and he, they’d just published the umpteenth edition of something called "Price’s Textbook of Medicine", which was the great flagship, and it had not come out to what you might call critical acclaim, and he dumped all these reviews on the desk and the one on the top was from the United States, and it said, it was by somebody called Hugh Bean, and it said, when I opened this textbook I noticed that the senior editor was physician to Her Majesty the Queen. After reading the book, my only thought could be, God Save the Queen. So, that was, and they got worse. So, I think rather reluctantly we decided, then we decided that they’d have to scrap this and we’d start, have to start again with a new textbook. So I got John Ledingham and David Worrell who has an enormous knowledge of infectious disease and global medicine, and we did it. It was very difficult, and working with a kind of ageing press which was just coming into the kind of 18th century. We had a lot of disasters, I mean, for example, the first set of page proofs, lots of the tables somehow got scrambled into ancient Greek, and we didn’t even know about this till the authors rang us up in a bit of a state, and said, you know, what the heck’s happening? Anyway, finally it came out and I suppose the worst couple of weeks of my life with the phone calls that came through, what had been omitted. The first one was from an angry GP who said, I can’t find anything on hiccups, and, sure, there wasn’t anything on hiccups, so you know, I told him, well, you’ve tried to blow in and out of bag, haven’t you? But that didn’t go down too well, and then there was a very, I’d say, well, I don’t know if the voice were, I think the, I think the chap may have been suffering from the disease by the tone of voice, he said- there’s nothing on priapism in your book. Oh My God, so, and then I said- oh yes, I said, it may not be, there’s something in the chapter on sickle cell anaemia. Oh, he said, I haven’t got sickle cell anaemia. So that was a disaster, and then there was a phone call from Papua New Guinea, some chap who said- I can’t find anything on Pigbel. Oh, I said- dear, I’ll consult Professor Worrall. There was nothing on Pigbel, whatever that is. But it went on like this for several months, and then we went through a lot of new editions and so on. I think it was reasonably successful, but, and it started the whole series of Oxford textbooks then, but the good thing about it, and the American review I liked, which said that, if I was working in the United States, I’d obviously stick to the standard American text, but if I was going to travel abroad in the wide world, the first thing I’d do was pack this text book in my bags, so I think the idea we make it a kind of global thing, worked all right.
					
						I think the other important development in the Department of Medicine was the development of what I would call the Overseas Programmes. Because we’d been working a lot, and developed all these overseas ties with the various people in the haemoglobin field, but in 1978 I got called to a rather dingy hotel in London by a bigger than life chap called Kenneth Warren, from the Rockefeller Foundation, and he was developing something with the unlikely name of the Great Neglected Diseases of Mankind Group, and his idea was to bring scientists from different disciplines, either in the basic or clinical sciences who worked in areas related to tropical medicine, and just bung them in a room once or twice a year and let them talk to each other, and for this he would give us grant money for, actually it worked out for eight years. Not a lot, but very useful. And the at the first meeting in New York in '78, I bumped in, well, I was staying in the same hotel as Peter Williams, who was Director of the Wellcome, and he said he had a good bottle of scotch one night, and why didn’t we throw some ideas around, and all he talked about was how to get tropical medicine, or as he liked to call it, medicine in the tropics, not just the, you know, the bug diseases and that, so on, but the effect of these on medicine in general. How to get this into the universities, because at the time it was only really developed in this country in the two big tropical schools? So, we thought it, what we would think about is developing a kind of partnership, so we got in an aeroplane with David Worrall, who had had a lot of experience in tropical medicine already, and was working in Oxford, and we went to several places and we - the first place we got to was Bangkok. Because they had had some connections with the Liverpool Tropical School, and I knew some of them, and we spent two days negotiating with the Thai’s, very memorable for me because, have you ever, any of you ever tasted durian? 

Yes.

Now there’s somebody, there’s somebody genetically engineering smell out of durian apparently, at the moment, but it’s the great Asian delicacy, and it smells awful and it tastes to me like rotten banana, but the Thai’s fed us this solidly for two days during this negotiation– it was awful. And in the end it looked as though something might happen, we might be able to develop a programme in Bangkok. We do go to other places. And when I left, I thought, well, let’s try it, we’ll be lucky if it lasts a year, and, because recently we had the 25th anniversary of the Oxford Bangkok Programme. It was very successful I think. David Worrell ran it for a while and then was joined by a young, one of our young graduates, Nick White, who subsequently has become one of the top malaria people globally. And they did some beautiful work on, particularly on the clinical management of malaria, proving that a lot of previous treatments were rubbish, and so on. And it’s still going strong.
					
						They developed programmes up on the Thai border, with the Karan refugees from Myanmar, and done a lot of work for the WA show, particularly on the prevention of malaria in pregnancy, and that type of stuff, and a lot of other diseases that are very common and rather neglected in that part of the world. Melioidosis which most of us have never heard of, but is a tuberculosis-like condition which occurs in Thailand, and Nick, Nick worked out ways of managing that, and so on, so it’s very successful. And then I guess because of its success, the Wellcome Trust who were supporting it had always been keen to have a similar establishment in Africa, and so that was the start of the Kilifi Project, which is now being run by another of our folk called Kevin Marsh. That’s on the coast, not too far from Mombassa, and what they did there was something very wise, they, it’s a, it really is a partnership this, with the Kenyan government, they took over a little district hospital there, so that it was an ideally set up for clinical research, really in the field, in a very highly malarious area. And then more recently, because of its success, the Wellcome have put in some more money and they’ve built a beautiful research centre there as well, attached to the hospital. So, that’s worked very well, and then the, the next one was really, it was due to Nick White’s enormous success in Thailand. They’ve, we set up on in Ho Chi Minh City, in South Vietnam. That’s been terrific, the Vietnamese are tremendous to work with and tremendously energetic, and we, that, that unit has been run by a young man, another of the graduates who worked in the Institute, he was a neurologist originally. And he’s become a real expert on viral disease in the developing countries, and has worked a lot on dengue and viral encephalitis, but more recently has become the, one of the major centres in Asia for the Asian flu work. So they’ve been, what I think is ideal models of what I would call North-South partnerships, with the accent on the partnership. You don’t go in there, snaffle off the blood of the poor old locals and run back and write lots of papers, which is, has been, in certain parts of the world, the way things were done. You develop a partnership, you have lots of to-ing and fro-ing, you train people in the UK, you don’t, you train them for the local problems to go back to, you don’t kind of train them in kind of expensive Western medicine, as it were, and so I think that plus our own long-standing programmes in places like Sri Lanka and so on, I think that probably is one of the things I’m proudest of, in the Oxford school, and it’s still expanding actually. And the idea, once you’ve developed this North-South partnership, when things are well established, then you can start to develop what you might call local, South-South partnerships, and that’s happening in Kilifi, for example. They’re now developing programmes with lots of people in Africa, and I think it’s one of the most economic ways of helping the developing countries and you don’t kind of throw your money into governments and never see it again, it’s done on a partnership, a personal level between you and the other end. So that’s been, that’s been probably the best thing we did in the Department of Medicine, I suspect.
					
						The other developments, kind of peripheral to the research over the years, I suppose, we’ve had a, I had an interest in one or two areas which, and I suppose the most pressing one for me in the '70s was the kind of, emerging problems of ethics, relating to the new genetics. I, I, not, I’ve had no training in this field at all, I don’t know what training means in this field, you, either you’re a philosopher or you’re a geneticist. I suppose it first came to me when I had to do that little, that lecture and little book in the late '70s on the new genetics in clinical practice, and starting to think about it, but the thing that actually really bothered me was the, the first gene therapy experiment in the United States. The Martin Cline experiment, I mean, he was a very bright guy, and he thought that he was ready to transfer normal genes into thalassemic red cell precursors, which he clearly wasn’t, and so his application was turned down in Los Angeles by the local ethics committee, but he managed to get some, a group in Israel to allow him to do the experiment, and they did it and of course it didn’t work, but fortunately it didn’t do any harm to the patient. And he got in a lot of trouble when he got back to the States. But it just seemed to me about that time, that anybody could pop into this country and, because a lot of us were quite naïve at the time, they could probably sell this, you know, this to us without too much difficulty actually. So the first thing I did, I suppose it was, in the, still in the late '70s actually, was to drop a note to the MRC, I think the director was Dai Reese at the time, and we, I said- look, this is really, I really am concerned that this could happen in this country, so they got a little working party together, and we managed to get a paper out on behalf, not just of the MRC, but all the European Research Councils, with some very simple guidelines on what one should, what should be in place before this was even contemplated. And the, the MRC, I think, then talked to the government, and this ended up in the formation of a committee chaired by dear old Clothier– a wonderful character, which was to look at the ethics of gene therapy basically. It was a very interesting committee, because he of course is a lawyer, but we had Nick Ross of television fame, who was there to ask the questions that the public would want to know, and he was fantastic value. He was so determined to learn some genetics, that he insisted on writing the introduction to this report, with a kind of explanation of genetics for the man in the street, and so, and then there were some general practitioners, and I think somebody who knew some genetics, and myself as the kind of middleman. And in the end I think we got quite a good report out actually, really talking about the, the gene therapy in principle, there was no kind of ethical objection. We, at that time of course there was somatic cell gene therapy, and then there was this talk about germ cell gene therapy and we, we did put, we felt that germ cell gene therapy was a totally different ball park actually, and that there were some ethical issues that needed a lot more thought before that was contemplated. And I think that was the beginning of the government’s going to, gene therapy regulatory body which, as far as I know over the year’s been quite, was really quite successful. I think this country’s not been bad on sorting out these issues, compared with a lot of countries. I did one or two other things in the early days of stem cells on the government committees, but then round about that time it became clear to some of us that what we really needed in the UK was an ethics, a bioethics group that was totally separate from government or any of the kind of hierarchy of medicine. And so a few of us got together, Lord Flowers was the, was the kind of biggest help in all this, because I think at the time he was Chairman of Nuffield, and so we ended up in some awful building in one of the Royal Parks, I can’t remember where it was, I know I had to be carried out the next morning because the bed broke my back, but we threw this around for the weekend, and then that was the beginning of the Nuffield Bioethics Committee. And again, I think because it’s been able to be, we had a lot of trouble with that actually, I mean, the Royal Colleges were furious, they said the didn’t need any help on bioethics from anybody, and the research councils were not too happy either. I don’t think the government were too happy really, but anyway, I think largely due to Flowers it was, it got off the ground. I served on that for the first five years, and I think overall it’s been pretty successful, there’s, had some very good reports. It, it, as things have turned out, given all the problems of the pharmaceutical industry and government and what’s happened in medicine over the recent years particularly and ethical issues and so on, it was probably just as well there was somebody who was outside the, outside all kind of influence, and I hope that will continue. There’s no sign of it kind of being axed or anything. I think the, it still requires a lot of funding from people like Wellcome and so on, but that’s good actually. It has diverse funding and it helps to keep its independence. So those were the, I think that was my entrée into bioethics.
					
						The other oddball things that I had to kind of do over the years, were again, I think as you get older, you get asked to do more and more about things that you know less and less about, it’s a strange kind of phenomenon. And one of the most embarrassing ones was this thing on so-called personalised medicine recently, which, well, not so recently now, which the Royal Society, for some reason, decided that they needed to investigate the, the whole concept of personalised medicine, and this difficult talking to a geneticist, but again, we had a nice mixed committee with some real geneticists and some pharmacologists and you end, but you always end up writing these things yourself, that’s the trouble. And it’s a fascinating problem because I remember the day, the first announcement of the human genome came, was made, a few of us, I think I was only there because of my welcoming input, but the, we were bidden to Downing Street to, for the big announcement, and we sat in the, we got the usual stale cup of tea, and then we sat in a room and in walked Tony Blair with a big smile on his face, and immediately on the other end of the room, this huge television screen lit up, and there was Bill Clinton, one arm around Craig Venter, and the other arm around Francis Collins. This was the kind of symbolism of the coming together of the, the kind of commercial end of the genome and the kind of public end of the genome. But what followed was slightly nauseating, because it was the time when the Blair’s were having their last child, and so the conversation really went on, ah, the wonders of this great news, we’re going to prolong the life of this child of Blair’s, and the assumption was, even if it’s on a bad day he’d live to 100, and, but, and what this was going to do, and of course, this hit the headlines the next morning, but there were, there followed an enormous hype and it, to my mind, wasn’t helped by some of the people who’s been involved in it, because I think they, what, they didn’t oversell the benefits, they oversold the timing of the benefits. It’s usually that wonderful 20 years, isn’t it? Within the next 20 years. I presume that’s because most of them are kind of middle aged, and they know they probably won’t be around to see whether they were right or wrong. But there was a lot of hype, and it’s interesting that in the 19- what, 2003 wasn’t it, was the fiftieth anniversary of the DNA. A lot of the meetings then, there was enormous hype. I was in one in Washington, and Frances, I usually get stuck on these things as the kind of miserable bugger at the end, you know, just to be careful, type of talk, but Francis Collins had had the press all week, and at the end of the week he dragged us together into his office, a few of us, and he sat down, flopped down like this, he says- God, we got to do something useful in this field.  And he said, let’s go back to sickle cell anaemia, and small molecules. But I think the problem was that the, at least my perception was that a lot of this problem was that a lot of the work had been done by extremely clever PHDs, with no contact really with the realities of clinical medicine, and the medical people who were involved were very heavily driven, again, probably the brightest of the bright, but again, probably not people who thought very deeply about the problems of common disease really and biological complexity.
					
						And it was absolutely clear that there was, from what we knew already about monogenic diseases, that it was going to be complicated, but I think the, as it’s turning out and through the successes over, that had been announced in the last few weeks, there’s no question that it’s going to have enormous impacts on clinical practice. Whether, I think, and probably the cancer field has been the most impressive, I mean, where amazingly to me actually, I mean, it’s been to, possible to, apart from diagnostics obviously, to direct drugs at mutant onco genes, I mean, I would have never guessed that the chronic myeloid leukaemia story would have broken, that you could target a drug at a kinase, which was firing off, and like that, and you know, so specifically together, it turned off every ruddy kinase in the body. But, so, so I think this report that we wrote was directed at, not so much the whole thing, but at the concept of personalised medicine in the type of thing we were told by a pharmacologist at my retirement party in Oxford, that in 20 years time, every GP will have your printout, the whole of your genome printout on his desk. You go home with a headache, press a button, tell you whether you’re a two aspirin or a one aspirin man. And in fact, you wouldn’t even have to go to your GP because you can, it will all be kind of online and, and it sounds a little bit unlikely, but this was, we investigated pharmacogenetics, or pharmaco genomics, and what troubled me really, or interested me, was that when I was in Baltimore in 1960, David Price Evans on the next bench had just finished a lovely study showing that there’s no question that isoniazind metabolism was under the control very much, of one gene, depend, and that, based on the, that polymorphism, you either metabolised it rapidly or slowly. And then it turned out that if you were a slow metaboliser you’re more likely to get some of the nasty complications. That was 1960 and we, I guess, we did learn the actual molecular mechanism much later, but that has never been used in clinical practice to my knowledge. And at the same time there was the warfarin polymorphism broke, and because that’s a terribly important drug, thousands of people on it, lots of side effects, but again, that’s never been used in practice. And of course over recent years, now one has both the molecular bases for the metabolism of warfarin and varying activity due to its endorgen effect, so you’ve got two major polymorphisms, common polymorphisms in the population. A fantastic amount of information about other drugs, the pharmaceutical industry of course, one could see major practical advances, ah, advantages for them, and particularly in starting to avoid developments in areas where from a pharmaco genetic point of view was obviously looking at toxicity and so on. But, personalised medicine, so, if we took warfarin as an example, what you’d want to know is really in terms of patient effectiveness, that’s both controlling of whatever you’re trying to control, plus awful side effects. Was a pre-knowledge of their genetic make up going to be effective, and cost effective, compared with just shoving the drug in at the usual dose and very careful monitoring. And it seemed to us, at least seemed to me, I think that the others agreed, that the only way to find out was to do it in a proper population study, which is easier to kind of throw out as a suggestion than to do it. I think it’s a very difficult study. Happily the government have given one or two grants as you know, for this kind of thing, and the Liverpool school, a pharmacogenetic group, are doing just that study with warfarin. It will take them a long time. And then I think there’s another group doing a similar thing with anti-depressants. So, I think, we’ve just got to wait and see, but, so yeah, personalised medicine, I suppose it will become slightly more personalised, but I think this image that we were thrown of, and then there were, there was a very interesting thing to do, because we had public, we had meetings, the social scientists who, very skilled now at getting at the average men to meet you, the average persons to meet you, sorry, and they were very interesting actually. I didn’t, I didn’t sense concern with what people were doing in genetics so much. Their concerns were very practical. Okay, once you’ve got this information, who’s going to handle it for us? Are we going to have to rely on our GP or our pharmacist? And then of course, there are huge problems about the level of education in genetics still, in medicine, and even worse, the total decline in clinical pharmacology as a speciality, and very badly taught, so there were really quite a lot of issues came out of this, but I think to a lot of people it was terribly conservative. I think the term probably addressed at the chairman of that was a boring old fart, I heard several times, but there we are.
					
						The other thing that I’ve been involved in more recently was even worse, and that was this question really of animal research, particularly primates, I mean, things have got so bad that the Academy of Medical Sciences and the Royal Society and the Welcome and the MRC jointly sponsored this working group, and I don’t know why I took it on. They asked me to do it, I think, because I’ve never worked with an animal. I mean, I think I had a brief flirtation with a couple of pregnant sheep just after I got to Oxford, but it didn’t come to much, and it’s nice in our field, because you can take a couple of ml of blood and do all you want from humans, and they can’t complain. So we had this rather very heterogeneous group of people, Nick Ross again, and the, John Harris, the bioethecist from Manchester, and then one or two people who knew something, particularly neuroscientists who had worked with animals, and the pharmaceutical industry and so on. And we just met for 15 months, it took, and we tried to adjudicate ourselves, we went to establishments where there was monkey research going on, and I, I don’t know, you get all this kind of advice when you go in an see these beasts, I mean, we were told on no account must you make eye contact with a monkey. But I mean, people have told me that about my cat, and we seem to make eye contact okay, so I went into this building, it was one of the Oxford buildings, and the first thing I saw was this little rhesus monkey peering at me, so, it seems rude not to look back, you know, and we peered at each other for a second, and then he immediately peed all over me, and I thought maybe they were right. But it was fascinating to, we went to Porton as well, they wouldn’t show us too much, obviously, but we had, and we went to Edinburgh, and at the Oxford place, interviewed lots of people from both sides really, extensive interviews with people like the RSPCA, have got some very serious interest in this. And also we had neuroscientists in- very long procedure, very difficult actually. And we got into an enormous kind of, ethical issues about the fundamental rights of animals and consciousness and all these awful problems which are totally insoluble, as far as I’m concerned. It’s such a long history of this, I mean, I hadn’t realised until I started reading about it, you know, that, I mean, there was a huge battle in Oxford when, well, Lewis Carroll, as we know him, has tried to, got a petition at Oxford, so that there would never be a physiology department. Even going back to Doctor Johnson, you know, the 18th, 17th century, a lot of this was going on, and Oxford’s always been in the centre of these battles, still is, but it honestly seemed to me, at the end of the day after all this, that, what the only useful thing we could really do that was semi-new, was to investigate the science. Has it been worth it? Is it really justified? Because the public debate has always suggested, from the rather limited, I know opinion polls are not very good, that they’re comfortable if it’s for medical research, but if it’s for kind of what they would call, curiosity-driven science, particularly in the neurosciences, they just do not like monkeys with their heads full of electrodes if it’s just for a bit of curiosity. And so we did two or three areas, we couldn’t do everything, but we did particularly communicable disease, the big three killers and vaccine development and so on, and the neurosciences. And then we also tried to look in great detail at alternatives, because there’s a big feeling now in animal rights that we don’t need these whole animals anymore, and the, because the pharmaceutical industry, they use the vast majority of primates, it’s a huge number compared with the ordinary scientists. Are there methods which will start to replace the requirement for primates? Well, you go through the whole gamut of molecular and cell biology and genes, you know, promoter modifiers that are promoter signals so that you can do kind of metabolic studies in cells or small animals at least– some of it very preliminary. And at the end of the day it seemed to us that there were certain areas in vaccine development particularly, and in the neurosciences, relating to some of the major killers, where for the foreseeable future, it might be quite difficult to proceed without a relatively small number of primates. From the pharmaceutical industry’s point of view, we felt that maybe some of it was more, kind of habit, on the part of the regulators, as much as, was there a good basis, and so what we’ve asked for is the pharmaceutical industry to produce publicly available results of the outcomes of all their primate work, and we’ve asked the big funding bodies to do the same thing actually, over the next five years. What exactly have we gained? Because it’s such an impossible to- you can obviously make cases and find cases, and then we’ve asked the government to review the possibility of confining this work to a few centres of excellence, where the animal facilities will be very much better, training would be much better. And this will make some people mad because it may mean kind of taking a car and taking their monkeys around the country and so on, but, and I think the government are probably going to have a look at this. So, that was my brief sortie in and out, and with an accent on the out of the animal research field.
					
						I suppose thinking about the future, one of the issues that bothers me most at the moment is the kind of young people that will, we will have to educate to take all these extraordinary possibilities forward, and one of, my problem is that whenever I get involved with anything to do with education, or medical education, I always get into trouble. I mean, it’s always been very simple to me. When I look back on my best teachers, they were people who just took a lot of trouble to teach, I mean, they turned up and they, they would, they had the few that, in my day, had so little humility, so that you could question, I mean, in the early days I nearly stopped doing medicine at one time, it was so pompous and you could never question anything, particularly surgeons. But the, and I had a very bad experience, I think it was the first time I was ever asked to publish publicly and pronounce on education, I got a request from "The Lancet" in the, I guess it was in the mid '80s.
					
						I was really put off by the, my first experience being asked to say something that was controversial, so they asked me to do, on assessment of medical, both students and post-graduates and examinations, and I’ve always felt that this country is obsessed with examinations, and degrees, and it’s one of the reasons why it’s not easy to train young doctors who have a bent for research, because the first kind of 15 years after your qualification is one long examination. But I got into deep trouble with this paper, because, in fact I nearly got thrown out of the Royal College of Physicians, because I was just pointing out to them that the, these examinations are totally artificial, a lot of these post-graduate examinations, and the thing I said, which was I suppose in retrospect, a bit bitchy and a bit stupid, was that if you visit Regents Park Zoo, you see biological diversity in all its wonder, really, but if you happen to turn right when you enter Regents Park, into the Royal Collect of Physicians, biological diversity ceases because the pass rate in the membership examination only varies within less than 1% every year. Boy, they were furious. 

Oh, they were.

But, they let themselves down because they wrote to me and said, we have to keep it tight so we don’t train too many physicians, so the young people they were telling, if they were good enough they would pass, that was patently not true, it was just a competitive thing. That’s a bit trivial, but, but I think we do have major problems with medical education, and at the moment, when the government have taken over post-graduate education, and are having a good bash to take over the lot, even more problems, because one of my great trials during running departments, and particularly the Department of Medicine, was actually protecting, or trying to protect, those very talented small number, who you could see straight away really had it in them to be good clinical scientists, from this kind of numbing system, and you could do it really, certainly in the '60s, '70s, and- but it’s gradually got more and more difficult as the whole thing has become more oppressive.
					
						We’ve not, I don’t think, prepared our youngsters for the complexities of what they’re going to meet in the future. We’ve tended to teach the basic biological sciences, anatomy, physiology and so on, and biochemistry, I think it’s taught a lot by people who feel that medics need something rather didactic and uncritical, and so a lot of them would, end of that period of training, with thinking that in certain ways biological systems were definable and perfect, if you like, then you go into a ward full of old crocks, and none of it works, and I have a feeling that’s why a lot of the youngsters have been put off. What I think everybody should read before they even start medicine, is Ernst Mayr's, one of his latest, his last book I think, or next to last book, "What is Biology?", because he struggles himself, he said, been on numerous NIH committees, and all the time he’s trying to define, you know, basically it’s a layered system, first of all it’s descriptive, and that shouldn’t be denigrated, as it’s often as, yeah, you know, it’s just descriptive, it’s the description of a phenotype, and then it’s, what he says it’s then the proximal and the distal causes. The proximal causes being what is describable in physiological and then more recently in molecular terms, but then the most distal causes of the kind of ecology and ethology and how things actually got like that, evolutionary biology, and that if you look upon living things as this layered sort of complexity, at least gives you some kind of basis for realising that when you go into a ward, you’ve, every one of these people you see there is that, and there will be no simple explanations. And after that, then one’s got the problem of how are we going to train people who I think are vital in the interface between the basic biological sciences, and in a system which is so totally kind of oppressive in terms of rigorous step by step, and how do you, how do they step out and step back? It’s got very, very difficult. And I think if we don’t do that, and really seriously re-look at some of those key issues in education and post-graduate education, it’s going to be very difficult, even more difficult, to train the next kind of cohort of clinical scientists. A lot, a lot more is expected of them, of course. Now, the other issue which I think we’ve touched on while we’ve been talking, is the issue of trying to encourage many more clinical scientists, and the universities in this country, to take a more global view of disease. It’s been fascinating talking around, I mean, wonderful tropical school in Liverpool, for example, the, there’s no interaction, the under-graduates and under-graduate teaching at all. What we did in Oxford, when I got to Oxford, we started something called the Tropical Day, so every student was, did nothing else that day, it was tropics, and we brought in a series of people with, who’d had a lot of experience in global aspects of medicine, and we brought a couple of chaps down from Liverpool with bags of worms and revolting things for these kids to see under the microscope, and that, that’s still going, it’s been very popular, and I think now about, I think somewhere around about 60 or 70% of the Oxford students do an elective period in the developing countries. And I think that’s obviously, a lot of that’s happening in other schools now, but again, what one’s trying to do is to just interest, perhaps even a small cohort, in the possibilities of at least spending part of their working time in research, and service work in the developing countries. What I’d like to see is more of the British universities developing these kind of, I hate this jargon, but the north-south partnerships, that we talked about earlier, that have been pretty successful in our place. So, there are problems for medical education, particularly for people like ourselves who firmly believe still, that there must be a place for what I’d call a kind of clinical scientist. I notice even in my own institute now, that there seems to be more of a division between the people who are doing kind of basic science and, and there is a feeling, and I’ve certainly met it in the States, that its not possible anymore for one person to have a foot in both camps. I don’t know if you believe that, then it worries the heck out of me actually, because who’s going to make the ground between the two halves? I mean, I’ve probably been kind of singularly unsuccessful in both halves at times, but at least occasionally you could at least fool yourself you were bringing the two together. I think if a person gets properly clinically trained and is then able, as they have been in the past, to take a few years off to get really, proper scientific training, and when they then develop their careers and are fully localised in their clinical activities, it is still possible, and must be still possible. But it’s going to take our successors a huge amount of fighting to stop these, I think our government at the moment seems hell bent on just a kind of generation of barefoot doctors, and think that a lot of the scientific background and the kind of early stuff that we have taught in the past is just a waste of time. They could produce a barefoot GP in 18 months, two years, perfectly adequately. It’s only that’s what, I think, the kind of thing we have to face in the future.
					
						One of the other major issues that arises when we’re loosely talking about education is the, is he increasing problem of communication, not just between the profession internally, but between the profession and the public at large. I, I first got involved in thinking about this bit anyway, in the year I was President of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, where you spend an enormous amount of time, at least for a few weeks, in the great Summer meeting, meeting the press or getting mucked about on the "Today" programme. And the, we, we also really came across this problem quite acutely when we were discussing the whole problem for example of animal research at the moment, and the public perception. This is a problem at many levels really, I think in, in medicine it’s been a, I don’t know why doctors have been such variable communicators. They’re now taught communication skills, I’m not sure, with, with actors and this kind of people, peering through kind of one-way windows at them, all that kind of thing. I’m not actually sure well, you can’t measure it, but I don’t think there’s anything, anything really better. What we tried to do with our kids in Oxford was to make sure that they actually spent lots of their teaching time sitting on the wards, talking to sick people and talking to, talking to their families. But the, the current issues are getting so complex, and the public, I get all the press cuttings from the Wellcome every week, anything to do with science or medicine, and a lot of the papers, they’re just bombarded every day with new advice, new genes for this, new genes for that. They’re now being told it’ll, maybe for a few hundred quid or not much more, they’ll be able to have their total genomes done. They read that the great Jim Watson’s recently had his put on, on the web is it? And except for one gene, which he doesn’t want to know, something that might make him an early sufferer from Alzheimer’s, I believe. But otherwise he’s quite happy for the world at large to know. Must be enormously confusing, and the, when we bring it down to the kind of student training level, it seems to me that perhaps by our better teaching of the complexities of human beings, it may make, I mean, hopefully make, the next lot of doctors slightly more humble, and in my experience of being a patient very occasionally, the one great thing that I required was somebody who listened, and I think listening is, and a little bit of humility, and some training, and this is why it’s so important, I think for all medical students to have a little bit of research experience, and the experience of presenting it, and the ability to take something that’s highly complex and put it into a language which is understandable. It is an art, but I think it’s an art that can be taught to some degree.
					
						There’s nothing in science except perhaps, perhaps some aspects of mathematics that cannot be made comprehensible to a, a layperson, if one takes enough trouble. But it’s something again, I think we’ve, we’ve all sort of very badly neglected it, I think, in training our young PHD students. They really should be presenting their material at least a few times a year, right through, and presenting it, not to just a couple of their peers in the lab, but to the whole institute or wherever they work. I think it’s that kind of training that we’ve not been very good at, and given the complexities of what they’re going to have to face, and the choices. I suppose the other important thing is how do you, how do you actually, to train a person, well, a doctor, never mind the public, in the statistics of what it actually means by risk? I mean, we can flash out these ghastly figures on smoking and ghastly figures on, well, it changes by the week, doesn’t it? Sometimes it’s coffee, sometimes it’s tea, I mean, everything’s been a risk factor that’s pleasurable, certainly in the last 30 years. But what does risk actually mean? Nobody actually explains what that actually means in numbers. I, I get the impression that a lot of our politicians who are looking after health don’t really understand this. They’re jumping on these bandwagons, there’s various, I mean, the things that make, I mean, okay, smoking, cigarette smoking, I have to admit, is very well established. Pipe smoking is not nearly as well established, but when you get to these marginal areas, which are poured out in the tabloids every week, how many risk factors for breast cancer there are now, and then they change weekly. So, there’s another layer here. There’s the layer of educating the scientist in communication, but then how do we interact better with the media? I mean, there are ways for them, I mean, the media do it on a personal basis, usually, and they have been ringing services for when big stories break, and there’s some excellent mechanisms for putting them into the right science area and the right people to talk to, but I think there’s more to it than that. When I was, I guess it was in the '80s, we had a body called the BBC Science Council, and we used to meet, a few of us, regularly with the producers, and I thought that was tremendously valuable, actually. I mean, we could tell them roughly what was hot at the moment, try and put it into perspective, and those were the days when there were these excellent Horizon programmes on science and a number of other very good programmes. For some reason, that seemed to disband, and I don’t know of any kind of more formal forum for the press meeting journalists. I think in our animal research report, we just asked bodies like the Royal Society and Academy of Medical Sciences to try to, I think the Royal Society had been quite good at this actually, and in particular areas of problem, like primate research, to really make a much bigger effort to educate the public, and that can be done by having open meetings, which are open to journalists and so on. I think it’s very important, but it’s got be at every level now, right through training and through the bodies like the Royal Society, and the Royal Colleges to some degree. Because complexity is by the day, it’s getting worse. Well, I don’t understand most of it now anyway.
					
						Yes, well I suppose to wrap it up, it’s interesting to think back on what we did and did not achieve, and what if one was starting over again, how one would have made things different. I think one could argue that by putting the whole of one’s research career with a few minor exceptions into one disease or one set of diseases, might sound like rather a kind of narrow view of the world, actually. I can make two excuses for that. One is that I think if you were going to take a broader kind of career, where you’re going to try to continue to be a doctor of some kind, and perhaps a teacher of some kind, and then have to run something, I think your research has got to be very focused, otherwise you can get your foot into other camps, and encourage other people to do things, but I think if you, if you’re, something that you're actually very passionate about, it does have to be focused. I suppose the problem with the thalassemia field was that, well, there were two problems, I mean, you could argue that it was all done in that exciting period in between '60 and the end of the '80s, we knew the molecular pathology, we, starting to relate phenotype to genotype, and what we, I suppose the big surprise, certainly to John and, John Clegg and I, at that time, was how quickly what was really totally curiosity-driven science, in trying to actually measure the way haemoglobin’s made in the test tube was, gosh, I suppose even when they never had two or three years in the clinic for prenatal diagnosis, the same technology, and that, that was quite gratifying, and certainly did a useful job over the next ten years till DNA appeared, but I’ve always found it a bit unsatisfying that despite all this effort, I still can’t look you in the eye, or even worse, a parent in the eye, and say with any degree of certainty for a large number of these diseases, what that child will end up as. And, with the newer technologies of, I think gene therapy, which of course has been around this wonderful corner for so many years, there’s starting to be hints now that it’s probably going to take off. Whether it will be able to take off for difficult monogenic diseases like thalassemia were, you do need to have a gene expression, which- very large amounts of product in a very accurate way, where you could do worse damage than, I think that’s still quite a way off actually, but, so when that comes, and in that very difficult run up period in the experimental phase, I think not knowing with all that much precision in a large number of cases still, say in sickle cell disease, for example, the justification for doing experimental science is going to be quite difficult actually. And I think that’s really why we’ve batted on and I’m afraid still are battering on, trying to understand heterogeneity. And really, trying to, I suppose look at some of these things which we, I suppose badly neglected many years ago, particularly the effect of the environment. But I find this, when I look at other monogenic diseases, I never forget, it was not long ago when somebody found a, managed to make a cystic fibrotic mouse, and of course, you do these wonderful out breeding experiments, phenotype changes, wow, we’ve a modifier on chromosome six. And then this, banner headlines in the "Nature", human monogenic disease is not so simple  But, we’ve known this in the field for about 20 years, but, and then you could argue, well, how far do you really want to go? It’s almost self evident that, but I think these breeds of the genetic modifiers in the globin field, at least was a kind of indication to the folk working on complex disease, of some of the complexities they were going to run into. And the fascinating question for me, I think, in the complex disease is, so much of that information’s going to be interesting, but not practically useful, is whether, as it seems to have happened in the cancer field, at least some of those susceptibilities may lead to different approaches to therapy. And it’s, again, very early, isn’t it? But it, there’re just hints now from the diabetes field, for example, that, and, even from one or two of the inflammatory diseases, that that may be the case. So, I don’t know, I don’t think I have too many regrets that I kind of stuck at this one disease. It’s been an extraordinary model for human molecular genetics in that sense really, and I remember about, it was round about three or four years ago, the "Nature" genetics crowd asked me to write on the, a kind of, one of the essays on this subject, and it was interesting because I hadn’t thought about it, I mean, we were doing it, but not it, the big picture. And I suddenly realised that we didn’t even have a nomenclature to start describing this phenomena, so I had to start talking, like kind of boring layers of primary and secondary and even tertiary modifiers, and that the complications of the disease undoubtedly would come under strong genetic modification in some cases, and in fact, again, the totally unexpected, the nice turnout that at least the tertiary modifier for the thalassemia is in the parts of the Indian sub-continent, that awful kind of ghastly disfiguring jaundice, something you can do about it, you know, so just occasionally, purely by chance when you’re working down in the kind of bottom layers of diversity, something like that, so I’m not too pessimistic, actually, I think it probably, if I’d had my time again, I wouldn’t have been stupid enough to become a Professor of Medicine, and have to look after the lives of so many people, and maybe stuck a little bit more to the science– I don’t know. Perhaps the science would have been a bit better if I had.
					