desmond.morris

Born in Wiltshire, UK in 1928, Desmond Morris had a strong interest in natural history from his boyhood. Later, as an undergraduate, he studied zoology, and after obtaining a First Class Honours Degree from the University of Birmingham, he moved to the Oxford University Zoology Department where he began his research into animal behaviour for his doctorate thesis.    In 1957, having moved to London, Morris famously organised an exhibition at the ICA of art work created by Congo the chimpanzee. Morris's engagement with the visual arts remains strong and he has often exhibited many of his own paintings since 1950 when his paintings went on show alongside those of the surrealist painter, Jean Miró.    1950 was also the year when Morris began his career in TV creating and presenting Zootime and Life in the Animal World.  Soon after this, he began work on a book that has proved a huge best-seller, The Naked Ape.  Focusing on human behaviour, it was the first in a series of books in which the author observes humans primarily as a species of animal.    Today, Desmond Morris has lost none of his inquisitiveness and continues to observe and write about what he sees in the world around him.

When I delivered my first volume of memoirs to my publisher, he said to me, you've told me everything about the people you've met, the places you've been, the things you've done, but there's nothing in the book about you. And I said, no, that's because I'm not really interested in myself. I'm interested in the planet I live on and everything in it – the plants, the crystals, the rocks, the seas, the ocean, the animals, the people, but I'm just the telescope that looks at these things. And if you have a telescope it's what you see through it that matters, it's not the telescope itself. So I've never really been very interested in myself. However, if I'm asked to talk about my own life, then I must begin at the beginning, when I was six months old.
And when I say six months old, I don't mean six months after my birth, I mean six months after my conception. Because I'm one of those very rare people who saw the light of day before he was born. That's a rather shocking statement and I'd better explain it.
What happened was that my young mother was found to be suffering from a large growth or some sort of tumour in her abdomen when I was in her womb. I think it was probably a cystic ovary. It was a growth the size of a grapefruit and she had to have it removed. And she said, well, what about my baby in my womb? And they said, well, I'm afraid you're going to lose that little baby. She said, in that case I'm not going to have the operation. And they said, well, in that case, both you and your baby will die. So with a very heavy heart, she had the operation, and there I was, snugly wrapped up in her womb, minding my own business, when suddenly there's this blinding light as her abdomen was opened up to remove this grapefruit-sized growth. There was no possibility of me surviving this, but I did. Somehow I managed to survive this. It was against all the odds. And later, to her absolute delight and relief, I was born, a healthy boy. And that was the first of the traumas that I suffered as a child.

I should just... before I go on, I should say something about what I think are the really disproportionate influences on one's life. There are two of them really. One is the experiences you have in childhood, which is what I've started talking about, and will go on to in a moment. But there is another one and that is lucky timing. Lucky timing is so important in life because you just walk through a door and something happens and it changes your life. Now, at the age of 86, I've been alive for over 30,000 evenings. And on three of those 30,000 evenings, something happened that changed my life dramatically.
The first one was when I walked through a door and saw a beautiful young girl and fell in love with her instantly – and two years ago we celebrated our diamond wedding. So that worked and that had a huge impact on my life because her brain was better than my brain, if I'm honest, and she has been a powerhouse in my life ever since. And a year later, I was an undergraduate and I was taken by my professor to hear a speech by a professor who was visiting from Holland, and that speech was like a religious conversion for me because his scientific method was so much what I wanted to do that it changed my whole scientific life, and for the rest of my scientific life, I followed his particular discipline. And the third one was in 1960 when I was at a dinner party with a young publisher who was there and I mentioned to him an idea I had for a book and he pursued me for it for seven years because I was too frightened to write it. And eventually I wrote it and it was called The Naked Ape, and that changed my life too.
So those three evenings – just lucky timing. If I hadn't been to that party, if I hadn't been to that lecture, if I hadn't been to that dinner party, my life would've been totally different. And all the other 30,000 evenings in my life, none... if you put the whole lot together – they don't add up to the importance of those three. So one's life, one's whole... the shape of one's life is determined by these lucky moments and one has to be alert to them and respond to them. And you never know when they're going to happen. There'll only be a few in your life and they will change your whole life.

But the other disproportionate influence on one's life is, as I said, childhood experiences. Now, I'd already had one bad one and I was in for a few more. I've often wondered really, what sort of childhood produces creative adults. And I think it's a combination of having loving parents and a... and a happy, loving environment, but also at the same time having occasional bad moments. If your life's too cosy, you end up as a sort of happy-go-lucky adult. If it's too shocking and chaotic, you end up as a neurotic adult. The ideal is to have a happy childhood, but to have a few bad moments. It may sound an odd thing to say, but what happens if you have those bad moments and you survive them is that they can make you tougher. They harden you up, they make you wary, they make you aware of the fact that life is not a bowl of cherries so that when you do grow up, you are ready for it and you don't expect life to be cosy.
Now, I had four of these childhood traumas. The first one I've already mentioned, which happened in the womb. I don't know what effect that had on me. I can't... I can't even guess. But my second one came pretty soon after because my young mother, like all young mothers in the late 1920s when I was born – I was born in 1928 – were under the influence of a childcare specialist called Dr Watson. Now Dr Watson had written the childcare bible of that period, and all young mothers were following his instructions. He's very authoritative. He also happened to be – and this is an understatement – a raving lunatic because he said that the child was a little monster that was trying to get the better of its mother and that you must not under any circumstances respond to it when it cries. You had to leave it to cry. Let it cry itself out; you'll break your baby that way. It was like breaking a horse; it was the most appalling book ever written about childcare. How he got away with it, I don't know. But young mothers believed it, and children were left to cry. He said you must put your baby out in a pram, regardless of the weather, because it must have fresh air and if it cries, it's just exercising its lungs and if you must watch it, build a screen and look at it through a peephole. I mean, he was... you couldn't be more nutty than this man. And these young mothers believed him.
So my mother would put me out in my pram and leave me to cry. And – she was a loving mother, don't get me wrong – and she hated it, but she was told this was the thing to do. And one day there was a bitter East wind – I always remembered the East wind which she told me about later on – and I got double pneumonia and nearly died. I was on death's door for the second time. I was only a baby and already, twice, I'd nearly died. At that point, my mother threw the book away and said: to hell with Dr Watson, I'm going to love my baby. And from then on, I... and indeed, I think it worked in my favour because then on she was particularly loving and gave me all the cuddles that a baby needs and ignored this ridiculous advice from Dr Watson. So I then had a loving and a really wonderful childhood.

It wasn't until I was eight that the next trauma came along, and this one was strange because I was on a family picnic on the Thames, and we'd gone in a boat and we were having a picnic on the bank. And there was something I'd left in the boat and I wanted to get it, so I went back to the boat and I leant over and as I leant over, the boat moved away from the bank and I fell in. And even to this day – what is it? 78 years later – I can still remember exactly what I saw. It was these water reeds waving like that in front of me, and it was so beautiful and I thought: how lovely this is. And the strange thing about it was that I was so impressed by the beauty of this underwater scene that I suddenly thought: I'm drowning, you know, this is... and then I suddenly started to panic because I was very close to drowning. I was in the... tied up in these weeds and I couldn't swim anyway.
And then I saw some legs, a pair of legs, walking towards me and this is my aunt coming to rescue me. And she'd got me out just in time. And the funny thing about that incident was that what the worst memory of it was the embarrassment I had when they had to take off all my wet clothes, and I had to put on the clothes of other relatives and have to sit in this... sit in these other clothes, feeling really stupid and embarrassed for the rest of the afternoon while the picnic went on. And as a result of that trauma in childhood, I never learnt to swim. I hated swimming. I wouldn't swim at school and I got into trouble for that. But I couldn't put my head underwater; if my head went underwater, I panicked. And it wasn't until I was 40 years old that I taught myself to swim. By this time I had a private swimming pool of my own and I got into this pool and I went through a series of exercises.
I'd been very lucky because I'd known an old psychoanalyst who was a friend of Sigmund Freud's. And when I was very young I used to listen to a lot of the things he had to tell me about psychoanalysis. And he told me... I told him about this particular problem and he said, what you do if you have a problem is you take it to pieces. You take each element of it and you deal with it separately.
And so I got into my pool. And what I'd do is I would hold onto the side and put my head under the water so that... and try to get used to this getting my head under the water without panicking. And that was terribly difficult. But I... what you mustn't do is to try and just swim because then it all happens at once. So I would spend... and I could do it in a private pool because nobody could see me looking ridiculous doing this... putting my head under the water and then coming up again. And then I would take my hands off the wall and do it with that. And bit by bit I would put together what it took to swim and I taught myself to swim at the age of 40, and then I loved it. And since then, I... after 40, I've been in every coral reef in the world and I love it. So that was overcoming that particular trauma.
The next one was when I was 12. And again, it was a picnic – I don't know what it is about picnics – it was a picnic on the bank of the Thames. Actually, not on the bank. It was in a... in a field next to the Thames and my mother and father were with me, and we were having strawberries and cream. And I remember the strawberries and cream very well because the strawberries were bright red in the afternoon sun. And we were sitting there having this... picnic when two small twin-engine aeroplanes... I can remember what they were – they were Avro Oxford's, they were training planes used for training. This was in – when was it? 1940 – the war had just started and they were training young pilots. And these two training aircraft came over and I looked up at them and they were coming towards us and as I watched them, their wingtips touched and they both plunged into the field in which we were sitting, one on either side of us. We're having our picnic and a few yards over there, there's one aeroplane, and a few yard over there's another aeroplane, and there's an arm sticking up from that aeroplane like this and a groaning sound coming from the other aeroplane. My father, who was very ill at the time, got up and went over to this aeroplane, looked inside it, and then walked – I always remember this – he walked over to a hedge and vomited. What he'd seen was so awful.
Now, I can remember that scene. I mean, there's... I've forgotten so much of my childhood but that scene, as I describe it, is vivid in my imagination. It's... isn't it awful that the things that are the worst moments stay most clearly in your memory? And other nice moments like going and having a lovely time here, lovely time there, you forget all about it. But I can't forget that moment.

And there's a reason for this. There was a man, an experimenter called Masserman. And Masserman's experiment with cats – a particularly unpleasant experiment but it was one that taught me something – the Masserman experiment called 'Food in the...' it's called... no, what's it called? 'Snake in the food box'. He had these experimental cats and he would show them snakes and they wouldn't mind. You know, they even sort of hunted them. But then one day, he put a snake in the cat's food box which had a lid on top and the cat, to get its food, had to knock the lid off. So the cat goes to its food box and it knocks the lid off and inside there's a snake. And the cat jumps back and that cat wouldn't feed again for days. It became completely neurotic about food because of the snake in the food box.
Now these aeroplanes crashing on either side of us were the snake, and our strawberries and cream were the food box. And so as we sat there in that field... it was such a lovely, sunny afternoon and I was with my mother and father – it was a happy moment – we were having strawberries and cream and it was wonderful. And suddenly this horror strikes us and nearly... I mean, how we didn't get killed is a miracle, but it was the contrast between the expectation of a pleasant afternoon and the horror that happened that left the mark on my memory. After all, I was a child during World War II and I saw plenty of air crashes and things where you... when you expected them. But it was the shock of the contrast between the cosiness of the picnic and the sudden horror.
So those are my childhood traumas which impinged on an otherwise happy childhood. I told you how the drowning incident meant that I couldn't swim; I couldn't put my head underwater. And as you can probably guess, the aeroplane crash meant that I couldn't fly. I just... I just couldn't bring myself to. My father realised it was a danger, this, and he took me to one of those air shows and tried to get me to go up in an aeroplane and I wouldn't, you know. And he was, oh, come on, come on. No, no, I wouldn't go near an aeroplane. And, indeed, I refused to fly anywhere and I had to... if I went to the Continent, it had to be on a ferryboat until I was 38. My first flight I took when I had no choice. I just had to go to a conference in Zurich and I got onto the aeroplane knowing I was going to die and bathed in sweat, and when I got off the other end I thought, I'm alive, I've actually survived.
And this is, you know, nearly... what was it? 12 years to 38 years. A long... a long gap. But it was still... it was still there – this trauma. So I overcame it. And then, as with the swimming, I not only became passionate about swimming once I'd taught myself, but once I'd flown and discovered that I wasn't going to die, I became absolutely passionate. I love flying and I've flown hundreds of time ever since. I've been in light aircraft, I've been in helicopters. I've even been in hot air balloons over Africa. And every... I've been in Concorde, I've been in every conceivable... I love flying. And so, once you do overcome these traumas, you can put them to bed and, in fact, they don't have to last in that way if you once defeat them.

But there was one bit trauma coming up which was going to have a major impact on my life. My father had been working for some time in a... he was an engineer and he was... I knew him as somebody who worked in a drawing office of an engineering company. He was also a writer; he wrote children's stories. And he gave me my first typewriter when I was very young and I could... I always used to say I could type before I could write. And that served me in good stead because, you know, my typing was very fast; I could type as fast as I could think when I was quite a small child. And so when... later on, when everybody else was doing longhand, I was typing away like mad. And that helped me a great deal later on... later in life. Today, of course, every child has a computer keyboard so it's all changed.
Now my father in World War I had been so badly damaged by life in the trenches that his health had been ruined. His lungs were shot to pieces and he had all sorts of other problems. And all through my childhood, I was watching him slowly die, and he finally died in 1942. The Second World War had just... at its worst. I was 14, and a 14-year-old finds it very difficult to cope with the death of a father. I had enormous respect for my father as well as obviously loving him, but I... he was... he was a strong man who suffered from this awful damage that he received in World War I, and I felt very angry on his behalf. And when he died during World War II, as a teenager I thought the human species is mad, the human species is crazy – what's going on? We had a world war to settle everything, now we're doing it all over again! And here am I, a teenager at boarding school, and they've already got me into uniform – I mean the ATC, Air Training Corps – and if the war goes on long enough, I'll be shot down in my Spitfire. At assembly at school each morning, the headmaster would read out the names of last years' sixth formers who'd been shot down in those Spitfires and Hurricanes the previous night. And... I was in the fifth form and you think, well, it's only a couple of years, you know, and it'll be me.
And what's so interesting is that I had no memory of how I'd reacted at the time, but my mother had kept my school essays and my school letters sent home, you know, to her. And I was able to read those many years later. And what was fascinating about my school essays was that they were violently critical of the human species. A child growing up in World War II knew that when you grew up what you had to do was to kill people. That's what grownups did – they killed people! And you were supposed to kill people. That was... that was the view I was getting as a teenager – as a sensitive teenager, and I thought this was appalling. And in one of my school essays, I wrote an extraordinary sentence in which I said that the human being is a monkey with a diseased brain. That was my description of the human species as a 14/15 year old.

This anger I had at the way my father had been treated produced in me a sense of rebellion. But in the immortal words of Alfred Hitchcock, I was a good little boy. I hadn't... I wasn't destructive. I didn't smash windows or anything; my rebellion had to be more constructive than that. And it took the form of turning against anything to do with authority. I decided that all political leaders, religious leaders and military leaders were... in my teenage language, I described them as the scum that rises to the top of society. And this is what these world wars had done to me: they'd made me hate authority and hate the leaders of society for what they'd done to my father.
And my rebellion was not particularly spectacular. What I did was I turned against anything to do with authority and tradition. I hated anything traditional because they were the people who'd killed my father. So I... in music, I was being taught classical music, so I developed a passion for jazz which made my music master furious and I had great battles with him over this. And from that day to this, I've been a great jazz enthusiast and have not really taken much pleasure in traditional music. In art, I was being taught about the old masters and I decided they were all rubbish and I found an essay by Max Ernst about surrealism and I became a passionate Surrealist. In literature, I was being taught Dickens and Shakespeare. What I load of rubbish, I thought – I'm not having any of that. And I turned to WH Auden, Christopher Isherwood, Dylan Thomas, TS Eliot, ee cummings – these were the people that I looked to. So in literature, in music, in art, I turned to all those movements and those figures who were rebels against tradition.
It was a fairly modest rebellion but it... it pleased me and it started me off painting. I started painting in... surrealist tradition and I started writing fantasy prose and poetry. And there was one other rebellion and that was that my family wanted me to be a doctor. It was the last thing in the world I wanted to be. I'd seen enough illness to last me a lifetime, seeing my poor father dying slowly, in agony. And so I said no, I want to be a zoologist. They said, but you can be a doctor, there's... you can make a good career out of that. How can you make a career out of being a zoologist? I said I don't care, I'm going to study animals. And I became passionate about two things – about my surrealist painting and my study of animal behaviour.
And I spent all my time studying the animals in the countryside in Wiltshire where I lived. I had a huge collection of pet animals. I had a collection of foxes and in a ridiculous, childish way, I intended to hunt foxhounds with them. I... I love foxes and snakes, and I had about 100 toads in the garden. Toads were a special favourite of mine. I loved their appearance. I thought their ugliness was so complete that it was beautiful. And my very first scientific paper ever published was in the school natural history magazine, which I edited with Martin Wells, who was HG Wells' grandson. And we edited this magazine and in it, I wrote my first paper on toad migration because I had studied toads and saw how they always migrated back to the ancestral pond. And I didn't know how they did it, I wanted to know.
So I went out at night – I was given special dispensation to go out at night which wasn't normal – to go and study the migration of toads and to follow their path back to the ancestral pond. And the interesting thing is that now, so many years later, we still don't know how they do it. It's still a mystery how they migrate back because tests have been done where toads have been taken from their ancestral pond and moved beyond other ponds, and then they... they walk round these other ponds to get back to their old pond. So it's not that they go to the nearest pond. It's that they go to their pond, the pond in which they were born, and they can identify that pond. How they do it, I don't know and nobody does. And I... in a way I'm kind of pleased that that mystery is still there although I would love to know what the mechanism is. The navigational systems of animals are still very much a mystery, an absolutely fascinating subject of scientific investigation.
Anyway, that was my very first study and I spent a lot of time in the countryside, watching animals.

My grandmother had a lake and... she was very old and she should have done something with it, but it had just got derelict and there was this wonderful old lake she had and nobody was allowed to go there. And she allowed me to go there because it was a family lake. So I had this lake all to myself. It wasn't a big lake, it was quite a small lake, but it was a lake. And it had been stocked with lots of different fish by fishermen. Now, I never wanted to catch fish on a hook because it seemed to me that it was a gross interference with the life of a fish. Because you've got to remember I was now zoomorpho... zoo... what's the word? I was... I was the... seeing life from the animals' point of view. I wasn't antropomorphic, I was theriomorphic and I was identifying with the fish so I didn't want to catch them, I wanted to watch them.
And I managed to build a raft out of logs and four oil drums and I got some removal men to take it down and float it on the lake and I used to lie on this raft. I don't know how my mother allowed me to do it because I still couldn't swim, don't forget, and I could easily have drowned. But I was very careful. And I would lie flat on this raft with my face pressed close against the surface of the water and for hours I would watch the fish, and I knew where the pike was hiding, I knew where the roach shoaled and I saw how the perch had spines in its fins to protect it from being eaten and I learnt about this underwater world. And I could also watch the sea... the water birds, the waterfowl and the birds and there were newts and toads and frogs all around this lake and it was a private world of mine in which I could disappear.
And this was happening, of course, you know, while the World War II was raging around me and bombs were dropping. And I remember we had a sort of metal cage – a reinforced metal cage – under the kitchen table, and when there was a bombing raid, my mother made me get into it so that if the house collapsed I would be safe, and I would sit in this cage under the kitchen table. The thing you learned was that when a stick of bombs was being dropped, you listened very carefully to see if each noise was slightly louder or slightly softer than the previous one, and if each 'whomp' that you heard was slightly louder than the last 'whomp', then you're in trouble. And they got pretty close to where we were.
So that World War II was... that was how I grew up. And I escaped from it with my animal studies and turned my back on the human species and wanted to do nothing but study zoology.

When the war ended, to my horror I got conscripted into the army. And one thing I really hated was warfare, of course, because of my father's death and it was the last thing in the world I wanted was to be in the army, but conscription was still going on after the war. So there I was, in the one place I didn't want to be, being trained to use a fixed bayonet to disembowel somebody, how to use a machine gun to mow people down and all these other minor accomplishments that a young soldier is supposed to pursue, finding the whole thing thoroughly objectionable. But it did two things for me. It made me physically incredibly fit – all those sort of forced marches in full kit and drilling up and down on the parade ground – I became physically incredibly fit, as fit as I've ever been in my life, and I think that did my body a bit of good.
I also developed cunning because you had to figure out how to survive. And I was always getting into trouble. I was very bad at making my bed up. You had bed inspections when you had to put all your kit very neatly on your bed and the officers would come round and would... you'd get into trouble if you had a lumpy bed. Mine was always lumpy and I was always getting into trouble. One of the things we had to do was to have our lockers open and make sure everything inside the locker was very neat. And I noticed that other soldiers had pictures of their mother or their sister or girlfriend in their lockers.
Now at this time, it so happened that a girlfriend of mine was a young actress called Diana Dors, and Diana had a particularly voluptuous body. And I wrote to her and I said, look, Diana, I need your help. I want some of your best pinups – your sexiest pinups – to get me out of trouble with my lumpy bed. She said, 'What do you mean, lumpy bed?' Anyway, that's another story, but... so I got these pinups and I pinned them in my locker and the next time a... one of these officers came round to inspect, he raised his cane to the I-am-about-to-give-you-a-bad-mark, sort of, position – like this, and then he saw these pictures of Diana and went over and peered at them and forgot all about my lumpy bed. So Diana was what in zoological terms we call a distraction display.
I'd been studying distraction displays in animals and I applied that to the army and it worked. And I thought, you know, you've got to use your wits. And I noticed some men having a smoke outside a building. I said, what are they doing – why aren't they drilling like the rest of us? Oh, they've applied for a transfer. So I thought, aha! So then every time I arrived at an army camp, I would apply for a transfer immediately and would be outside the normal routine. I kept getting transferred from one camp to another in this way and it got me out of a lot of trouble. So I was learning – what the army did was it taught me a bit of low cunning and how to manipulate situations.

I eventually ended up in the medical corps. And I thought, well, this should be all right and I'll learn something about medicine... I had no idea how awful this was going to be.
I never forget the first lecture I went to in the medical corps. A sergeant came in and he said, 'Right, sit down'. And so we all sat down. He said, 'Now then', he said, 'what do you look for?' And we don't know what he's talking about.  'What do you look for when a patient comes in? A body's brought in – what do you look for?' And we said, 'Don't know, sergeant. What...?' 'Symptoms', he said, 'got to look for symptoms'. Oh. 'What sort of symptoms are you going to look for?' This is the kind of lecture we were having. So we said, 'We don't know, sergeant'. He said, 'Colour. You've got to look at the colour of your patient. Now then', he said, 'if he's blue – he's cold, if he's red – he's bleeding, if he's white – he's dead, and if he's green... if he's green – he's gorn orff'. I immediately applied for another transfer. That was too much for me.

I decided to apply for a transfer immediately and this time I was lucky because I got into the Royal Army Education Corps and was sent to a demob college. Now this demob college was a place where men went when they were coming out of the army and they could choose any subject to rehabilitate themselves for civilian life. And they were short of a lecturer in Fine Art, the previous one having left under a cloud, I gathered. And I was given this job. I was suddenly – I was only a teenager – but I was suddenly running a monthly course on art, on the history of art, on life classes. I had life classes, I did still-lives, I did field trips to sketch in the countryside, I took my art students to the galleries in London. It was a wonderful time and I really enjoyed this part. This was the second year of my army life; it was wonderful. I had 12 of these one-monthly courses. And, of course, as a young painter, this was just what I needed. And I learnt a huge... well, I had to learn fast because again the army was teaching me how to use a bit of low cunning and to bluff my way through because, of course, as a teenager, I didn't know much about the history of art but I learned it very, very quickly in order to teach it.
And it was during this time, I was very lucky because my boss, a man called Mervyn Levy, happened to be a childhood friend of Dylan Thomas. They'd grown up together and they were close... they were best friends when they were children. And Dylan used to come and stay with Mervyn. And when Dylan was coming to stay, I would dash over there and spend as much time as I could with him. And it was about a couple of years before he died. He was... he was... poor Dylan – he was either drunk or suffering from a hangover and hangovers were better because then you could talk to him. He had this terrible problem with booze. But he was a magician with words. His... as a wordsmith, you just sat in astonishment at the way in which he could play with words. Everything he said, sort of, hung in the air. And he wasn't showing off – he just couldn't help it. And I learnt so much from him about the use of words.
I remember Mervyn was a rather short man, and at lunch one day, Dylan took his fork, stuck it in a boiled potato, held it up like a microphone to his mouth and said, 'And now, we will all say a hymn to our host who is a very, very short man'. And then he proceeded, and you... I couldn't believe my ears the way... because it all just came out. He said, 'Our midget, which art in heaven, miniature be Thy name' and he went right through the Lord's Prayer, ending up, 'Forever and ever, Tom Thumb'. And it was the most extraordinary facility with the English language.
And he and I discussed the difference between visual art and written and he... at one point, he took a crumpled poem out of his pocket and held it on the wall and said, 'Look, you can sell your paintings – I can't sell that'. And, of course, money was the curse of his life. I mean, he was obsessed with the fact that he didn't have any and was always borrowing money and was in money difficulties. It was... it was such a shame because he was the greatest wordsmith I've ever met and I... what he taught me, without... he didn't teach me, but just by listening to him, I learnt so much about the use of words. And it lasted... that's lasted me a lifetime too. I shall always be grateful to Dylan Thomas for that.

When I finally came to leave the army, I had to decide what to do next. The art schools at the time were pretty awful – hidebound, traditional – and it didn't appeal to me at all. But I was by... at this point, obsessed with my surrealist painting and drawing and I decided that what I would do is I would combine my two interests of animals and art and I would go and do a degree in zoology, but with the primary aim of doing thousands of drawings under the microscope – because I was fascinated by microscopic shapes and I wanted to spend hours drawing them. And I did. It wasn't actually my intention, much as I loved animals, to go on and become a professional zoologist. There was a reason for this. It's because I happened to like animals and I wasn't prepared to do experiments on animals. Now zoology is an experimental science and I would – if I went on to become a professional zoologist – I would be expected to do experiments on animals and I wasn't prepared to do that. So I wasn't serious about a career of zoology, but I was very serious about the wonderful shapes and images that I found under the microscope. And I've got a huge pile of old notebooks of those drawings still.
And then something very strange happened. My professor, who was a young man called Peter Medawar, who was utterly brilliant – another great wordsmith incidentally, and I learnt a huge amount from him about scientific writing, he had a wonderful way with words, like Dylan and... but in his case, they were... it was... it was scientific eloquence. And in fact the research he was doing when he was my professor was research for which he later received the Nobel Prize. It was research on immunology, and it was that research that led eventually to heart transplant, so it was very important. And his brain was at its peak and his lectures were wonderful. And he knew that I was interested in animal behaviour and he was such an acute observer of people that he spotted that... I think he must have spotted that I wasn't really happy with experimental work and that I was an observer of animal behaviour. And one day he said to me, look, there's a Dutch professor, Niko Tinbergen, coming over to give a talk at the medical department here and I think you ought to hear him.
I was very flattered and he actually drove me over in his car. I was only a student but anyway, I thought, this is wonderful. And I sat with him and listened for one hour to Tinbergen and that was, for me, a great moment because here was a man who had found a way to do respectable, quantitative, scientific analysis of animal behaviour which was based on observation rather than experiment. You didn't have to do nasty things to the animals, you just simply sat and watched them. But you didn't just watch them like a naturalist, you sat and watched them analytically and you analysed everything they did and you recorded it, you described it and you measured it, and then you made predictions and then you measured those predictions. So it was... it was scientific analysis of animal behaviour of a naturalistic kind. It was exactly what I wanted. And thanks to the brilliance of Medawar's brain, which impressed me so much, and thanks to Tinbergen's philosophy of observing animals, I was able to continue with my zoological career. I didn't stop... I didn't stop painting. I managed to keep both things going and in 1950, I – for example – I had an exhibition in London with the Spanish artist Miró and later got to know him.
And so I was active in the art world, but I was also now becoming seriously active in the scientific world of zoology.

And I managed to get a First, which I had to have to get to Oxford where Tinbergen was with his research group. He'd just set up a research group at Oxford to study what was called Comparative Ethology. The discipline was against the old psychology. In fact, psychologists, animal psychologists, were our sort of... were our kind of friendly enemies because they were running rats in mazes, and all their experiments were to see what happened if you did this or that to a rat and then you ran it in the maze again to see if it was better or not. And to us, as ethologists, this seemed crazy because a rat is an animal that only really exists if it has a burrow system and no rat can set up its lifestyle without a burrow, and these poor old rats in the laboratory had no burrows so they weren't real rats. They were... I don't know what they were. We just... we just rejected all of animal psychology in a rather offhand way and said, that's nonsense, you've got to study the natural behaviour of the animal.
And Tinbergen's dictum was this: he said, you're going to do a three-year study – and I chose the ten-spined stickleback, a little fish, which had a fascinating reproductive life cycle – and in the first year, I don't want you to do any experiments, but I want you to do an ethogram. And I said, what's an ethogram? And he said an ethogram is a list of every action that that particular species makes. You must describe it, you must say when it occurs and what effect it has, and when you're finished, you will then know the entire behaviour repertoire of that species. That's what you do first. You don't rush into experiments. So I spent a year just sitting in front of aquarium tanks, watching these... and I had to set up the aquarium tanks as if they... full of waterweeds and... it had to be done in a naturalistic way. And I watched the fish go through their extremely complicated lifecycle with all sorts of elaborate patterns of courtship and fighting and parental care and so on. And I thought: this is a fascinating little fish, and I did my doctorate on it.
And I started... I realised now I had a serious appetite to do this kind of research and I began a whole series of studies of fish and birds. And what I was particularly interested in was to try and find out what were the origins of animal communication systems. How did animals communicate with one another? How did they display to one another? And the interesting thing was that, if you watched television – an animal programme on television or a film – people would talk about the animals doing a courtship dance. They'd say, oh look, the animal's bobbing up and down, that's... he's displaying to his female. Why was he bobbing up and down? Why... how had that evolved? That was my question. I wasn't satisfied just to describe, I needed to know how that particular pattern developed. You know, one bird would bob its head like this, another one would wag its head like this, another one would bow down and there are all these different movements. How did they come about?
And it was a study that I wrote up as a paper called 'The Origin of Social Signals' which I was most pleased with because I was able to trace back to the origins how these different things arose. A lot of them were intention movements, where a bird was about to take off and then stopped, about to take off and then stopped – so you get a bird doing this, and it was a series of intention movements which had become ritualised into a dance, and this was the courtship dance of that species. And so I was studying these... the origins of these signals and all these strange movements. And people hadn't done this before – it was all new research, it... we felt like pioneers.  We were all looking into these things and nobody had really looked at this before – they had just said they dance they hadn't sort of asked, why do they flap their wings like that or bob their head like that?  And we were trying to find the roots of all those actions, and it was very exciting research.

I developed a concept called 'typical intensity'. You know when a telephone rings, it goes brrp-brrp, brrp-brrp, brrp-brrp, like that. Now, it could be a casual call, it could be an urgent call – the telephone can't tell the difference. The brrp-brrp goes on at a fixed intensity. The only way that you can make it feel more urgent is to let it ring longer, but that's not very... So telephone's not very good at telling you how intense a particular call is or how urgent a particular call is because it has a fixed signal. Now animal signals aren't fixed like that. They're variable, and the stronger the intensity, the stronger the movement. But if that happens... if that goes too far, then there's nothing strange about the ritual. And for the ritual to become strange, it has to develop a typical intensity, that is, that the bird may bob its head slightly faster, but it won't be as fast as it might be if it was just an action like, say, pecking: if there... if there's a hard nut, the harder the nut, the harder the peck.
It isn't like that with animal display. What happens is that the animal develops a typical intensity so the head will be bobbing like this at a particular intensity. It won't be absolutely fixed because it might get a little more excited. But it won't... let me give you an example. Human clapping – you see, because I, of course, later was going to apply all this to humans – human clapping – if you clap like this, it's a very different signal to if you clap like this. And when people applaud, if you measure the speed of clapping, you'll find that there is a typical intensity, that when people are applauding, they tend to clap at this sort of speed. If they're really excited, they might try and clap even faster, but it's very difficult. So they have a...normal applause goes at a certain speed. And if you do it very slowly, it gives a different signal altogether. So visual signals or sound signals have about them this typical intensity which marks them out and makes them into special rituals. And this was the kind of thing I was studying at Oxford.

After a number of years of this, I had a lucky accident. I was in the library and I was in... I don't know why, but I opened a particular volume almost at...  I was... I was bored, I couldn't find the reference I was looking for and I just pulled out a volume and I looked at it. And it was one of those lucky moments when it fell open at a paper written about a chimpanzee called Alpha in the Yerkes Center in America who had started making drawings. And what's more, when she had a pencil and scribbled these little drawings, they weren't random; the scribbles were actually visually organised. The man who was doing the study unfortunately died before he could publish it and it was published after his death and it was rather a fragmentary paper. But I saw that and I thought: this is extraordinary because here, my two loves come together. I'm obsessed with animals, I'm obsessed with art, and here's an animal that is making visually controlled lines on a piece of paper.
So I went to Tinbergen and I said, look, I want to study chimpanzees, I must have... And he said, you can't have chimpanzees here in the zoology department! We are not equipped for it. So I said, oh, what can I do? And he said, well, you'll have to go to the zoo – it's the only place where they've got chimpanzees. So I went off to the zoo and asked if I could do research there. And they said, well, I'm sorry, we haven't got a research appointment at the zoo, but...now wait a minute. And the director of the zoo looked through his desk and he got a piece of paper. He said, here, Granada Television want to start a television and film unit at the zoo – would that interest you? Have you made any films? And I said, yes, I have made a couple of films. I didn't mention they were surrealist films. But I had made two films and they'd won some amateur awards. So anyway, he said, well, would that interest you? So I said, yes, because I just had to get to the zoo to study my chimpanzees.
So I did an audition and it worked and I got the job. And suddenly I was... my wife and I packed up our belongings and moved to London and within a matter of days, to my horror, I was on television. This wasn't my intention at all. I had gone there to make animal films about animal behaviour. But they said would you mind doing a little programme on television? And I said, well, I'm not... I don't know, I'm not... I don't know anything about television. And they said, well, nor do we because Granada hasn't gone on the air yet. It was very early days and I went on the air with Granada in 1956, when ITV was just starting. BBC were furious because they'd had a monopoly, of course, up to this point and did everything they wanted to do their way. And suddenly there was this upstart ITV coming along and giving viewers an alternative choice. There were now two programmes. Think of it – two whole programmes on television! And David Attenborough was doing Zoo Quest on the BBC and I was doing Zootime on ITV, and we were supposed to be rivals. And we were told by our bosses that we must never meet. We thought this was ridiculous. Of course, we soon got together and became friends, have been friends ever since.
And it was the same for David. He said, I didn't want to be in front of the camera. My presenter died and I had to take over. He'd been filming with... he was behind the camera originally, you see. He'd been filming this reptile expert who'd... who jumped into a pond and got some hideous tropical disease and had died. And so David... they said, well, you'll have to do it. And he said, well, I don't want to get in front of the camera. But he did. And I said, well, I don't want to get in front of the camera. They said, but you... look, you must do this because you've got the whole of the zoo there. So David and I were both thrust – in the 1950s – thrust in front of the television cameras to present programmes and it wasn't what either of us intended. But we both started to enjoy it after a while. It was all live; there were no videotape in those days. It was BV – before video. And it was very exciting because it was... you know, once you're on the air with animals, that was it. David was actually travelling around the world making films, using celluloid – but there was no videotape – and I was at the zoo doing live programmes and getting myself into all sorts of trouble.

I was also a bit upset because I'd gone there – I wanted to do serious filming of animal behaviour, and I wanted to do some research too, on my chimpanzees. So what I did with these programmes was I cunningly slipped into them... each programme I did – and I did over 500 – each programme I did, I slipped in a few scientific facts, and I tried to do it in a way that nobody noticed because if I had started to become too educational, I'd have been in trouble; it had to be popular. But I was determined not to just show people, you know, the sea lions feeding or the elephants giving a walk or something. You know, I wanted – I had to do one whole programme sitting on the back of an elephant, I remember – but I tried to infiltrate into each programme a scientific concept.
I'll give you one example. I wanted to show that snake charming was a load of nonsense, because snakes are deaf. And when the snake charmer plays his flute like this, it's the movement of the flute back and forth that the snake follows. It can't hear anything so the flute-playing is a load of nonsense. So I thought, we'll demonstrate this. So we got a cobra. And, of course, unlike the snake charmer's cobra, this one was deadly because we... you know, we couldn't... I mean, what the snake charmer does is they either cut out its fangs or block its fangs or something. But we weren't... we weren't going to do that to a beautiful cobra. The cobra was intact and lethal; if it had struck, we'd have been dead within 30 minutes and a very painful death, too. So we were... we gave strict instructions to the camera crew not to make sudden movements or anything.
So there we were with live television with this basket with the cobra in it. And I said to Reg Lambourne, the reptile man... I said, isn't it going to slither out? And he said, no, no, I'm going to tape, very carefully – we won't hurt it – I'm going to tape its tail into the bottom of the basket so that it can rear up but it can't get out. So he did this and the lid was put on. And then we come to this item in the programme and I explain that I'm going to demonstrate to you now that snake charming is nonsense and that... because snakes are deaf. And we took the lid off. The cobra reared up and I played my flute like this and the snake danced and said... I said, now, you see, the snake is dancing to my music, isn't it? No, it's not! And I'll show you why this is nonsense. And then I played... I held the flute and I made the same movements but I didn't play it. And in complete silence, the snake, of course, made the same movements. So I was... I got my scientific point across. I taught two million people that snakes are deaf. And that was a scientific fact. And I made a nonsense out of this ridiculous snake charming act that everybody is so fond of. And that was fine.
But unfortunately we'd overlooked one thing. The snake was about to moult and as we watched in horror, it slithered out of its basket, leaving its skin neatly taped in the bottom of the basket – its shed skin – and slithered across towards camera number two. It's the only time I've ever seen a cameraman – television cameraman – operate his camera from above. He actually... in those days the cameras were big, not like today's little cameras – they were huge – and he climbed up his camera and was trying to operate it, sitting on top of it with a... with a deadly cobra at the base of the camera. And this was all, of course, on live television. I had to keep talking and I learnt to fly by the seat of my pants in those early days of television, and it stood me in good stead for later on. I did go on to make a lot of other television programmes, but that really wasn't my purpose at the zoo; my purpose at the zoo was to do research.
And I was lucky because I had a young chimpanzee that... he was a famous television star by now and I was able to spend three years, working on him with his drawings and paintings.
 

And this chimpanzee – he was called Congo – Congo's paintings were extraordinary because he did control them visually. He got no reward for them. If I tried to stop him in the middle of painting, he would scream and have a temper tantrum. If I tried to get him to go on after he'd finished a painting, he wouldn't. The lines were placed exactly where he wanted them on the page and he would have a basic quality of the artist which is thematic variation. He would develop a theme, like a fan pattern, and then he would vary it. He'd make this fan pattern and then he would split it in two and put a spot in the middle, or he'd make a little subsidiary fan to one side. And he was playing with abstract patterns and doing it for no reward at all other than the excitement of exploring visual patterns.
And I remember saying to somebody, 'They've called Lascaux the birth of art. Lascaux isn't the birth of art – it's the adolescence – this is the birth of art, this is the beginning of aesthetic expression. They may only be abstract patterns but they are visually controlled and varied'. And he did about 300 or 400 of these pictures. And eventually there was an exhibition of them at the ICA in London and people were surprised. Oh, of course the press had a field day with it, made jokes about it at the expense of modern art, which made me very cross, but the serious artists realised what was going on.
And Picasso had one of these Congo paintings, and when a journalist came in and rather sneeringly said, 'Oh, what do you think of this picture by this chimpanzee then?' Picasso bit him. Which I thought was a wonderful way of saying, the chimpanzee and I have something in common. And Picasso was very impressed. So was Salvador Dali. Dali said, 'The hand of the chimpanzee is quasi-human; the hand of Jackson Pollock is totally animal', which was a wonderful quote from Dali. And Miró – who I had that show with earlier on – Miró came to see me and said, 'I want one of Congo's paintings'. And so I gave him one – I had only a few left by this time – I gave him one and he was so pleased that he did a Miró in exchange for me. He sat down and did a Miró which is what a schoolboy would call a good swop.
So that was my Congo experiment and it led to a book called The Biology of Art which was my first serious book. And it fascinated me because it brought together my two passions: passion for animals and for art. I decided then that I would try to extend this research with chimpanzees and we did a number of other experiments with them. When I say experiments, I mean these were... I built a coconut shy, scaled down to take grapes so that the chimpanzee had to aim at these grapes as if they were coconuts in a coconut shy. And I was doing this because there was some debate about whether chimpanzees had good aiming ability because aiming ability was something which early human hunters had to have par excellence. It was very important in the history of our species that accurate aiming took place. And I wanted to see how... and a chimpanzee was able to knock a grape off with a... with a ball swinging on a chain. And we have it all on film and so you could... again, not only could you see the first germ of aesthetic behaviour in the chimpanzee, but you could also see the first signs of aiming behaviour.

At this time my wife, Ramona, who was working in the... in the – she was also employed by Granada and we worked together in the... in the film unit – she employed a young assistant, a young girl by the name of Jane Goodall who, I’m ashamed to say, we didn’t recognise... we didn’t spot how good she was going to turn out to be, how important she was going to turn out to be, and Jane had come to London to get a job and all she wanted to do was to study chimpanzees. And so she went off to Africa and, of course, everyone knows now about the Jane Goodall studies of chimpanzees in the wild and she became the world authority on chimpanzee behaviour in the wild. And I also had other students working with chimpanzees on other aspects of chimpanzee behaviour and I’d built up a research group, studying monkeys, chimps, rodents, birds, and these were all doctoral students who were treating me as a sort of field station. They had their university connections, but they would come to me as if the London Zoo was a... was a field station. And they worked together and we had this group and it was this group of research workers that led to something quite important which was that we had seminars.
And at these seminars we discussed animal behaviour issues. And David Attenborough, who’d left broadcasting briefly – he wanted to study anthropology and he was studying anthropology in London – and he said can I come to your seminars? And so David came and sat in on our seminars. Shortly after that, he was grabbed by BBC to become the director of a new channel, BBC2, and he became Controller of BBC2. It was a job he couldn’t very well refuse. I mean, to become Controller of a whole new channel was wonderful. And he remembered these seminars that he’d attended at the zoo and said to me couldn’t we do something like that on television? And he had this brilliant idea of having a discussion about animal issues on television. It was a programme called Life in the Animal World and Life was alternating with Horizon. And it was the first time that anybody had had a programme which didn’t just look at beautiful animals, you know. All the other animal studies just said, look, there’s a rhinoceros, you know. What we did was we had zoological experts coming into the studio and debating controversial issues in the field of evolution or any aspect of zoology. And some of those discussions were very lively and it involved some very senior people.
On one occasion I did a whole hour’s tribute to Julian Huxley on his 80th birthday and I got all the top people in the world – Lorenz, Tinbergen, Ernst Mayr – all these... and Peter Scott – all these people who had known Julian Huxley, and I also managed to get the last interview out of Julian, who was a little frail by this time. And Julian was wonderful because... I’d always admired him because, like me, he was a serious zoologist, but also concerned with popular communication.  And he once said to me, do you know, I’m the only Fellow of the Royal Society who’s ever won a Hollywood Oscar? And I said, how did that come about? He said, well, I made this film about the gannets and it won the documentary film in 1933 or something, whenever it was. And I said, where’s the Oscar? I must see... I want to see your Oscar. And he said, oh, filthy, ugly thing – it’s upstairs somewhere. And eventually he did go up and bring it down and show it to me. Unfortunately, it was a filthy, ugly thing because it wasn’t like the one they have now. It was a... this was very early on in Oscar’s history – Oscar and I are the same age, by the way – and in those early days of Oscar, they had a rather nasty little statuette which they gave to documentary film-makers. But he was so proud of the fact that he’d won an Oscar and was very concerned with getting across to a very wide audience the joy of studying animal behaviour, you know. And so he was... to me, he was... I idolised his approach.
And I did this one hour tribute to him and he was wonderful because he talked about his childhood and he talked about his brother, Aldous Huxley. Now Aldous was a very strange man. I knew him and a very, strange, interesting, fascinating man. But Julian’s stories about Aldous Huxley as a child were amazing. I remember one of them. He said, our nursemaid saw Aldous sitting in a... on a windowsill, looking out of the window, and she said, ‘Hello, little Aldous, what are you thinking about?’ And the boy turned to her and said, ‘Skin’, and then turned back again, looking out of the window. And there was something terribly sinister about this. And these stories were pouring out of Julian and it was a wonderful programme. And when Julian died, I asked David, who was still controlling BBC – I said, look, we’ve got that whole hour’s tribute to Julian, now he’s died, we ought to show it again. And David said, of course we should. But in those days, unfortunately, these programmes weren’t kept. It had all been wiped and we couldn’t find it, so it never did get shown again. Archives are much better kept now than they were in those days.

I decided that, with my research group, I wanted to encourage them to communicate with a wider audience because what we were doing was interesting. It wasn't of just academic interest, it had a stronger interest. And so I managed to persuade a lot of them to appear on television programmes with me and as a result of this, they did go on... one of them went back to Holland, he was a Dutchman and he went back to Holland where he had the top rating animal programme in Holland afterwards and I was very pleased about that. He also went on to become a senior academic in the field of primate studies because he'd been... he'd been fascinated by facial expressions of primates and how facial expressions had evolved.
And what was happening during all this was that because I was making these Life programmes for BBC, some of the subjects we looked at were getting rather close to human behaviour. I hadn't intended this but it just happened that a lot of the studies with chimpanzees and primates – like the origins of facial expressions – this started me thinking about human facial expressions. And bit by bit, we... I found myself drifting towards the human species, but coming at it from an entirely different perspective. Previously, all studies of human behaviour had been done by sociologists, psychiatrists, psychoanalysts, anthropologists, and those disciplines are all busy working away in their own special way. But zoologists had never really tackled human behaviour before. So I thought, why not? I'd met this young publisher and I'd said to him, I think one day I'm going to write this book called The Naked Ape about human beings, and I'm going to write it as if I'm an alien landing on this planet and looking at this strange primate, clearly related to apes and monkeys, but it's a bit odd because it has a naked skin, it doesn't have any... it doesn't have a coat of fur and it stands on its hind legs and it talks; it's a very strange monkey, very strange ape. And if I were an alien I would say, well, I'd better give it a name – I'll call it the naked ape because it's a comparatively more-or-less naked, functionally naked – I know we've got... we have body hair but it's... functionally, we're naked.
And this young publisher, Tom Maschler, said, that's going to be a great book, you must write it. And I said, well, it's a bit challenging. I shall get into all sorts of trouble if I do that – I think I'll stick to my chimpanzees and my rodents and other things, I get into less trouble there – which is very cowardly of me, but understandable. But he kept on. I used to... about twice a year, I'd get a telegram – we had telegrams in those days – and I'd get a telegram saying, where is The Naked Ape? That's all it said, and this went on for years until eventually in 1966, I finally sat down to write it. I thought: the time has come.

So I must side-track for a moment into giant pandas. What had happened was this: we had a female giant panda at London Zoo called Chi Chi and in Russia they had a male called An An; they were the only two outside China. And I went along one day and I said, look, we should put these two pandas together and see if we can breed them – they're a rare species. And so the director of the zoo said, okay, hop off to Moscow and see if you can arrange it. Well, I hadn't anticipated that because the Cold War was on and it was not a very pleasant prospect going to Moscow on my own. And I remember getting into the aeroplane and flying there and thinking, why did I... why did I open my big mouth?
Anyway, there I was in Moscow, and Igor Petrovich Sosnovsky, the director of the Moscow Zoo and I, were having these discussions about whether we could mate these two giant pandas. But unfortunately for me, the Russians thought I was a spy because obviously they didn't... they didn't believe that anyone would go to Moscow to mate a giant panda. There hadn't been anybody going to Moscow for official sexual purposes since the bedding down of a latter day tsarina, and they couldn't accept this one for one minute. So they started to give me the full treatment. I was followed everywhere, my electric razor was dismantled and they couldn't get it together again – they thought... you know, looking for my equipment.
And then one day they said, 'Go for a walk!' And I said, but it's -35°C outside. I'd rather stay in. 'No, no, go for a walk, it'll be good for you. Go to GUM. GUM – the department store – you go and look at GUM'. So I went out in the freezing cold. I was followed by two large men with copies of Pravda under their arms. And I went to GUM and saw the queues for biro pens and other such features of Moscow in 1960... what was it? 1965 – or '66 – '65, '66. And as I was walking around GUM, somebody said, 'Psst!' And I thought, I didn't hear that, I couldn't. And I looked around and there's this spotty young man saying, 'Psst!' I thought, what is going... this is ridiculous. And he said, 'Listen very carefully'. So I said, 'What is it?' And he said, 'Are you interested in plans of secret factory?' I thought, this is like Carry On Spying, this isn't... And I said... so I thought... in my best English I said, 'Not today, thank you'. And he said, 'You don't understand! It is very important!' and he became very excited and tried desperately to go off with him to look at the plans of a secret factory.
And later that day I was being driven in the embassy car and the official from the embassy... 'So you had a good day?' And I said, well, I had this strange episode in GUM where they tried to get me involved in the plans of a secret factory. He said, 'Don't say anymore'. I said, well, why not? He said, 'The car's just been serviced'. Which... because every time the car went in for servicing, it got bugged and then they had to debug it, and they hadn't had time to debug it. So we stopped – it was just like some sort of Hollywood movie – and we got out in the freezing snow and we walked in Gorky Park together. And he said, 'Tell me all about it'.
So I told him about it. And he said, 'Well, thank goodness you didn't fall for it because if you had, they'd have taken you off to some place. If you'd, out of... out of a, you know sort of curiosity you'd gone off with him and he'd have showed you some stupid, useless plans and then the KGB would have broken in, you'd have been arrested and you'd be in Lubyanka and that's just what they wanted'. And I said, well, why would they want me? And he said, 'They need a swop'. So I said, a swop? And he said, 'Yes, yes, we've got one of theirs and they want to swop, so you were very lucky that they... you didn't...' I thought, this is ridiculous, I'm a zoologist – what's going on? You know, and I... Anyway, this... I'm making a joke about it now but actually at the time it was... it was stressful because there was a chance that they were going to get me into Lubyanka if they could.
And I... when I came back to England, something happened to me that hadn't happened to me before in my adult life. I fell seriously ill.

I'd always been... perhaps just that army training, I don't know, but I'd always been very physically fit. And I came back and I just collapsed; I was seriously ill with hepatitis. I think they may have done something to my food, I'm not sure. But anyway, I had this hepatitis and I was out of action for weeks and weeks. And it was during this time that I realised that I'd been overworking. I now had two television series going, I had a curatorship at the zoo, I was doing book reviews for Times Literary Supplement, I was writing a book a year, and I was just overworking – and I had a whole research team. It wasn't that... I wasn't... I was enjoying it all, that's why I wanted to do it all and I was loving it all, but I was only one human being and I couldn't... I just couldn't do it.
So when I lay there very ill, after Moscow, I decided to stop doing a lot of things. I stopped book reviewing and I stopped this and I stopped that and I cut down on all my activities. And in... this was in 1966 and I said I'm just going to do one thing: I'm going to finally sit down and write The Naked Ape, this book that I've been putting off. Instead of doing all these different things, I'm going to do one major thing. And that's how I came to write The Naked Ape. So in a way I'm grateful to Moscow, because if I hadn't been ill after Moscow, I probably wouldn't have reorganised my life and written The Naked Ape.

Before I come onto The Naked Ape, many, many years later I discovered why the Russians thought I was a spy. There was a very good reason for it and there was a book published, a biography of a friend of mine called Maxwell Knight. Max Knight was a naturalist and he and I used to do programmes together for the BBC and... called The Naturalist and Nature Parliament, and we did... and I was very fond of Max. He... he specialised in animal pets and keeping animals as pets and so on, and he was an avuncular, friendly bloke. I didn't know much about him other than that he loved animals.
Anyway, a book was published, a biography of Max Knight, about 20 or 30 years later, this was, and it was the title of the book that riveted me because it said – biography of Max Knight – and the title was, The Man Who Was M. And it turned out that Ian Fleming – I knew Ian Fleming and he was a... he was a joker, he loved teasing people – and he took the M from Max Knight's name and gave it to James Bond's boss. So James Bond's boss was M. And M was Max Knight and unknown to me, Max Knight was head of counterespionage and I was his cover. I mean, he did all these natural history things so that he had a sort of popular life. And he wrote little books about... you can buy a book by Max Knight about keeping pets. And this is the man who was sending spies off to be killed or to kill people. He was... he was James Bond's boss. So no wonder... no wonder the Russians thought I was a spy because they knew that I was a... one of Max's friends and so they automatically assumed that I was one of his boys. So 30 years after it happened, I discovered why. Because I thought at the time it was a bit odd and now I know the reason why.
Ian Fleming was a fascinating man. I was very fond of him. He was very much James Bond himself. He... when he snapped his cigarette case shut, it was like a rifle... like a gun going off. It would... you know and he had a real presence about him. All he wanted to talk to me about were his hummingbirds. He was fascinated by the hummingbirds in his house in the Caribbean and we had to spend a long time discussing those. And of course his other joke had been a friend of his in the Caribbean, who had written a book about the birds of the West Indies, was an ornithologist called James Bond. And he pinched his friend's name for his spy. And poor old... the real James Bond would go into a shop and order something and they'd say, 'Name?' And he'd say, 'Bond, James Bond'. They'd say, 'Yes, okay, yes, what's your name?' And he said, 'No, no, I'm James Bond'. They'd say, 'Yes, yes, yes'. Anyway, the poor chap – I don't think he ever forgave Ian Fleming for that. You know, it was a terrible thing to do to a friend really.
But, of course, Ian... I don't think, imagined that his books would ever be as successful as they were. He and I had the same publisher and his publisher didn't like the books at all. Old Jonathan Cape, who was still alive in those days, he thought they were terrible books, but his staff persuaded him to publish them because they were going to make money and the company needed some money so he gave in, but he didn't like them at all and didn't like Ian Fleming. Because the early James Bond novels were fairly sadistic, actually. There was a lot of cruelty in them and this didn't appeal to Jonathan Cape.

My own book was also...The Naked Ape was published by Jonathan Cape, and this book got me into all sorts of trouble. A zoologist wasn't supposed to write about human beings. And, worse still, the zoologist was writing about them as though they were just another kind of animal. The chapter headings in The Naked Ape were almost the same as the ones in my thesis on sticklebacks. There's a chapter on feeding behaviour, fighting behaviour, mating behaviour, parental behaviour – the same things that I'd studied in fish. And what made The Naked Ape an unusual book was that it was written just as... the same way that I would write about other animals. And I said at the beginning that I'm going to ignore all the higher achievements of human beings that people usually write about and I'm going to look at his basic ones – I'm only going to look at things we share with other animal like feeding and mating and fighting. I'm not going to look at literature and art and science and research and philosophy and politics. I'm not going to look at any of that. I'm going to ignore all that and just say: what do we share with other animals?
And it was clear to me that it'd be very foolish of any species to throw away genetic background. And it was clear to me that a lot of the behaviour patterns that we performed were inborn or had a very strong inborn influence. I didn't want to suggest that we had genetic instructions in our behaviour. We certainly had genetic instructions in our anatomy and our physiology, obviously. But in our behaviour, at the time I wrote The Naked Ape, everyone said that we were born as a tabula rasa, as a blank sheet on which education wrote everything, so that our entire personalities were based on what we learnt during our lifetime and that, when we started out, we were just blank sheets.
Now I thought this can't be true because no species is going to throw away all the achievements that have occurred during its evolution. Because what happens during the course of evolution is that certain patterns of behaviour turn out to be more successful than others, and they're selected, and that must apply to us. And so I wrote about patterns of behaviour that seemed to me to be inborn not as genetic instructions, but as genetic suggestions – there's a difference, you see. What happens is that you inherit a genetic suggestion that this is the best way to do something. But then you are able, because you're a... one of your genetic suggestions is that you should be very innovative and playful because we are a very playful species. Adult play is what we call science and art and all those wonderful things that human beings do. But they're all essentially to do with curiosity and invention and innovation and exploring new ideas and new things and that, we're very, very good at. So there's a flexibility in our behaviour.
But there are a number of basic suggestions of... that this is... our genes tell us that this is the best way to do a particular thing, and we can vary from that, but if we vary too far away from that, we're in trouble. And every so often, a particular movement or cult or belief system will develop which interferes with those basic biological suggestions. And I made the point that The Naked Ape is at his most fulfilled when he keeps reasonably close to those basic suggestions and doesn't stray too far from them. Because if he does stray too far from those evolutionary suggestions, then it won't be appropriate – his behaviour will not be appropriate for his species.

This got me into all sorts of trouble because people at the time didn't want to think that there could be any genetic influences on behaviour at all. And as a zoologist, this seemed... seemed so obvious to me. So that when I sat down to write The Naked Ape, and I only had four weeks in which to do it – I took a month's leave – and I had to write an 80,000 word book in four weeks, and that nearly finished me off. I... that was day and night, non-stop. But I managed it and I gave it... handed it over to my publisher – there wasn't even a carbon copy of it, it was just as it came off the typewriter – and I handed it to him and he said, thanks very much, and he put it away. And then he read it over Christmas and got back to me very excited and said, I think this book's going to... going to be really successful. And I said, well, who knows? I mean, I honestly didn't know what would happen. I thought I'd get into trouble for it, but I didn't expect it to do very much.
And proof of that is that I'd just resigned from the zoo to take up a new post as director of the Institute of Contemporary Arts [ICA]. I had had 10 years at the zoo and I wanted to make a change and I wanted to move back into my other great love which was the world of art. And I was... I got to know the people at the ICA and I was lucky enough to get the appointment as director of that institute... art institute. And I went there and it was while I was there, running the ICA, that the book was going through the printers and getting ready for publication. And Tom Maschler rang me up and said this book is going to be huge. And I said, oh, I'll believe it when I see it. And I wouldn't have gone... people think, oh yes, that's a bit... surely that's not true, I'm sure you thought it. But no, I wrote it from the heart. This is the way I saw human beings and I wanted to tell the story of what I thought human beings were all about and if people read the book, that's fine, but I wasn't expecting very much.
And then it took off and it took off in a most extraordinary way. And today it is in the list of 100 bestsellers of all time and I still find that hard to believe. It sold – I don't know – we... at 12 million, we lost count. It... I don't know, it's probably more like 20 million by now. But we kept on counting the sales until it got to 12 million and then we gave up; we just lost interest at that point. It was just a runaway bestseller, the sort of thing that you can't possibly predict. And it went into about 30 or 40... it went into languages all... even went into, I think, Icelandic and Korean and, I mean, every language in the world. And it became a runaway bestseller. And suddenly, for the first time in my life – because I'd never had any money – first time in my life I had... I had some money. I couldn't believe it. And so Tom Ash said what are you going to do?
And I said, I'm going to go off... I'm going to do a mini-Gauguin. I'm going to go off to an island in the sun and I'm going to paint! So that's what I... I've been running an art institute, I've been a curator at the zoological society, I've been running research and doing all these things – I... it's time I took a break and I'm going off and I'm going to spend the money and have a time to myself. And so my wife and I went off to the island of Malta, bought a big house and I set up a studio and I started painting seriously.
 

And at this point, painting came to the surface again, became... I'd... I'd needed a break, I'd been overworking and it was a wonderful, wonderful time in Malta where I was able to look back at my past. And I looked back at London and I thought that was an extraordinary time in London, it was... what was... what is a human animal like me doing in a city of that size? I'm a tribal animal.
And I sat there and I thought, hang on, I must write about this. Because outside the city, outside the urban world, I could look at it dispassionately and say, what are people doing in those great cities? And I'd come up with this expression that somebody had used saying the city is a concrete jungle. I thought, jungles aren't like that, the city's not a concrete jungle – it's a human zoo. We put animals in cages in zoos and they manage to survive in... and somehow or other, human beings survive in cities of millions of people. But they are tribal individuals. We spent a million years as hunter-gatherers. It forged the human character. And it set up a relationship between males and females which was crucially important where the males became specialised as hunters and the females did virtually everything else. And the females are actually the centre of tribal society. They were in the settlement; they were doing everything except hunting.
And the reason... this wasn't... somebody said, oh, you're just fostering the idea of the mighty hunter and the little woman at home. No, no, no – it wasn't like that. The reason that men went hunting – because they were expendable, you could... you could afford to lose a few men. Women were too important in a small tribe – the tribes were only 80, 100 people – you couldn't afford to lose women on the hunt. Because the hunt was dangerous, men were expendable; if you lost a few hunters on the hunt, it didn't matter because you've still got your females and you could breed. Breeding was tremendously important in these tiny, tiny groups. And it also became very important that because the males had to go off hunting and leave the females behind – this is something no other primate, no other monkey or ape had ever done – and so there had to be some sort of bond otherwise the men would go off hunting and they wouldn't come back or, when they came back, the females wouldn't be there. So what happened was that we slowly evolved a bond of attachment between males and females and we became a pair-bonding species which was different from the behaviour of other apes.
And we also became a nest-building primate because we had to have a settlement. We had to have a place for the hunters to come back to with the kill. And we also became a feasting primate where we had celebrations when we had a feast and special occasions occurred in our life. If you're a monkey, you just eat nuts all day or fruits and so on – you don't have special moments. We had feast moments, special moments, big moments which became celebrations and it was at these moments that we started to dance and sing and paint our bodies and it was the beginning of human art was through this celebratory moment of the feast.
And I thought, well, this is this tribal species that's now living in a conglomeration of a million people or 10 million people or whatever it is. How on earth are we managing to do that? So I wrote a sequel to The Naked Ape called The Human Zoo in which I looked at the behaviour of tribes that have become super-tribes and how the status of individuals has become super-status of great leaders and how the super-status of a great leader, again, is something that's not suitable for a human male – to have that much power – and they don't always handle it very well, as we all know. And also, in cities, there's a great deal of crime and suicide and all kinds of other problems which develop because we're not evolutionarily developed enough. The cities have only been around for a few thousand years and it takes much longer than that to get some sort of genetic change in a species. So we're still a tribal animal, living in these huge super-tribes.
And I realised that somehow we manage, even in a city, to remain tribal. And the answer is to look in someone's phone book. Because if you... or address book, because there you'll find the phone numbers or addresses of members of that person's tribe. It may be 100 or 200 of them, and that's their tribe. And that tribe is interlocked with a million other tribes and there are overlaps and interlocks, but each person really only responds to a small number of people. Otherwise, when we walk down the street, we'd have to say, 'Hello!' to every person we met. Can you imagine getting down a street, a crowded street? You would... you'd never make it; it would take all day to get down a crowded street. Because, in a tribe, everybody knew everybody else.
There was no such thing in human prehistory as a stranger. Well, there may have been occasional arrival of a stranger from another tribe but within your society you knew everyone. In a city, there were a million strangers. And the way that we handled with... handled that was to treat them as non-persons. So we walked down a street and all these strangers, we just walked past them as though they were trees. We didn't respond to them. We couldn't because it... So the way we adapted to city life was to turn the city into this massive interlocked tribe – little tribes – and we didn't make any attempt to get to know everybody in that city.

One of the strangest things actually – this is a side-line – but one of the strangest things about appearing on television is that... and I was on television every week for 11 years and I had an audience, avid audience, of two million people. And so I would go to a restaurant in those days and people would say, 'Ooh look', they'd say, 'Hello, Desmond!' you know. And of course I didn't know them, but they knew me because they'd spent half-an-hour a week with me and I hadn't a clue who they were, of course. And I suddenly realised that the strange quality of television is that what it does is the people who appear on it sort of develop this huge tribe where they... which they don't know because everybody knows them. And I found it a bit oppressive to reach the point where, you know, I couldn't walk down the street or go into a restaurant without everybody saying, 'Hello'.
There was one famous occasion when my wife and I had been to the cinema and we went into a little restaurant called The... I think it was The Green Parrot or The Blue Parrot, in Camden Town. And it was... it was a fairly rough little restaurant, and we were in there and we were the only two people – it was late at night – we were the only two people having our supper. And a gang of Hell's Angels came in and they went over to the bar, and they'd got their flick knives and their black leather and everything else; they were looking very threatening. And I was a bit worried, you know, Ramona was young and very beautiful. And I thought, oh Lord, you know, we're in trouble here. I really thought, you know, we could be in serious trouble. And I saw them talking to one another and pointing across at us and I thought, oh God, we're in serious trouble. And then this gang of thugs came across to our table. I didn't know what to do. There was about eight of them, you know, and they really looked fierce and brutal in all their black leather with studs and things on it and one of them came up to me and said, 'Like your programme. The meal's on us'. And they walked out. I thought, what an extraordinary thing television is. They'd paid for our meal, bless them. It's just one of the little sort of incidents that would crop up then.

When The Human Zoo was published, to my surprise, I had another best-seller on my hands and was able to extend my stay on the island of Malta and do some more painting. And while I was there, I was living for the first time in a culture that wasn't my own. And I started to make observations about the movements and actions and body language of the people. I was fascinated by the subtle differences. I remember seeing a man walking down the street and he shouted out across the road, 'Have the newspapers come in yet?' And then the man with the newspapers did that – tilted his head back. And I thought, that's odd. And so the chap walked on. And to cut a long story short, this was what's known as the Greek 'no'. It originated in Greece and it's a head toss which is the Greek equivalent of us saying 'no'. And there are variants of it. You can... you can, sort of... you can exaggerate it by doing that, meaning 'no'. And you can even just do that and it means 'no'. And I noticed there were subtle differences in things like shrugging. I mean, at home I would shrug like this, but in Malta they had directional shrugging. They would shrug in the direction of the thing they were talking about. So if there was a problem in the dockyards, they'd shrug in that direction, if it was a problem with the government, they'd shrug in that direction.
And it occurred to me that human actions varied a little bit as you went from culture to culture. Everybody smiled and frowned and they'd shake a fist in the same way. There were a lot of basic things we all did in common. But there were also a lot of subtle little differences and I thought: something is missing here. And what was missing was a human ethogram. Niko Tinbergen had trained us to make a complete list of all the actions of a species we were studying. So if we were studying, let's say, a robin in the garden or a fish or a... or a bumblebee or whatever it was, the first job was to make a list of all the actions that that particular species of animals performed and then, once you'd done that, you could then start to analyse it. And it dawned on me, a very obvious thing, that nobody had written a dictionary of human actions. There were lots and lots of dictionaries – dictionaries of words, expressions, of slang, foreign languages – but there was no dictionary of human actions. Indeed, we hardly had names for any of them. There are a few like the shrug or the wink. If I say wink and shrug, you know what I'm talking about; these are named actions. But what's that called? You know, what's that called? You know, well this one's actually now... people are calling that 'steepling'. And there are a few names creeping in. But what's this?
And so we live in a world where our own species hasn't even got a dictionary of its own actions. And this seemed to me such an extraordinary omission that I set up a research office in Malta and took on a very good assistant and together we started making a human ethogram; we started to identify and name every kind of human action. Now, of course, you might say that's impossible because you think of all the things people do with equipment and implements and so on. But we simply lumped that together as equipment action, you know, we... and we put that to one side. What we were looking at was the personal body language.

At this stage, body language was something that wasn't really known about, and wasn't a subject. And I decided to make it into a subject and I started work on this and I started to identify and name and classify all human actions; there were about 3000 of them. My publisher came out at one point and said, how are you getting on with... this is... because this was going to be a new book on human actions – how're you getting on? I said, I've reached the eyebrows. I always remember he said, 'Are you going up or down?' And I said, 'Down'. And at that point, he panicked and said, look, I need another book. You know, you will take a lifetime to do this encyclopaedia of human actions.
How right he was. I'm still working on it at 86. I'm still... I'm still collecting human actions and still building my human ethogram now, at this late age. But what I did do was say, look, I can simplify this down to a single volume and present it in a way which doesn't require me having to go through this huge encyclopaedia, but I will boil it down to one volume. And we were sitting in the square in Malta and I said, look, you see, this is what I'm going to talk about. You see that... see the way that person over there is leaning towards the other one? That lean is closer than you would expect an Englishman to lean because each culture has a certain distance between them and if you lean too close to an Englishman, he gets upset. If you don't lean close to an Arab, he gets upset because he thinks you're being offhand and rejecting him. So each culture requires a certain proximity. And I was talking like this and my publisher said, 'You know, you're just like a birdwatcher, looking at birds – only you're looking at people'. And I remember saying to him, 'Yes, you could call me a man-watcher'. And he said, 'That's it – Manwatching!' And I said, 'Well, that's too popular a title for me – I want this to be a dictionary of human...' And he said, 'No, no, no, no – you write a book called Manwatching'.
And I spent a long time researching this and eventually it became clear to me that I couldn't continue my research in Malta and Niko Tinbergen came out and persuaded me to return to Oxford. He said, you're doing this study now of human behaviour, come back and do it in my group in Oxford, and I did. I came back here – I'd been away for about five years – and our small son had been born out there in Malta and he was only five and so he started going to school here in Oxford. And we came back to Oxford and I bought this house that we're in now. I was only coming here for a few years. That was 40 years ago. I'm still here. Because Oxford's a very seductive city; it's got everything I want. And I never will leave now.
And back here in Oxford, I was back in the research department with Niko Tinbergen again, doing research now on human action patterns. And I became more and more involved with this and it took several more years and it wasn't until 1977 that Manwatching appeared. And when it did, it was a book that, actually, I liked. To me it was the more important book than The Naked Ape because it was all my own original view of human beings, and I studied all the different aspects of human action in it. And it was the first major... serious study of body language which today is taken for granted. People talk about body language all the time. You've... I was listening to a sports programme the other night and they said, oh, you can see from the player's body language... And I thought, ha, they're talking about the player's body language – this was something which I introduced in '77 in the book Manwatching. And it became for me, personally, the most satisfying book that I ever wrote.
And afterwards, I started to get interested in particular aspects of human behaviour.

My son loves sport and he wanted to go to football. And I took him to a football match and I remember looking around and thinking, why are all these adult human beings getting so excited over a simple ball game like this? I mean, what's going on here? This is... I mean, there were, there were grown men shouting and when a goal was scored, you'd think they'd won the lottery. It was extraordinary. The passion that went into this, what was really just a child's game of kicking a ball about. And I remember thinking, there's something here for the manwatcher, something here for the human student of animal behaviour, of the human animal behaviour. And I wrote a book called The Soccer Tribe in which I looked at the tribal behaviour of footballers and I became a director of a football club in order to penetrate that field and I got into that world and studied it very closely and analysed everything.
And, to cut a long story short, it was, it was clear to me that what was happening was that the old hunting drive that our species has, which we evolved with over a million years and which became deeply ingrained in us, needs some sort of expression. And because we get our food from a supermarket now and we don't have to go out and hunt it anymore, the hunting drive is sort of left floating around, looking for some outlet. And it occurred to me that what's happening is that when the ball goes into the net, this is a symbolic kill; this is the moment when the hunters – and the hunters, of course, are our... the club's football team, our own team, that are our champion – they've been hunting for this goal and they finally scored it. If there wasn't an opposing team, it would be too easy. So you have to have... you have to make it difficult so... and the other team are reciprocating in the opposite direction. And people have called it warfare, but it... symbolic warfare, but I think it's more symbolic hunting because when you score that goal, that moment of triumph when you've made your kill, eventually what happens – you win a cup and you have a feast and you go feast and you parade around with this cup. And it's... the whole thing is a symbolic hunt.
And that's why it has such passionate importance for so many millions of people all over the world. And why it's also male-dominated although, of course, women are excited as well. But it's... and then I started to look at other sports and I thought, the extraordinary thing is that all sport involves either chasing or aiming, and these are the two elements of sport. Football has both; some just have the chase and some have just the aim. Snooker is just aiming and... or darts is just aiming and motor racing is... or horseracing is just chasing. But football has it all. It has both the hunting pack and it has the cooperation between the hunters and it has the kill and it has the chase and it has the aiming. And so it's got it all and that's why it's the most popular sport in the world.

This is just one example of how, having moved on from my general studies of human behaviour, I started to look at particular areas.
And then I... I got interested in Bronze Age art and wrote a book about the Ancient art of Cyprus which I'd been studying and spent several years deeply involved in the archaeological world because I was fascinated by the way in which Bronze Age people decorated their... their  vessels. There was no need to put all those complicated patterns on the vessels to make them functional and... there was something more going on there. And I was able, by doing a detailed, quantitative analysis of the incision patterns, to identify individual artists who'd been working 4000 years ago. And I wrote a book about the art of Ancient Cyprus. And then I moved on to look at cats and dogs and horses and other animals we have a close relationship with to find out what it was about their behaviour that made them so attractive to us.
And I decided to study the aging process and I wrote a book called The Book of Ages in which I looked at the behaviour of people at each age and studied the behaviour of very old people because I was fascinated as to how some people survived to be 100 or more and what was the... I, you know, again I was looking at human behaviour. What was it about those people that made them different from people who died at 70 or 80? And some very interesting information came out of that because it was clear that there was a particular kind of personality. I went to the birthday party of Jeanne Calment when she was 121. And I remember I was holding her hand and wishing her a happy birthday. And it was an extraordinary thought that the hand I was holding was the hand that gave Vincent van Gogh the paints with which he painted his sunflowers because she was a young girl in Arles, living in the shop there and van Gogh came in to buy his paints from her father and she had to hand the paints over to him. And there was something very strange about holding the hand that had given Vincent his paints to paint the sunflowers. Extraordinary moment in one's life, that. And I remember saying to her... you know, I asked her what she thought of Vincent. And she said, 'Vile temper, filthy ugly and smelt of booze'. So she didn't like him at all. He was a very, very strange man but also, of course, a brilliant artist.

And that was another thing that interested me was that, when I studied artists, it was clear that you could have an artist who was extremely pleasant and friendly and down to earth – someone like Henry Moore. Henry... I knew Henry Moore and he was... he was a really sort of pleasant man. I loved his company and there was nothing strange about him at all. Down to earth; he could've been a Yorkshire farmer, you know. And then, there were people like Caravaggio who were murderous thugs and who produced masterpieces. And when you look at sort of Henry Moore and Caravaggio, you know, here you have two completely different human beings. And I started asking this question about what it is that goes with being intensely creative. I'm still asking that question today because there are still... for me... although I'm 86 now, I can't stop asking questions because so many unanswered questions, so many things I want to know about and it's that that keeps me going now in my old age and I'm still writing books and painting pictures because I'm driven by a mature form of childlike playfulness.
Adult play is the key, I think, to human success because, as a species, we have this incredible curiosity, a very high level of investigativeness. We want to investigate everything, we want to... we want to analyse things, we want to study, we want to understand things. And as long as we have this level of curiosity and playfulness, we'll be a successful species because every time we throw up a problem for ourselves, we'll find a solution to it. And there are going to be some solutions that I won't see in the next 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 years, which will make the present day seem medieval. I'm very optimistic about the future. Everybody says, oh, the planet is dying and we're killing the planet and warfare continues. Yes, it does – the horrors are still with us. But we are an ingenious animal. We're the most ingenious animal that has ever existed on this planet and we're going to go on using that inventiveness and that ingenuity to find new solutions. And they're going to be new solutions of a kind that obviously we can't even dream about at the moment, otherwise we'd have them.
People say, what do you think will happen in the future? I say, well, if I knew that, they'd happen now. You can't guess. I mean, nobody... I mean, when I was a child, there was no television. Nobody could've guessed television when I was a child in the... in the 30s. Nobody could've guessed the computer and... the worldwide web. I mean, this is extraordinary new development. And there will be other major developments like this which will change our lives. And the next major one is going to be anti-gravity. People are already researching on that now.

Gravity, incidentally, is one of the greatest mysteries of this universe. I mean, why don't you and I float off into space? I mean, you're not made of iron, I'm not made of iron. Why don't we just float off into space when we walk outside? It's weird because there's no metal in us to keep us... and yet we are... the earth attracts us. And people say yes, well, that's force of gravity. It's... that's not an explanation. And what we have to do is to try and understand that so that we can then control it. And once we can control it, then we can float off in the air instead of having to sit in traffic jams all day long. And just as the motor car changed everything, so the anti-gravity machine will change everything and there'll be a whole new phase. That's just one possibility. But there are other things that, of course, one can't even dream about at the moment that can happen. And when they do, our species will move onto another stage.
But – and this is a big but – it's happening so quickly. In my lifetime, television and the... and the computer have happened. And who knows what will happen in the next 50 years? But we are still tribal animals, we are still dragging with us that genetic inheritance that we have. And, as I said somewhere, I wrote somewhere, that even a space ape must urinate. We are still animals and because we're such extraordinary animals, such incredible animals, we tend to forget that and we have to remember that we have these tribal instincts, we have these deep emotions to form pairs, to love our children, to be aggressive towards our enemies, and all these basic emotions are going... simmering away underneath the surface of all this inventiveness and are constantly going to cause problems unless we respect them. And it's going to be a fascinating struggle. And the one thing that makes me really cross is that at the age of 86, I'm not going to see it. I'd love to be able to watch what happens. I don't mind if I'm not part of it, I'd just like to be able to watch what happens over the next century because it's going to be a fascinating time and I shan't be here to enjoy it. But I've had a very exciting 86 years and I wouldn't change one minute of it.

One of the aspects of human behaviour that's particularly fascinated me for obvious reasons is human violence. It's still a major problem, and when you read the newspapers or watch the news on television, you get the impression that we are a hideously violent species. Because, of course, television news doesn't say: Mr Smith got up today and had a quiet, peaceful day and didn't hit anybody and went to bed. That's not news. What is news is when somebody commits a murder or war breaks out or there's a riot or an atrocity and then it's news. So we get a very peculiar view of our species through the news channels, through newspapers and television and radio. And what we forget is that of the – what is it now? – 6, 7000 million people on earth, the vast majority of them woke up this morning and had a peaceful day. They didn't hit anybody, they didn't kill anybody, they didn't riot. Yes, there are people rioting, yes, there are people killing and torturing, yes, this is happening, but the vast majority of people do not do this.
And what we tend to forget, because of the way the news focuses its attention on violence, is that we are a remarkably peaceful species. And this is because, in our evolution, we developed two competing patterns of behaviour: competition and cooperation. These two patterns are at war with one another. We like to compete and we like to cooperate. We like to be helpful and we like to be difficult. And there's a nice balance between these two because without a bit of competitiveness, we're not going to drive one another on, and without cooperation, we're not going to survive. Now, people have underestimated the cooperative urge, the biological... I was going to say imperative – the biological imperative that you must cooperate with one another or you will die, because there is no way that our tribal ancestors could've survived without a great deal of cooperation.
Cooperation. This isn't some sort of moral tale; this is survival. You cooperate for selfish reasons, you cooperate because if you don't cooperate as a tribe, you die. You have to help one another. On the hunt, for example, the men had to cooperate with one another actively or they wouldn't make a kill and they would starve. What the leader... there would always be competition, though, between the hunters and there would be a leader and he would be the best of the hunters and he'd be the leader. But, if he didn't have active cooperation from the other hunters, he was done for because if he was brutal towards his... the other hunters and tyrannical, then what would happen is he'd say, right, everybody round here, you know, I'm going down there and they'd say okay, and he'd... they'd let him get killed.
You can't... on a hunt you have to help one another if you're going to kill a large animal. You cannot do it by yourself. And we know from studies of early kills, the way in which they were done where animals were driven over cliffs or into ravines where they could be killed. There are... there's quite good evidence on the cooperative skills that were necessary for successful hunting. So cooperation became a key element for hunters. And again, back at the... at the tribe, cooperation between the women had to happen for successful rearing of the offspring because when a mother gave birth, she needed help and there would be a great deal of mutual aid between the females in the settlement. And so, for both males and females, there was an intense development of cooperation.
And then there was also a development of a bond between the males and the females. And these bonds of attachment between males and females are what we call love. And they were very important to us because, again, it was a matter of sharing, that if you had a tyrannical male – I'm thinking now, let's say, of a baboon that has a harem of females and he's the top monkey in that group and the other males have to sort of keep on the outskirts and he has all the females to himself – until he gets too old and then one of them moves in and takes over. Now if you're a hunter-gatherer society, you can't do that because the males are going off and separating from the females. You... and the males need help to make the kill. So cooperation is essential for survival. It's not a matter of altruism or moralistic altruism. It's nothing that the Church has to teach you. It's in your genes that you are helpful and cooperative. That's the kind of animal you had to be to survive as hunter-gatherers.
And so that cooperation which, in its intense form, becomes love... and also because you will have a powerful love between the males who are hunting together and helping one another to survive and when one of them is injured – and the same amongst the women, when the babies are born and they're helping one another – this helpfulness became, in its strongest form, what we would call love. There was also a sexual love between the males and the females and pair bonding developed because it meant that there was a sharing out of the females so that you would... if you... if you didn't have that, if one male was too tyrannical, you would lose the cooperation within the tribe.

Now I know that later on when we get to an urban society, you do have harems and you do have these other developments because then men were in a position where they could introduce artificial powers. You could have dungeons and you could have police and all these other things which were developments that couldn't happen in a small tribe.
And... but even then, even in modern urban society, you'll find that the majority of people still form pair bonds. Yes, they break up. Yes, they're unsuccessful. Yes, they collapse under the pressures of modern life, but falling in love is a deep-seated biological imperative of our species and developing an attachment to a mate and also to a close friend. You can... you can have a very strong bond of love between two men who have helped one another throughout their lives which has nothing to do with sex. Or two... or between two women. And of course there is parental love where our babies are so helpless that if they didn't have special stimuli, the shape of the head and the roundness of the body and the crying, all these ancient signals which trigger a maternal – massive maternal response – the human female isn't aware of just how massive her response to a baby is. And we did some tests on this.
We took a lot of young... we did this for a film we made... we took a lot of young mothers and we lined them up. And they'd all just had babies recently. It was quite elaborate to arrange this but we arranged it all. So we had this row of young mothers and each one had a baby. And all the babies were given to nurses and we stood them in a row and then we would bring one baby out and we would carry that baby and the mothers would all be blindfolded. We've got a row of blindfolded young mothers and we'd carry a baby and we'd carry it along and we'd just carry it beneath their noses and said, just sniff as we go past. And blindfolded young mothers could identify their own babies by their body fragrance, I'll call it that. And when we'd take a baby past all these mothers and we'd say, right, now, I want the mother of this baby to raise her hand, and one mother would put her hand up and we said, right, take your blindfold off, and she'd take the blindfold off – it's my baby! And she didn't know... she didn't know that she could identify her own baby by its body fragrance and distinguish it from any other baby. There are all these factors at work.
And there's another thing too that... in a tribe, you see, all the babies were sleeping together in the settlement, and in the night they'd cry. Now if they... because they were all together in the settlement, if every time a baby cried all the mothers woke up, they wouldn't get any sleep. And the way that evolution took care of this – very interesting – in a tribal village like that, the mothers could identify... even when the mother was asleep, she could identify the crying of her own baby and would only wake up if her baby cried; she wouldn't wake up if somebody else's baby cried. Now, because today almost always there's just one baby in a house, this ability to identify your own baby's crying, you don't realise you've got it. A mother doesn't know that this is the case. But again, we did some tests. And if you put several babies together, the mother will only wake up when her baby cries and doesn't wake up when somebody else's baby cries. So she can identify her own baby's crying even in her sleep.
Now there I've just mentioned two qualities: body fragrance and crying. But there are a lot of other things going on which mothers aren't aware of and which mean that they have this massive, massive emotional attachment to their baby and which ensures its protection and its care. And the... I mean, I've just... you know, I've just mentioned a few of them. Babies are the same. Babies can identify their own mothers' bodies, just simply from the fragrance of their mothers' bodies. It's an incredibly complex biological relationship between mother and baby. And this is maternal love. And it's far more wonderful than people realise.

So, you have sexual love with people falling in love even when they don't want to – they can't help it, they've developed an attachment for somebody, sometimes against their will. Now again, you might say yes, but this all goes wrong because people keep having affairs and couples break up. But that's because of the human zoo... that's because we live in this huge complex. The point is, in a small tribe, you wouldn't meet a strange girl who was attractive to you because you'd have your small tribe of 100 people; it would all be sorted out. But when a man or a woman goes into the urban zoo, they're surrounded by members of the opposite sex who are sexually attractive, and it requires quite a strong effort not to respond to those presences. And the result is that you do have a lot of breakdown. And people say, oh well, there's so much divorce, so much breakdown, that clearly we're not a pair-bonding species. That's not true. We are a pair-bonding species, but the pair bond is given so much pressure by urban life that it isn't always a success. And, you know, because urban life disturbs and disrupts a lot of ancient behaviour, we tend to think that ancient behaviour isn't important but it is. And we will always be a cooperative, loving species because it's in our genes and just as we will also be an assertive, competitive species because it's in our genes. And if we're lucky, we get a nice balance between the two.

Looking back on my life, I never expected to live to be 86. All my male ancestors died much younger. And I once went back over ten male ancestors and averaged out how long they had... they'd lived. And then on that basis, figured out how long I was going to live. I was doing this when I was 40 and it turned out I was going to die at 61, which wasn't very... wasn't very useful. Or was it? Actually, it was because it made me hurry up. When I was 40 and I thought I was going to die at 61, I worked twice as hard because I thought: I haven't got much time left. And my old friend, Anthony Burgess, the author, said to me once that he was told he was going to die in six months, the doctors gave him six months to live. And he thought, my poor wife – I must, I must quickly write a couple of novels so that she's got some income from those novels after I die. He took about three years to write a novel before this but when he thought he was going to die in six months, he sat down and wrote three novels in six months. And then he came back to England to die and the doctors in England said, that's rubbish, you're not going to die, you're perfectly fit. And Anthony Burgess said to me, I suddenly realised I didn't need three years to write a book – I could write three books in six months! And after that he became one of the most prolific authors ever known – he never stopped writing.
And I think, in a sense, if you think you're going to die young, it's quite an advantage because then you do get on with it and you don't procrastinate. You don't sort of put it off to tomorrow because you don't think there's going to be much of a tomorrow. And so from the age of 40, when I thought I was going to die young, I kept working as if I've only got a few moments left. And I've been doing that ever since. And I'm still doing it at 86. I've got two books coming out this year, two exhibitions of my paintings and I've written another book this year already which will come out the following year. So I'm still writing and painting and... but I do adjust my life now. My... I'm lucky because my brain is still working, but my body is giving up the struggle. I haven't the physical energy I used to have, which annoys me. I loved walking and now I find it's a strain to walk a long distance and that makes me very cross because I love walking – particularly in strange places – and I love travel and that's become more of a problem.
And so I am cross that my body is aging, but luckily, as I say, I'd rather have it that way than the other way around. And old friend of mine had the opposite. She was an author here in Oxford and she physically was fine, but her brain went. And the last time I saw her she didn't know who I was. And I... I thought, I'd rather have it the other way. I'd rather... if something's got to go first, I'd rather it was the body than the brain because to see her in that state was so awful – that here was this brilliant novelist who wasn't at home anymore. So I think I would rather have it this way round. And I'm perfectly aware of the fact that the human body has a built-in sort of obsolescence. It... we have a lifespan because that keeps the species flexible. If we... if we live forever, the species wouldn't have any chance of evolving any further. And by constantly rejumbling up the genetic material with each new generation, we create the possibility of evolutionary change. And it's a system that has worked for every species so far. Well, apart from some rather strange, lowly organisms, but all higher forms of life go through this cycle whereby each generation is replaced by another generation and, in that way, keeps it flexible.
I... to me, my great joy are my grandchildren because they're my genetic immortality and they're carrying my genes on to another generation. And so I take great pleasure in them and I'm very proud of them because they're all... you know, they're four wonderful young people who are growing up and I'm sad I shalln't see them become adult because, at 86, I haven't got much longer to go. Although who knows? I've been wrong so far – I  may have a bit longer to go.

If you, if you contemplate death, you... if... in my case what happens is that I make jolly sure that every day I have a full... as full a day as I can manage. And I also tailor my life, I don't...  for example, a few years ago, I gave up lecturing and public events. I won't do public events anymore. I made this decision and stuck to it. People get very cross. Oh, you must come and give a talk, you must... you know, and so on. I won't do it.
I decided that the things I really loved doing are painting pictures and writing books, apart from just enjoying myself in other ways. But, I mean, those are the two activities that I care about and that's what I've limited myself to. And people say, oh, fancy you writing books at your age. But I don't do the other things, you see. I don't do... I don't go to social events the way that so many people do, and I don't belong to... well, I may be a member of societies but I don't... I'm not active. I keep away from public events and keep away from things where I have to lecture to a large audience. I don't mind sitting here in my library, talking, because this is... this is where I feel relaxed, at home. But I think when you reach my age, you have to, you have to restrict things a little bit and then... and do the things you really love doing, but going on doing them at full tilt. I work every night until about 4:00am. I rise... I get my sleep, I rise late, but I like working late at night because it's completely peaceful and I can paint or write then without any interruption.
And my own attitude towards death is that when it happens, everything just stops. I don't... I wish I could believe in... it would be nice to believe in an afterlife, but I find it hard to conceive of one. And I can quite see how people of religious faith find it comforting to think of an afterlife. In fact, it was one of the earliest inventions of the human imagination, was to create an afterlife thousands of years ago and it has been a comfort ever since. But it's also been a curse because people now are being told that if they will blow themselves up and take a lot of unbelievers with them, they'll have a lovely time in the afterlife. So by being promised – what is it? – 15 virgins or something, I can't remember what it is now, but you're promised all sorts of goodies in the afterlife if you'll blow yourself up. This is... this is a terrible distortion of that. And... but on the other hand, just a gentle belief in an afterlife is something that I'm sure brings comfort to people. It's a comfort I don't have because I can't conceive of another existence of that sort. So I'm sad that I shan't be around, but equally I'm very glad that I've had a full life because I haven't held back in my life, I haven't been cautious – I've taken risks and enjoyed a very varied and active life and one that I've enjoyed enormously. And there are so many questions about this little planet I'd still like to ask and try to answer which I won't get a chance to do which is sad. But there you go.
