diana.athill

Diana Athill (1917-2019) was a British literary editor whose publishing career began when she helped André Deutsch establish his company. She worked with many notable writers, namely Philip Roth, Simone de Beauvoir, Jean Rhys and VS Naipaul. Following the publication of her memoirs, she came to be hailed as an author in her own right.

The whole of my family were completely bookish. They were academics, a lot of them. My great-grandfather was the Master of University College at Oxford and so everybody was always reading. And we were never given anything for Christmas, which was rather a matter of disappointment, really. We were always given books. I do remember once being given a lovely grey elephant, which I liked very much, and my brother had a fort. But mostly, we got books. And the ones that were clearly improving, one didn't read, but the others, one read avidly. And one sort of went on without realising it from children's books to more grown-up books because everybody was reading in the house. I mean, there were just books, books, books, books.
In my grandparents' house, there were books in the library, there were books in all of the rooms. There were books… there was a huge shelf of books in the nursery, up to the ceiling. There was an enormous, long passage called The Corridor, which had books from floor to ceiling, which was a lovely passage because it was rather dark and you never knew what you were going to fish out. And it might be a handbook on veterinary work or it might be Barron Resources. I remember that is where I found The Scarlet Pimpernel, in that passage. So there they all were, all the time and one took it for granted that they were very desirable. I mean, my father was absolutely mad on PG Wodehouse, and so when the new PG Wodehouse came out, it was a sort of excitement in the house. And he, of course, had to have it first, and one almost wanted to murder him, one wanted to get to it so quickly. And therefore, it simply was natural.

My maternal grandfather had a beautiful library, wonderful library. I mean, it was a big room, and there also books in all the other rooms, too, but he really had a very good library indeed. No one was allowed to touch it, excepting my grandmother. So that when it was spring cleaning, the whole house would be cleaned by everybody else, but Granny would put on an overall and a sun bonnet to keep the dust out of her hair, and she had a special sort of stone jar with some sort of unguent in it for the ones with the leather bindings. And it took her about, oh, three weeks or a month. Slowly, slowly she'd go through the whole thing. Book after book after book would come out and be dusted and blown off and polished, if it was leather, and put back. And that was where I first discovered, to my thrill, I think when I was about nine, I discovered the full facts about sex. Because she was doing the smoking room and, very properly, in the smoking room, he kept his rude books. And there were six beautiful white vellum-bound volumes just called Ballads. And they were… I went in to sort of keep Granny company while she was doing this boring job and I was falling on the sofas and talking. And there were these things. She'd put them on the floor beside the desk. And I thought they were rather virtuous. I said, 'Oh, what are those'? Because I understood that ballads was the sort of one thing that one ought to like. And she said, very quickly, 'Oh, you wouldn't like those'. And I knew at once, and I didn't say a thing. I didn't give a sign. But that evening, downstairs I went and snitched one of them and took it upstairs to my bedroom. Wow! It was terrific, you see. They were extremely obscene, most of them. And there it was. I tumbled upon rather sort of boring one, didn't quite know what it all meant – the ones about farting I found boring – but they were very interesting. And on top of that, you see, from my mother's shelves, I discovered, a little bit later, a volume of Marie Stopes.
And so there you were, you were away. I mean, you knew everything. And from the Ballads, you knew it was fun. But books were useful.

Well Marie Stopes, of course, for a whole generation – or two generations of women – although she was a mad old woman, extraordinary figure, we published a biography of her, and she was really a very, very peculiar woman. But she did open possibilities. She taught women how they could use contraceptives, for a whole generation, because she was so horrified by what was going on, and people having babies, children they didn't want.
And she wrote very clearly, in great detail. But of course, she herself hadn't known anything about sex at all when she got married and neither had her husband. And for quite a long time, they hadn't known, either of them, what they ought to be doing. It was most extraordinary. And she had the sense to think, 'Well, I don't want other people to have to go through this', so she found out what people ought to do. And she then, in a very high-minded way, you know, one was given to understand that once you were with someone you loved, it was all very beautiful. But you then discovered… anyway, just detail by detail, exactly how it was all done. And the book was called something like Wise Parenthood, and it was small and it was black and I don't think it had anything on the outside. It was in a corner of a shelf, down at the bottom. And I pulled it out and saw on the title page Wise Parenthood, and thought: how funny, this is probably a book that Mummy once bought about how to bring us up and thought I'd have a look. And so I began to read it. And that was very eye-opening indeed.
I knew better than to say anything to my mother about it, but I rushed to tell my friend, who lived next door. I mean, you know, we shared the knowledge. But I got into trouble, eventually, because her mother found out that we'd been having these conversations - I think we'd written letters to each other. And we were, both, of us, absolutely obsessed at that stage by the knowledge that we'd gained. And I was described as a dirty-minded little girl, which I think I was, actually. And she was forbidden, for a bit, to see me. And I got into much… but not real trouble. My mother was very sensible, she just said what had happened.
[Q] At what sort of age?
Nine, I think, or ten.
[Q] 'A dirty-minded little girl' is a funny sort of thing to say, isn't it, you know, but it sounds like…?
That was what Mrs Arbustner had said about me, apparently. And my mother was too sensible to actually accuse me of this. She obviously thought the whole thing was rather funny, and didn't say much about it. Just said, 'Oh dear, oh dear, Mrs Arbustner is very cross, because you and Betty had been having these silly conversations'. Silly. My mother would not say things were obscene, but silly was our word, in my family, to put you down in your place. Silly, very silly to be interested in this sort of thing. So you shut up.
[Q] Is 'silly' a sort of… what kind of a word is 'silly' where you come from?
Silly was wonderfully effective, actually, as a disciplining word. It was much, much better than naughty, because naughty was rather dashing. But if you were silly… I mean, you didn't want to be silly. And so they did actually… that's how they largely put us in our place, by simply telling you, you were silly.

She was a most wonderful reader aloud. When we were in her house, we were always… we and the cousins would always spend our Christmases there and things, and we were often there in the summer. Always, after tea, one went down to the drawing room when we were little, and Granny read to us. And she was a superbly good reader aloud. She read Old Scott to us. And it wasn't until I was grown up that I realised how much she'd been skipping, of long, long, long, descriptive passages. And she could read it, sort of, keeping to the story, without all of the heavy descriptions, without one knowing that she was skipping at all. She was a brilliant reader.
[Q] Did you like that?
Oh, we loved it. I mean, we all absolutely adored being read to by Granny.
[Q] So how should one picture that scene? I mean…
You should picture this… this rather attractive white-haired lady in her very beautiful drawing room, sitting on a chintz-covered chair with the children sitting on the floor all around her.

Two of our very favourite books when I was very young were because they were so funny. One was a marvellous book called The Log of the Ark, which I believe has been reissued since. But it was a… there were some imaginary animals, as well as the real animals. And it was howlingly funny, but it was also quite sinister, because there was one terribly evil animal who sneaked on called the Loathly Scub, who sort of hid. And no one knew he was there, for a bit. And then he began… he would have, sort of, secret conversations at night with the wolves and the tigers, and he was where evil began, because he suggested to the wolves and the tigers that it was rather nice to munch up one of the little animals and eat it, you see? So the Loathly Scub was quite a dramatic figure, but the little animals were very funny, and there were some wonderful hippopotamuses, and when they had a ship's concert, the hippopotamuses had a sublime song which they sang, which I could almost sing to you now, but I think I may…
Someone found a copy of this book, somewhere about in this flat it is, because he sent it to me. Someone said, 'Do you remember how we enjoyed this when we were young?' And sent it. And there were, 'the hippopotamus, what a lottamus…' we thought it was hugely funny.
And the other one that was very funny was a book about a very nice horse called Hildebrand. And that was funny, because it made jokes… I mean, the grown-ups were sort of made… quite actually, quite grown-up jokes about how awful the grown-ups were. It didn't write down to one.

There was a system. It was called PNEU [Parents' National Educational Union], and I don't know what that stood for, but it was about education at home. And they supplied programmes and lists of books, and they had a theory that no lesson ought to go on for very long, because it would tire young minds. So all the lessons were rather short. And at the end of it, were these exams, which were sent to the PNEU, and you were supposed to have marks. I don't think our governesses, or my mother, ever bothered with that bit, but we used to have all the PNEU books and suggestions. And I remember very well there was one called Citizenship, which we never did, because it was a very, very boring, dark blue book, and the subject was very boring. And our governesses thought it was as boring as we did, so we never did Citizenship. But there was a very nice one about art, where you got not very good reproductions of paintings. Usually paintings by the Pre-Raphaelites, as I remember it. And you used to study them and write descriptions of them, and I loved that. One of the reasons why I still love lilies is because there were always lilies in those pictures.
[Q] And did you enjoy this? I mean, lots of children their early schooling. How did you feel about it?
Well it… it depended on your governess. We had 14 governesses, I think we got through, but we laid them low if we didn't like them, my cousins and I, very quickly. And… but if you liked the governess. We ended up with Ursy, who we… Ursy, who I was very fond of, who was lovely and stayed with us for quite a long time. And she made the lessons fun, you see? And they only went on in the morning, because it was generally felt, in my family, that fresh air was more important than anything else, so we ought to be out of doors. So after lunch, no lessons. I mean, after lunch you were riding and doing so lessons weren't exactly burdensome. And when I got to school, my headmistress said she'd never met a girl so badly grounded, in fact. But um…
[Q] Were you very bright?
I think I was quite bright, because I think they always said that I… they always sort of knew that I was going to be the one that would go to Oxford, probably. Me and my cousin Anne, on the other side, were both sort of fingered as being the ones likely to go to Oxford.
[Q] And were you conscious of that?
No, what I was conscious of was being fairly articulate, being quite good at essays and things when other people weren't.
[Q] And just to go back to the governesses, can you tell me a bit about how you laid them low if you didn't like them?
I think we were just very naughty. Well, we were terrible for our French governess, when we were very young, we were awful. We used to run away, vanish in the garden, and she would be left, poor woman, wailing, unable… I mean, this is when we were at my grandmother's house. Very big garden. Huge, so you could easily vanish. And I remember being told that we'd been cruel to her by my mother which was very sobering because I hadn't realised. I'd realised that grown-ups might be cruel to children, but I hadn't realised that children could be cruel to grown-ups. Then we suddenly got… course, we were terribly cruel to her, poor woman, she was just miserable. Horrible place, where all the food was disgusting, where none of the grown-ups wanted to see anything of her. It must have been absolutely deathly. And it was very cold, that house, too. And we didn't… that was considered unhealthy, to have anything hot in your bedroom, the windows always had to be open. This poor Frenchwoman must have been suffering the tortures of the damned.
But when we had a nice governess, and usually what would happen, if she was pretty and young and charming, is almost always she would then get married and go away. So that the nice ones left because of that and the nasty ones left… one of them, the nasty ones, left because… I can't now remember any details, but she was cruel. And we were frightened of her. This was a very early one, and my mother twigged that quite soon. What I can remember was the immense relief when I was told she wasn't going to be coming back. So she must have been somehow horrid to us. But I don't remember, sort of, having to go and say anything about it. I think we must have looked downtrodden or something. But she was made very short shrift of, I think she was about one term.

The tedious thing about getting to Oxford was you had to have Latin at which I was very bad. I think Latin was taught in a most terribly, terribly boring way. But I even had to go and have special coaching from an elderly clergyman to try and get me into Oxford, because I had to have a basic amount of Latin. I got just enough to scrape through, and then swept it all out of my mind.
I took it absolutely for granted that when I went to Oxford, I would read English because I knew I would be reading it anyway, you know? I mean, this whole book thing went right through from earliest childhood, right through. The books were what you did for fun, really. Fiction is what I read in those days. And it would be whatever was the latest, sort of, most reviewed novel one… one fell on. One read the Sunday paper reviews. And I think I was still reading poetry then, when I went up to Oxford. I think I still felt that I actually, by choice, liked to read poetry which I don't anymore, now. And I remember, for instance, just before I went up, being given a volume of Oscar Wilde stories and being very thrilled by them. And at the same time, being given TS Eliot by a young man. I was 15, and I'd already fallen in love seriously for the first time, and Tony was rather brilliant at presents and things, and he gave me those two books at Christmas. And I remember he wrote in the TS Eliot, 'I can't make much of this, but I expect you will'. So I think people did think I was quite bright and it was frightfully flattering, being given this modern poetry. And I did, in fact, read it most diligently. I don't think I made a great deal of it, but I tried hard.
[Q] Would that have been Selected Poems, or was it The Waste Land and…?
That was The Waste Land.
[Q] How did you get on with that?
Well, I read it, and I knew it by heart, but how much I really liked it, I don't know. How much it wasn't just that Tony had given it to me, and it was very exciting that he had thought that I would like modern poetry, and so therefore it was up to me to like it. I think I liked better, in fact, Stephen Spender and people who were much more understandable.

I had no idea what it was that was so awful about him [Oscar Wilde]. My grandmother said, 'Oh, dreadful man, dreadful man', but she didn't ever say why. And it didn't really… it's not apparent. I mean, if you read him, his rather charming fantasy, sort of fairy stories and indeed, even when you read the one which is always supposed to be such a giveaway… what's it called? The one about the portrait up in the gallery?
[Q] [The Picture of] Dorian Gray.
And I read Dorian Gray, which I had vaguely, I think, understood somehow, through something that somebody had said, that this was a sort of clue as to why he was so awful. And I read Dorian Gray and was no wiser.

I don't think I did know about it. I knew faintly about it. But the great discovery was, during my first term, Tony came to see me and took me out. We had a lovely, wonderful, wonderful… I mean, it was when I began to enjoy Oxford. We went to a very, very nice pub, which was his favourite pub, because the dear old woman who ran it adored him and we had a wonderful evening there. And then we went on to see a friend of his, who was gay. And Tony said, 'Well, you see, he's gay'. You wouldn't say 'gay' in those days. What would you say… A pansy, I think. But a splendid fellow, a splendid fellow all the same. So we went to see him, and he was in bed with a bad cold. And so we went up to his bedroom and Tony and I got into bed with him, and we drank whisky together, all three together and that was marvellous. I felt so sophisticated. There I was, lying in bed beside a pansy, drinking whisky. And he was a terribly nice man, and very funny. And so that was a big step forward in what I knew about life.

I knew pretty all the poems, of course, in the Oxford Book of English Verse, and things. And the ones I liked were the love poems, always. And, 'Had we but world enough and time'… I liked them really better than any of the modern poetry I knew, but I did… I remember I did love Stephen Spender's poems, which were very easy to understand, and which did sort of express things that worried me. I mean, 'We who live under the shadow of a war', one of them said. And anyway, it was about things that one was worried about and which one understood.

'Had we but world enough and time,/This coyness, lady, were no crime./We could sit down…' No, I can't, really. I mean, I could a little while ago. 'But at my back I always hear/Time's winged chariot drawing near;/And yonder, all before of us lie/Deserts of vast eternity./…/The grave's a fine and private place,/But none, I think, do there embrace'. It's a wonderful poem. I love it. And I loved The Garden one, too. 'Stumbling on melons.'
[Q] Is To His Coy Mistress, is it an argument that would succeed with a… a reluctant girl, do you think?
Oh yes. I mean, I hardly needed urging. I'd quite decided while I was at school that I was going to be seduced as soon as possible. I did the minimum amount of work and went to about three lectures and decided, 'Oh well, why bother to go to their lectures when one can read their books?' And then never did read their books.

Faraway events in the newspaper, I've come to the conclusion… I never read the book, but I read a review of a book that someone had written in America, saying that he thought that really the beginning of, sort of, corruption was when news became freely disseminated all over the world. He said, 'Local newspapers write about things that are within your control, to a certain extent. They're things that you know and see and can, if you want to, do something about. So it makes sense to read that sort of news. But when you read about distant famines and wars and horrors, it becomes, in the end, just some ghastly form of entertainment, because you can't do anything about it. It is nothing to do with you, really'. It's unreal, so if you're reading it, you're reading it for thrills or in order to enjoy horrors, or… you know? It is a dubious thing.
And I think it's even worse when you're seeing it. I loathe it. I can't bear it, actually, now. I never… I just don't watch dreadful things because it doesn't, in fact, give me any kick. It just gives me horrors, and why should I experience that horror when there's nothing I can do about it? But of course, it's never going to reverse. News is going to go on being as accessible, or more so, all over the world. But I do think it separates people from reality, in a funny way. They think they're getting more of it, but they're… they're not.

I like to read… to give one historical perspective about why things have happened. I read, because I was the judge, not long ago, one of the judges on a panel of judges for a non-fiction book prize, and we did read a lot of non-fiction. And there was a very, very good book by… I now can't remember his name. An Irishman. Hennessey? Henry? It was about the 50s, about the politics and the economics of the 50s, not just a sort of… I thought… I thought at first it would be a sort of nostalgic book about the 50s, and I thought it would be rather fun to read about that. There was a little of that, but mostly it was an extremely interesting book about why and how things had happened, and the down… total ridiculous ignorance of most of the Prime Ministers of the day, of economics. I mean, none of them had any more knowledge of economics than I have, and they did the most foolish things. Half of our problems, to this day, are the result. Well, that's interesting. It was interesting to follow that sort of thing up.

There are certain kinds of book about horror which shouldn't be avoided, because they explain how and why people become evil, or they try to. And one of them, which was Gitta Sereny's book, Into That Darkness, we published because we had seen the… I think it was The Sunday Telegraph had serialised it. And André was very quick at spotting that kind of thing and saying, 'Look, there may be a book in this', and had got in touch with her and said, 'Is there a book'? And she said, well yes, and she'd come and see us about it. And she came, and she said, well, yes, she had a lot of material, and she'd like to make a book of it. And she produced the material. It was formidable. I mean, see that table behind you? It covered that. It was a vast mess of material. And Gitta had been collecting it and had reached a point of exhaustion, really. I mean, the work had been tremendously difficult and tremendously testing to her. And to put it into shape, she just did need help, she needed somebody to, sort of, do it. So I brought all that stuff home, and I had it on the table, and I remember starting to read it. And I remember walking round and round this room, and thinking, 'How am I ever going to sleep tonight?' I mean, it was the most shattering thing I'd ever read, because it was the raw material of that book, it was the interviews she'd taken. And it was quite clear that there was one thing that we would have to do, we… working on it. We had to cut out adjectives. You couldn't say things like 'horrifying', 'disastrous', because they just were useless, those words. Absolutely useless. You just had to just give the facts. But then we started sorting through it, and it took us… I don't know how many, I must ask Gitta how long it was. It was months and months. I mean, maybe it was six months, you worked. And I did quite a lot of the work at home; I stayed at home quite a lot on it. Because there would be… it was quite obvious that the interviews, the order they ought to be in, really, but then there was where she needed to put in linking passages and she wanted to fill in and say. And it was really an uncanny thing, because there were times when it seemed that there were things that, however important they were, they just couldn't be fitted into this enormous book. Where could we put that in? And I would say, 'Gitta, I don't know, I think we may have to cut it out. I don't see how we could fit it in'. And she'd say, 'Oh, we can't cut it out', and then she'd go away and we'd think. And always, in the end, there was a place where it exactly fitted in. And it turned out that she had been working much, much more methodically than she realised. She hadn't… I mean, she thought she was just sort of getting what she could get, but she had been working in such a way that, I think, nothing that she'd got didn't fit in to the pattern of this book, as to how this man had slowly become corrupted and who… I mean, there were people who she interviewed who were wonderful. There weren't very many survivors of Treblinka, but she had talked to, I think, about… I think it was six of them, and they were very, very impressive people. There were people who she interviewed who were nightmares, really, because they were the people who'd worked with him and for him. Very interesting indeed, was his wife, who had known nothing for a long time about what he was doing. He had started by being… working on the euthanasia programme, where they were forbidden to say what they were doing, but were told that it was a virtuous thing and that the Führer had decided that it was good and that, although it was very distressing to have to do this work, it was necessary. He never sent anyone to their death in that. He was looking after things like property. People who had been killed and what had to be done with their property. And what was a very remarkable moment was that he had had to go to a hospital run by nuns, about something that had been left by some unfortunate cripple, a mindless person who had been incinerated. And the holy sister said to him, 'Do you know it was so tragic, they wouldn't take that one'. And there was some poor little person lying there, a 16-year-old with a mental age of nothing, you know, lying curled up in its cradle. And the holy sister thought it was very tragic that that one hadn't been taken to be killed as well, and so did the doctor think that. And so he thought, 'Well, look, nuns and doctors all think this is right, so no doubt it is right'. But he still couldn't tell his wife what he'd been doing, because he'd been forbidden to do so.

And do you know, it turned out that every single person working, recruited for the camps, had been through the euthanasia programme. That had been their, sort of, introduction to it. So that the idea of gassing somebody had already been put into their heads as something that could be done. But when he was first sent to help build one of these camps, when he first realised what the purpose of the gasworks was, it was a hideous shock. And he and a friend of his said, 'What are we going to do?' And they daren't do anything, they daren't say they wouldn't, because by that time they were so implicated, they said that it would be the end. And the thing is, it wouldn't probably have been, but they thought it would be. And so they went ahead, still not saying anything to their wives. But his wife was allowed to come and stay with him once. This was not at Treblinka, this was at the camp before, Sobibór. And she found out what was going on and was horrified, absolutely horrified. Couldn't sleep with him, couldn't let him touch her, and went home. And he was shattered, because he adored his wife. But she then… I think it was she who went and talked to a priest about it, and the priest said, 'It's not up to us to judge'. So she began to think, 'Oh well, perhaps it's all right'. And so she softened towards it and she accepted it. And he was able to say to her, 'Look, I have never, myself, killed anybody'. Which, strictly speaking, he hadn't. Even at Treblinka. What he had done was he had brought order to an absolutely ghastly chaotic condition. I mean, the description of what that place was like when he first went into it is unbelievable. And it was a slow process, but he brainwashed himself into being two people, really. Very, very interesting to see how it worked. And there was an extraordinary moment when he'd escaped, got away. Of course, that was an interesting part of the book, too, how he did escape, how those old Catholics all helped them escape. And he was living a perfectly respectable life in the motor factory, German factory, making German cars in Brazil. And he was making a train journey and the train stopped outside a town where there was a big, big slaughterhouse for cattle. And there was cattle beside the train in pens, waiting to go into the slaughterhouse. And he looked at it and the cattle were all there, sort of looking at the train. And he suddenly saw them as being the freight. He called them the freight. It meant the trains that had come in. And he was never again able to eat meat. And she found out from his wife that this was true. He'd come home one day from a journey. He hadn't ever said why, but he'd never eaten meat again from that day. He'd never had dreams, he'd never had nightmares, but he couldn't eat meat since he'd seen the cattle waiting to go in to be slaughtered. Eugh.
And she got him to the point, finally, at the end, where he said, 'Yes, I was guilty. I ought not to be alive'. And it wasn't quite the last time she saw him, or was going to see him, because he wanted… it was the end of their meetings, but he was going to come back after the weekend, because he wanted to look something up. He was a very pedantic man. He'd become very much involved in this business, and he wanted… he had certain facts that he wanted to check and let her know. So she went back… was going to go back to the prison after the weekend, and they rang up and said, 'He's dead'. And they said… she said, 'Did he kill himself'? And they said, 'No, he just died'. He'd said, 'I ought to be dead', and he died. And she'd…The Telegraph had not let her use that in the story, because they said no one's going to believe it. But it was true.
But I don't know that it actually helps to understand about evil, really, but it did show very, very clearly how this sort of thing built in these people. And that if at any point one of them had said, whether it was the wife or the husband, 'No, this is too evil, it can't be done; even if we lose our lives, we're not going to do it'… it would stop.
So it built at tiny increments, that it built. And it made one think, at the end, one has never got to accept things that one knows are wrong. So it's a very valuable… I mean, it didn't just make one think it in theory, it made one think it in the marrow of one's bones.

He… this man Stangl, was one… he was the commandant of Treblinka. Treblinka was one of the… I think it was only five actual extermination camps. Not concentration camps, they were different. They didn't exist to have people working there and being worked to death, they existed simply and solely as places where people were exterminated. They came off trains, they were stripped of their goods, they were sent naked into the gas chambers, excepting for a very, very few, who were kept to sort of manage. Not managed, but to be used as servants in the camp. And he had been… he was one of the very few people who had actually been a commandant of such a camp. And Gitta had worked, when she was young, on the children. She'd… she'd got a job trying to sort out the children who'd ended up in Germany. God knows how. You know, they were the children of slave workers and things. And they were lost, and they'd got to be reunited with their families, if that was possible. And she got a pretty good view, as a young woman, of the unspeakable horrors that these children had gone through. And she thought, 'Well, how? How did perfectly normal people inflict such horrors?' And it came to her that someone, someday, ought to try and get hold of some of these people and get to the bottom of it by talking to them. And when she heard about Stangl had been discovered, and was in prison, and available, and she had, by that time, become a practiced journalist, she thought that she could perhaps take this on. She would get permission to go and see this particular man, who had done the most evil thing that anyone possibly could do, and talk to him, and see what he had to say about how it happened. And of course, he had begun by saying, 'I never did anything excepting what I was told to do. I was not responsible, I would have… if I hadn't done it, I would have lost my life. I simply obeyed orders'. And he stuck to that for quite a long time, which was the answer that they all gave, of course. Until finally, finally, finally, she… she had… she felt, in the end, I think, in a funny way, that she needed to try and save his soul by making him see what he'd done.

Gitta was a wonderful person to work with, because she had no author's vanity. She… her first language had been German, so although she'd been living and speaking English for years, and speaks very good English, she still hasn't got full confidence about writing it.
So that all she really cared about was that what was being said in the book was what she wanted to say. She wasn't vain about how she was saying it. So if you said, 'Look, this goes on too long and it would be more effective if it was done like this', and if she then agreed that it would be more effective if it was done like this, she would accept it perfectly happily. So she was easy to work with, and liked working. She…I mean… it was… it gave her pleasure. We became great friends over this. I mean, I haven't… the only reason why she wasn't at my birthday party was that she wasn't well at that time. And she's coming, not next Sunday, but the Sunday after. We're having a special party just for Gitta to come. But…
[Q] She's a very remarkable woman.
She's very remarkable. I think she's a bit too hung up, now, on trying to get to the bottom of evils, because I don't… I think that in the end you can't really get to the bottom of some of them. It's very strong meat. I think perhaps you do get a bit addicted to writing about it, but that first book, that big book, I think was a very important book. I think one of the most important books about the whole thing, of the camps.
[Q] So does it matter to you, when you look back over your long life, that you…?
Oh, I'm very pleased that I worked on that. I'm very pleased that I was allowed to do that, that she let me do it, that she welcomed me to do it. I felt very honoured.

Mostly, I mean a great many writers, fiction writers… Non-fiction writers, you see, are easier to work with, and you have to do more with them, quite often, because they're not necessarily very good writers, but they have very interesting subjects. And what they're trying to do is to express their knowledge about a subject. And there you can intervene sometimes, or have to intervene, simply to make… There was the famous case, my… my famous case, of my first time I ever had to work on a non-fiction book that was badly written. It was early in our career as publishers. So it was a book that… only because we were so anxious, we were looking for books very much. And this was a man who'd written a book about the history of the discovery of Tahiti. And it was quite obvious that he knew everything you could possibly know about this, I mean exactly what the captain of the ship had taken, what his equipment had been, everything. In minute detail. But poor old boy, he couldn't write at all. It was awfully difficult to read. I mean, it was really hopeless. So we said, 'Well, we can do this if it's edited' and André found someone who knew the Pacific very well, an old retired administrator or something who was looking for odd jobs to do, literary jobs that he'd thought he'd enjoy doing in his retirement. And we put them together. And this naughty old boy said he'd do it, and he took the book away, and he charged the poor man £200, or whatever it was. He hadn't done anything. And he'd just sort of read the first two chapters and decided it was impossible, I think… so this… we were in a very awkward situation, and the book was barely no better than it was before.
We'd put the boy… old man to a considerable expense. What were we going to do? Either pay him back that money, or what? So we thought, 'Well, we'll just have to do it ourselves', and that meant I had to do it. And so I sat down and I worked on that book. There was hardly a sentence, certainly not a paragraph, that I didn't have to pretty well rewrite. I sent it to him, bit and bit, and he was sort of struck. He was sulky about it, but he accepted it. When it was finished, it was published, and it was reviewed in the Times Literary Supplement as a very, very interesting book, fascinating book, and beautifully written into the bargain. And he cut this out and he sent it to me with postcard, and I thought, 'Oh, he's saying thank you, thank you. How nice'. And I read his postcard and what his postcard said was, 'You see what they say about the writing? I always knew that all that fuss was pointless'.
I thought well, I'm just at that… that's the editor's lot. One just mustn't expect anything in the way of thanks. But, on the other hand, mostly, you did get thanks, because mostly you weren't going to such extremes. And when it was fiction, you did very little, because you didn't take on a novel unless it was good enough, really. I mean, you might have a little bit to say, here and there. You might have things like, oh, I don't know, you might say to him, 'Look, you describe this character's appearance on page 42, wouldn't it be better if you described it on page 11, when he first appears?' That sort of thing.
And on the whole, provided what you said made sense, in my experience, it was always accepted. If it went a bit too far and didn't sound like them, then they would say, 'No, I don't think that, I think that's not quite what I would say'. And then you said, 'Oh, okay, you're right'. Because I never wanted… you must let someone sound like they are. You don't want them to sound like you, you want them to sound like them. So that mostly, with… people say, 'Oh, she was a very distinguished editor, she edited people like Jean Rhys, VS Naipaul, and John Updike'. Of course, you didn't actually have to do a single word of editing on any of them, because it came in perfect. I mean, all you did was you read their scripts to see whether there were any typing errors in them. And what your job was, after that, was just saying, 'You're wonderful, darling', you know, as though they were actors. Giving them lunch.
[Q] You're not quite telling the truth, are you?
Well, yes.
[Q] That's not over-modest?
No. I mean, you then had to… you had to understand the book well enough to write a good review of it, I mean a good blurb for it, but… and you had to, sometimes, give a degree of moral support, I suppose. But with Jean, for instance, was a full-time person. What you were doing was you were being her nanny. I mean, you took her on. She came up to London, you went and filled her hot water bottle every night, because if you didn't, she scalded her hands. And took her shopping. Or arranged somebody else to take her shopping, because she was worth keeping alive. But otherwise, you were just a sort of attentive friend who had read the book and understood it, which is quite important to people.

I wasn't the only person who looked after her. There was a sort of team. Sonia Orwell did a tremendous amount, Francis Wyndham did a lot. Di Melly, George Melly's wife, had her to stay in her house for a whole winter. My God, that was a testing thing. Di was a saint. And Jean was terrible, because Jean was drinking a lot at that stage, and she really was a pain. But you see, even Di, when we meet, we look at each other, and say 'Oh, she was really wonderful, wasn't she?' And I know what Di went through, but she still was very fond of her because she was very charming in many ways. And, of course, very interesting.

Jeremy Lewis, who wrote a description of me as… an absolutely nonsensical description, I may say. Have you read his book about his publishing life? Terribly funny, very, very good. But his memory of me, which is based on a certain degree of truth, is that there I was, being a nice, kind, amiable, elderly, respectable English lady spinster. And then there was one day when he needed to go back to the office for some reason, and I had the key. And somehow he got… either I told him, or somebody told him, that where I was, was at a certain address where a party was going on, but that if he went there, he could collect the key from me. And he went there and he rang the bell, and the door was opened by a tall black man, and out came waves of strong smell of marijuana. And this man said, 'Oh yes, I'll get her, just a minute'. And then appeared this mysterious character in a golden dress, with long golden hair, who he didn't recognise at first, but then it turned out to be me. And that the next morning, or two days later, he thought, 'Well, this can't have been true'. But he went into my… came into my office to give me back the key, and there, hanging on the back door, was a long, golden wig. Well, one thing which is absolutely not true, is I never in my life had a long, golden wig. But I did go to a party, a very, very, very boring party, where everyone was absolutely so high that there was no… no sense could be made of anybody, and I didn't stay there very long and that was the party from which he collected the key. I was wearing a yellow dress, which I had bought. I remember the dress quite well. It was a rather shiny yellow dress. And it has occurred to me since, that at sometime about then, I had, in Selfridges, bought a fun wig. It wasn't a long golden wig, it was just a sort of curly wig, which I wore about twice. I could have been wearing it that evening. And Jeremy, who makes a good story better, had turned it long and golden. But anyway, that was his picture of me as an editor, someone who had a secret life. Which wasn't far off the truth, of course.
[Q] How do you mean?
Well, I mean I did have… my life was not really all that sedate, although I was very sedate in the office.
[Q] Drugs, do you mean, or…?
No, I smoked pot about four times, I think, in my life. And acid once, in this room, I experimented. Which I didn't, in the end, much enjoy, but I never really felt any wish to go in for drugs. No, but you know, I had lovers and I had… life went on.

Well, like books, it suddenly occurred to me… I thought, 'Now why are two of my most important books that I always come back to when I think about what I've been doing'? One is Byron's Letters [and Journals], and the other is Boswell's diaries. Not Doctor Johnson, but his own journals. And then it occurred to me that really what it is, what I like about books, why books are so important to me, it's voices. It's people. It's the people, it's not stories that interest me, although of course I have enjoyed novels. But it's the personality that one's listening to, that they're still alive. That's just magic of the word on paper. That I know Boswell better than anyone who actually met him. And he really might have been… I think he would have been a pain if one had actually met him, really, dear thing, excepting, of course, Doctor Johnson did love him, so he was loveable. But he was so interesting. Year after year, he was wanting to be good, trying so hard to be good, never managed it. Never stopping having to drink too much, never stopping being as randy as an old goat, however hard he tried. I love him.
And then I thought pretty well everybody who I really love as a writer, is because they and their personality are there. I mean, it's true of Chekhov. It's true of Jane Austen. It's true of my latest… the only person recently I really am very impressed by is WG Sebald, where he writes really, really about himself although it's fiction. And it's the voices. It's the fact that you are communicating, or being communicated with, from the past by real people. That's why I think books are so important to me. It's like meeting very, very interesting people. And that, I suddenly thought, was really actually at the bottom of my endless reading.
[Q] But they must be real, must they? I mean, because…
You see, the more real it is, the better. And fantasy doesn't do for me at all. I'm just bored by it. And even people like Nabokov, who are…it's… his exuberant use of language and his imagination, I don't love him as much as I do Chekhov, you know, who's writing about real things that happened in his life.
[Q] So Humbert Humbert… I can't…
Yes, I meant Lolita is the best of his books, because that is really very interesting indeed. But I was looking… I looked at one of them, Ada, the one… it's absolute nonsense to me.
[Q] So you're not a great admirer of pyrotechnics and style?
No. I mean I do understand that charm to other people, but that's not what works with me. I like language to be very clear and very accurate.
[Q] That's how you write, isn't it?
That's the way I… well, that's the way I try to write.

I like language to be very clear and very accurate. It must be fairly much the way that comes to you naturally, but I very… I was influenced by… by writers like Vidiadhar Naipaul, and Jean Rhys, who both used to say the same thing: the important thing is getting it right. And Jean was very emphatic about cutting. Cut, cut, cut. You don't need to say very much if you're saying… if you're using the right words, you don't need to say very many of them.
On the whole, I write short rather than long, but there would be evidence… I mean, there wouldn't be evidence of important cuts, but there would be a great many little ones. Little ones where I suddenly thought: well, why do I put it that way, when I could put it that way, which is four words shorter rather than… so it's the detail that I have to cut to get it to suit me. And the other thing I think important is some rhythm. And I think it's important to read things aloud and see how it goes, because I don't actually try to write rhythmically, but I'm very conscious of whether writing is… how much… I mean, the rhythms in prose can be very subtle. And one of the interesting things about WG Sebald is he writes in this extraordinary way, sometimes, with no paragraphs. Page, after page, after page, after page with no paragraphs. So at first, you think: how difficult. Read it aloud and you find that you cannot go wrong, because the rhythms are so exquisitely right. And that was writing… he was writing in German, so it must be partly his translator. But really, his… it worked… it simply works without adding the paragraphs, because it's… he had this sense of rhythm.

Flaubert, you see, is… Madame Bovary, is marvellous, because what he was doing, he was going to great trouble to sound completely, sort of, natural and ordinary. And it's wonderful. But when… I can't read Salammbô and I don't think many people can, now, actually. And The Temptation of St Anthony, which he thought was much more important than Madame Bovary.
[Q] What's so good about Madame Bovary, do you think?
I think… well, there, I think it really is… I never really thought of it in terms of the style and the language. There, I did think it was the story. I was very fascinated by this… always have been, by the story of this unfortunate, silly woman.
[Q] Silly woman?
Silly woman, yes. Romantic woman.
[Q] Is that silly, to be romantic?
To me, being over-romantic is silly, but I'm very unromantic.
[Q] Have you always been that way?
I think I've always been that way inclined, yes. I mean, when I was young, I was romantic. When I was a child, I was romantic. I suppose in my teens, I loved ridiculous romantic novels then. They were lovely. I wanted… you know, the idea of the splendid, dark, fatal hero, when one was about 15 or 16, was perfect. But I didn't last feeling like that, really. Mr Rochester. I don't think I would have fallen for Mr Rochester after I'd got a little bit older.

I can say I had a happy childhood, because that's what it seemed to be. I mean, I simply adored animals, my ponies, our dogs… my cousins, I was very fond of, who I had as companions. I sometimes, I look at photographs – there are very, very few photographs we had – and I looked a rather, sort of, skinny, sad child, quite often, in the photographs. I think I was not very confident, I think I was quite shy, in a way. But on the whole, everything… and I was frightened of things I couldn't do well. I didn't like tennis parties because I couldn't play tennis well. But on the other hand, I did like tennis parties, because one met all one's friends there, and, you know, I wasn't paralysed by shyness.
And on the whole, most of what I… and I loved the places, you see. I absolutely adored my grandmother's house. Coming home to that for holidays when we were living in other places, driving up the drive, getting out and opening the gate, and smelling the familiar smells – I think children go a lot by smells – I absolutely adored it. And finding out which room one was going to be sleeping in.

It's a large Georgian house, red brick, that was built in 17-something. My grandfather had added a wing to it. It had been a sort of big, rectangular house, and he added a wing, making it sort of U-shaped, so that there was extensions. But he'd… there was a local brick kiln where the original bricks had obviously been made and he reactivated that and had bricks made from the same material by the same kiln, and you could, when I was a child, see the line where the wing he'd added went. You could just see it. I don't think you can, now. I think that it simply blended in.
It was a very elegant house, really, and it had a huge, lovely, cedar tree planted against the corner of it, which they've now cut down, because they said the roots were going miles underneath the house, uprooting it, really. And it was a big house. My great-grandfather bought it. He was a doctor up in Yorkshire who'd done well, anyway, as a doctor, and who had married, I think, a rich lady. And who had then, on top of that… he was left, I think, quite a lot of money by a grateful patient called Miss Greenwood, because his son was called William Greenwood Carr. And so he was obviously pretty well off. And his wife, who famously delicate, apparently – she outlived everybody, of course – she was said to be suffering from the bad climate up in Yorkshire. So he decided that he would move to a more mellow climate. Yorkshire must have been very hard if it was mellow… if Norfolk was mellow compared. And he bought this estate in Norfolk. A fairly sizeable estate, but what is maddening is that when you're a child, or when you're young, you don't think of asking people who know about your family history. I mean, my grandmother could have put me in the picture. She was a great one for family. She could have told me, I'm sure, exactly where they got their money from and everything about it. I never asked anybody of such things. And when I asked my mother, she didn't know, really. She said, well, she thought it was probably railways, and she thought it was railways, because Gramps, her father, when they went up to Yorkshire when she was a child, he had a little key on his watch chain which meant that when they wanted to stop at a station, they could stop there. The train stopped there, because he had this key. So he was obviously a shareholder. And what I suspect is that at the time of the Industrial Revolution, they had been originally… my grandmother did say they were originally yeomen, she said. And I think these canny Yorkshire yeoman sold land to the railways, probably. And I think my mother said also that my grandfather had shares in that railway which goes across Canada, the Pacific whatnot. And so that must, I think, have been where the big money came from because you must have had a considerable amount of money to buy not just a house, but a substantial estate in Norfolk. And not only Ditchingham Hall, which is my… ours, but Haddenham Hall which is next… and the parks of these two great big houses. It was a quite unusual arrangement, actually. Actually abutted against each other. And I'm not sure whether it was my great-grandfather who bought Haddenham or whether it was just my… or whether my grandfather added it. And it was eventually, when my great-grandfather died and everyone was saying, 'Well, what are we going to do with Aunt Mary?' who was my great-aunt. What they did was, she moved into Haddenham Hall, this rather boring old lady, single, never got married, lived in this princely Elizabethan house. But it gave her something to do, because she used it… she turned the top part of it into a home for orphan girls, who were taught how to be housemaids. Aunt Mary's orphans used to be seen going for very sad walks in little crocodiles. And one didn't actually… I mean, one just took it for granted: oh, there go Aunt Mary's orphans. It never occurred to me as a child to think, 'My God, poor children, how awful'. But…
[Q] So did you grow up with servants?
Well, my grandmother's house, packed with servants, yes. But… you know, butlers and all the lot. But our house… the daughters… you see, money always… he had one son, and he made settlements on his daughters, which I suppose, at the time when he made them, looked quite generous, but by the time my mother was an old woman, she was getting from that, from her settlement, something like under a thousand a year came in as a result. So that they… he was taking it for granted that his daughters would marry well, and they married nice people. They married… they tended to marry soldiers and sailors, who were pleasant, but not rich. None of the daughters were rich. And so we lived in a much more modest way.
[Q] Just to… I think I'm not quite sure I understand. You would go to your grandmother's house to stay, say, in the holidays or something? You didn't live there?
We went there… well, we lived for a long time on the Hall Farm, which was of course the park, which was part of the estate. Mostly, we went to stay there, and I had a great piece of luck when I was about eight or nine. They had a scare that I was going to have tuberculosis. I don't think… I think it was a completely made up scare. I think it was a ridiculous doctor, because I remember my mother saying, 'Darling, you haven't got consumption, but you've got a sort of tendency to consumption. You might get consumption in your glands, and the doctor says you've got to rest'. And I was horrified when she said, because I could remember Beth in Little Wives [sic] dying of consumption. And she got so weak that when she was sewing, her needle felt heavy. And I'd always remembered that. I thought: I can't be going to have that. And indeed, I was so sure I couldn't be going to have that, that I stopped worrying. I couldn't be going to have that, obviously not.
But anyhow, I had to be taken to rest, so I spent a whole year at Gran's house, not doing lessons, than which you couldn't possibly imagine anything more desirable. I mean, it was just heaven. But you had to have your bedroom window nailed open, because of the fresh air, but as you would have to have had it open anyway, because Granny didn't hold with shut windows, that made no difference. And I just had the most lovely year, and it really did become home for me, much more than it did for the others.
[Q] You didn't have to stay in bed all that time?
No! I had a lovely time, haring about in the garden, riding my ponies. My cousins were there, mostly, and they went… they had a miserable tutor, who used to come bicycling up the drive every morning to give them lessons. And I didn't have to have lessons. So I used to just be mucking about with the ponies. Oh, we had goats, too. Pen and I, my younger cousin, we each had a goat, which we looked after, because they had to see I was drinking goat's milk. Actually, there was a risk of tuberculosis then. I mean, a lot of people got it. There was a house in… the two big houses in Ditchingham, Ditchingham Hall and Ditchingham House. And the inhabitants of Ditchingham House, quite recently, had pretty well all died of it. And I think, you see, cow milk was not pasteurised at all, and they were… there was quite a risk of it. And it wasn't just silly, putting us onto goat's milk. But it was great fun, because we looked after our goats. We each called our goat after our mother. So we had Katy and Dorothy, our goats were called. And we adored them.

A rather modest lifestyle, for its scale. I mean, there was no unnecessary extravagance. Your clothes were made… I mean, Granny's clothes were all made by her… she had a lady's maid who made them. She did have a dressmaker up in London, but I don't think… I mean, I think that she had one or… perhaps her very, very, very best dress would have been made by Mrs Somebody-or-other up in London. But ours were always made… my clothes were all made by my mother. And, for instance, our family car, for a long time, was a Baby Austin. And at one time, everybody's family car… there was, at one time, when everyone was at home, there were six Baby Austins standing in front of the house. My grandfather, of course, had a bigger and more sedate car.
Necessities, in my grandparents' house, were pretty substantial. I mean, you had to have a very large staff. You had a butler with his footmen. You had a cook who was always called Mrs, although she was not… that was a wonderful, sort of, hangover from the past: cooks were always called Mrs. Mrs Wiseman was not married at all, but that was a title that was given to cooks. And the cook had her kitchen maid and her scullery maid under her. And then there was the head housemaid and she had two or three under-housemaids. And then there was Granny's lady's maid, who just looked after Granny, did all her clothes, brushed her hair, I believe, kept her jewels in proper order. And those were all necessary. And enormous numbers of books were necessary, because it was an academic family. My grandmother had… her father had been master of an Oxford college. An enormous amount of food was necessary. At breakfast time in that house, there would be, of course, bacon and eggs and porridge and there was always a boiled egg for everyone there, even if you didn't eat it. And there were horses to ride, ponies for the children. I mean, those were all necessary. So it was pretty substantial. And… but you didn't have smart clothes, or showy cars. I mean, a lot of people had much, sort of, more grand motorcars and things than we did, because I think the Yorkshire inheritance was level-headed. And it was definitely understood that you mustn't show off, and that it was more important to be good than to be showy.
I remember boasting to a friend that, my grandfather… my Granny's house has 20 bedrooms. And I remember my mother telling me, 'Don't do that sort of thing. You mustn't boast about things and say you have 20 bedrooms when you know somebody else only has three. It's very nasty. It's not right'. And after that, I didn't use to boast, but I still was conscious of having 20 bedrooms in my Granny's house.

I don't think we ever sort of thought what we were, but we just thought we were the best, excepting we weren't lords. We… we respected lords, rather, I think. But we mingled with them, if necessary. And in fact, you see, my uncles… my uncle married, very shockingly, an Italian. He married a Catholic lady, and she was Italian, which he could not have done if his father had been alive. They were terribly anti-Catholic. They were Low Church and I think that really… I know that his father had told terrible lies once to avoid… to make him break off being engaged to a Catholic girl when he was at Oxford. But then, when his father was dead, he instantly married this scarlet woman of Rome, really, because Nenella was not just Catholic and she was not just Italian, but she had an uncle who was a cardinal. And Nenella believed that you should marry your daughters well, if you could. She was always very, very shocked because my mother and her sisters didn't think that. They let us all wander about unchaperoned, but Nenella would never have dreamt of doing that. And did, in fact, marry both her daughters to lords. She brought it off in a big way.
As children, one thought of the people on the farm as… and their sons, as friends. But we were unaware, we didn't sort of think that these friends who we ran across the park to play with all day, we never went into their house and they never came into our house. It didn't… I don't think it occurred to them, either. I mean, we just… the lines were so laid down that those were a different sort of friends. But for instance, Andrew and I, my brother and I, absolutely worshipped the boy who was the shepherd's assistant, because he knew so much about birds and things. He was older than us. I suppose he must have been about 14 when we were, say, six and eight. But I mean, we were with him as much as we possibly could, and he was lovely. He used to collect eggs for us and he was very kind to us.
And then he vanished. And he vanished, poor boy, because his father, I think, who was the woodman, got drunk and was bullying, and he threatened his father with a shotgun, and got sent to prison. It was an awful sort of scandal. But then, years later, it was most extraordinary, really, I was, I suppose 16 or 17, and we were going… roller-skating had become our great passion. We used to go into Norwich and we used to go to the roller-skating rink, which was lovely. And there was the man who sort of looked after the roller-skates and strapped them on for you, and he was kneeling down, kneeling in front of me. I could just see the top of his head. And I said, 'Dick Webb?' I didn't know I was going to say it. And he looked up and said, 'Hello, Miss Diana'. And that was Dick Webb. And it was a very, very odd moment, because he'd been such a friend, and neither he nor I quite knew what to say.
And, you know, I said, 'It's nice to see you', or something. He said, 'Yes', and we were both quite, sort of, tongue-tied by it, and I was very upset by it, really, but glad to see that he wasn't in prison anymore. But it was a strange thing, because there was this tremendous class difference, which we used, in our childhood, to have been able to escape. And there it was.
There was a very clear distinction in our minds about… people like us were alright, people like Dick Webb, or anybody on the estate, were alright, they were fine, they were nice, you liked them. People who lived in suburbs were beyond the pale. I don't think we knew anyone who lived in a suburb, but suburban was about the worst thing you could possibly say about anybody, or anything, that it looked suburban.
And that was very strong. And one suspected that a lot of Londoners might have been rather suburban. But on the other hand, you see, then it became complicated, when you were a child, because if they were Londoners, well, they might be a bit suburban, but they were Londoners. They knew their way about this terrifying and wonderful great place. They could travel in buses by themselves. And in a way, you were awestruck by them, because when we came up to London, we always went with Mum, and she knew her way about in London, which made us admire her greatly, but we were absolutely at a loss. We were fascinated. We loved it. We went on undergrounds and up and down on moving staircases and things, but if we were left alone in London, when we were sort of nine or ten, we would have been completely, absolutely flummoxed. We would have been terrified. So that to think that these people, who lived in London, were sort of quite at home in it, made them, in a way, admirable.
Quite soon in my career, I began to think it was a lot of nonsense. But… I mean, for instance, I still recognise accents, but on the other hand, I now disregard them, but I consciously disregard them. One splendid thing, which we've now become quite used to, is 'toilet'. That would have been absolutely the pits. But now… I mean, one said lavatory or, if you were my grandmother, you would say water closet. But we did not say toilet. And it was only really I think fairly recently, by which I mean in perhaps the last 30 years ago, that one began to think, what nonsense, and really everybody said toilet, and so one might just as well say toilet, too.
[Q] Or loo.
Loo. Well, loo, of course, has turned up as being preferable. More likely… because one used to say lav, when I was at school, and loo is more like that. I still don't actually like toilet.

I was  always known… knew, right from the very beginning, that I would have to earn my own living. I used to be told that, pretty smartly, by my father from time to time. And I thought what a bore he was saying it, but never mind. No doubt it was true.
[Q] And there was a time when you had to live in, sort of, less grand circumstances?
Oh, we always did. In our own houses, we were much less grand. And there was a time, when we were living in Hertfordshire, in a nice little house in a village called Kempton, when the bank said – my mother was extravagant, you see – the bank said: no more cheques can be cashed if we go on like this. And so the housemaid had to go and the cook had to go. We had, there, cook, housemaid, governess and a gardener. And the housemaid had to go. We had to make our own beds and do our own cooking. Not for very long. Someone was doing cooking soon, but on the other hand, we then moved to save money even more. We moved to the Hall Farm, where I suppose we paid no rent. And there we did do our own cooking for, I suppose, about two years, but gradually there was slaves available, really, on the estate. Jessie, I'm quite certain, was one who came and lived in and was a cook. I'm sure we paid her about tuppence, because she was half-witted and things. We were able to. Help was available, eventually, but there was a time, certainly, when Mum was doing all the cooking, which meant that we lived on scrambled eggs, really. And we did have roast lamb, because she knew how to put lamb in the oven. But, you know, that… and it never worried anybody very much.
I can also remember being very scared when we used to… we didn't have a fridge in those days. What we did was things had to be… there was a safe on the wall outside the kitchen, with a perforated door, and that's where the meat and things lived. And I remember being very scared when I went out to get something from it, and there was nothing left, after that. It was empty. And it suddenly occurred to me that it was actually possible to run out of food, perhaps not to have food. And the Hall, Ditchingham Hall, had a larder, an enormous room, I mean as big as this room, with black slate shelves, absolutely stuffed. I mean, there was… if the house had been besieged, it could have gone on living for months, really in what was in the larder. But we had this little square box. Well, if it was empty, it was empty. And I remember thinking: oh dear, yes, this is the reality of being poor. But of course, then not really being all that worried, because it was soon quite full again, because my mother went shopping.

He [my father] was a very nice man, but he wasn't particularly close to children. He… I think he used, when we were babies, I think he was always frightened we were going to be sick. He was one of these people who had an absolute horror of people being sick. And you know, babies sort of spill over very easily, and I don't think he liked that very much. I think he rather shrank from us when we were very small. But he was… he was nice and he was friendly, and he was funny. And when he liked, he could be very amusing, and sang funny songs and told us funny stories and things. But, between my mother and my father, which was… we didn't realise it until later, she had got married. She was very young when she met him. My grandmother believed that… she really did believe that no decent woman, no lady, could possibly let a man kiss her unless she was in love with him, and that no man could possibly want to kiss a woman or allow himself to kiss a woman unless he wanted to marry her. And these two met at a dance when my mother was 19, I think, and he was pretty young. And I should think probably as innocent as she was, too. And he fell for her very much at once, and he kissed her in the conservatory, and she was absolutely thrilled, you see, she had never been kissed before and it was just lovely. And so she thought she must be in love with him.
                         And he was invited home. He was a very, very nice young man, and he was amusing, and she liked him, and all her friends liked him. And they went for a walk in the wood to see the bluebells, and he kissed her again, and that was even better. And so they got married and it didn't occur to her… I mean, she didn't… she didn't know anything about sex at all. And the only critical thing I ever heard her say about her mother, when she was 82, she loved her mother, but she said, 'It really was rather wrong of Mum, you know, she never told us anything about sex'. And she didn't. And when they actually got married, she hated it. I think, probably, you see, he, poor man, very likely didn't know much about it and was probably a clumsy lover, quite unable to cope with a girl who didn't know what to expect, and it was a disaster. And she sort of pulled herself together, though, 'Oh well, one can survive'. Think of England, lie back, you know, and all that. And that. So it got off fairly alright and she had me, and then she had Andrew. And then when they were at Woolridge, she fell in love with one of his fellow officers and briefly had an affair, discovered what… that she did actually like it and it was marvellous with someone… and this was something, you see, that we naturally didn't know at the time. My sister was in fact the result of that affair. And my poor, poor father found out, wouldn't divorce her. I think really it would have been almost unthinkable to have a divorce. She would have found it unthinkable, because her family would have rejected her, she thought. And so there was terrible, terrible tension between them for a bit.
                         Being such an extraordinarily nice man, my sister was the child he was always nicest to. He never, never, never took it out on her, and never did he ever… when he died… I mean, we both… I guessed, eventually, and my sister guessed eventually, and we both discovered that we'd guessed from the same tiny, tiny, tiny symptoms, which one wouldn't have believed if somebody else hadn't noticed them, too. And when he died, my brother and sister were both abroad, and I was alone with her that evening after his funeral, and then she said, 'Oh, I feel so guilty, I feel so guilty'. And I said, 'Why do you feel guilty? You couldn't help not being in love with him, you know.' And she said, 'Well it wasn't that, it was just that he was such a good man. You know, Patience wasn't his child, and we quarrelled, you remember how we quarrelled all the time. He never used it against me once'. And I said to her, 'Well, you know, we knew'. She said, 'How did you know'? She was sort of so miserable, she said, 'How did you know?' And I told her. And she said 'Oh, yes, well that was true', you know? And she was going out to see my sister in Rhodesia, so I wrote to my sister and said, 'Look, you have now the chance to find out about who's your father, because she's talked to me about it'.

When she got out there, she never said a word about it. And my sister said, 'I longed to ask her, but I thought I can't. She's spent all my life not saying anything about it for my sake. I can't bring it up now'. Which is a pity, because I think in fact my mother would have liked it. But she never did.
[Q] How did you know?
Oh, there were tiny little things. I don't… I hardly know what made me… well, excepting that it… what made me suspicious. She… the way she talked about a certain doctor who was, in fact, the doctor who had saved the situation, who had said… who had taken her into a nursing home and given her a sleep cure, which is what… because she was having a breakdown, completely, and had said to her, 'Look, keep calm, don't worry, it'll be alright'. And so he had sort of got us through it. And he had obviously meant something very special to her. But how did I know that he meant things like that? And then once, when she thought I was up to something, quite rightly too, and she said, 'You needn't think you could ever get away with anything, because one never can'. And I thought, 'Oh, aha'. At once I thought, 'She's talking from experience'. And the fact that my father was extra nice to Patience. He took her once for a bicycling holiday in France, and he'd never done anything like that for Andrew or me. And that, given his character, sort of suggested it. And the fact that both Andrew and I resembled... and we always said, 'Andrew looked just like him and I looked just like her and isn't it funny, Patience doesn't look like anybody'. We used to say it quite happily, which must have been very, sort of, awkward for her to hear, really. But Patience didn't look at all like us.
And these little things. But when I first had my suspicions, I thought, 'Now, this is ridiculous. You know, one can't make assumptions on such small grounds'. So I never said anything. And when Patience was at about the same age as I had been when I came to that conclusion, she said to me, 'You know, I think I'm not Daddy's daughter'. And so then we exchanged notes and we'd both noticed… we'd picked up the same things. And we thought, 'Well, the only reason why we could have picked up, from these tiny things, the same feeling, must be because it's true'. And so then, from then on, she became rather superior and used to say sniffily, 'You boring old legits'.
The marriage was an unhappy one for a long, long time, and they got through it by him working away from home a lot. And really, I don't think… they got… they went… after the war, he came out and they went to Africa together. And they had an interesting time together, and I think that during that time, I suppose sex mattered less by then and they became more good friends. But I really think that it was only after his death that my mother, sort of relaxed.
She became quite a happy old woman, but I think she was a very frustrated woman for a long time. And he, poor man. It was the saddest thing, was after his death, I was going through letters, and I found a letter from Abyssinia, announcing that he'd be home at last and he'd be home soon. And he said, 'Oh darling, I do wish… I know you don't really want me to come back. I do so wish I could have made you feel about me like Peggy felt about Geoff'. Peggy was her oldest sister… son… sister, who adored her husband. And my poor darling father, all this time, had sort of felt it was his fault. He was a very, very generous, nice man, but when you think of how we lucky we were, of course we lived in places where there was masses of space. We could escape it.
I mean, Andrew and I were aware that we didn't like this situation. We used to say to each other, 'Why does she always… why does he always do the thing that makes her lose her temper?' We felt they were silly. But on the other hand, in two twos, we should vanish off down the garden and have our own time, our own play and our own ponies, and there was a sort of buffer state of governesses and nice people who must have understood a bit what was going on. I remember someone once saying to us, 'Well, you see both your father and your mother are very, very nice people, but perhaps they ought not to have married each other'. And we used that. Andrew and I used to say, 'Well, you see, they perhaps… they were nice people, but perhaps they oughtn't to have married each other'. It was logical, it was sensible, we could see that. So it didn't depress us all that unduly.

We [Andrew and I] were very great friends and he was sent off to school and that was awful. So then of course we became less great friends, because we didn't see so much of each other. And that made him very unhappy. He hated being at school, poor little boy. Hated it. He just felt completely exiled. He was… he was… he belonged to the place, he belonged to Ditchingham to such an extent that it was a real torment for him, not being there. He knew every inch of that place. He used to say that he'd climbed every single tree in the whole [sic] and he really was, sort of, native to it. And he minded being not there very much. He would have said his childhood was unhappy because of that.
In his preschool days, we were very, very great friends. We used to go about linked with our arms around each other's necks. I remember thinking: Awful little self-conscious child, smug little child, walking across a lawn. There was a tennis party going on. Andrew and I with our arm around each other, thinking: They'll all be thinking what sweet little children we are.

Oh we all were sunk in the natural world. We all did, I'm ashamed to say it now, but, we for instance, we collected eggs. Everybody did. And… but with very strict rules that you must never make a bird desert its nest. And you must never take more than one egg out of a nest. And oh, this awful thing that if you found a rabbit in a trap and it wasn't dead, but you thought that it was too badly damaged to live, you've got to kill it.
That was something one always, 'Please God don't let me find a rabbit in the trap'. Because I had actually seen my poor darling Aunt Joyce, who was the most tender-hearted person in the world, steeling herself to get a big stick and kill this unhappy rabbit. But, I mean, we all were constantly involved in the country. If you had a pet who died or anything, there had to be a funeral.
You knew much more about life from animals than you did from about people, really. I mean, you quite early on, knew all about dogs coming into heat and that sort of thing, and stallions going round from farm to farm to mate with mares. So that… my mother, I think, never, ever, ever, although she blamed her mother for not telling her about sex, she never told us, because I think she took it for granted that we were going to know, because there were all these dogs and horses, and there were… and she never forbade us any book. We could read whatever we liked. And so I think she thought, 'Well, thank God, they'll pick it up for themselves', so she didn't have to tell me.

Well, my mother told me about The Curse, as we very sensibly called it, which I think is a very good name for it, when I was 11. She did tell me that. And she said, 'It's a very boring thing that happens to women'. And I said, 'Does it hurt'? And she said, 'Oh no, it doesn't hurt, it's just a bore'.
Which seemed to me, now, looking back, a very sensible way of… no sort of sacred thing about… you see, one of my friends was told by her mother that it was a most sacred and splendid thing. It was called Your Little Friend. She… it made her nearly sick when she confessed what she'd been told. That we were told, because that was obviously something you were going to experience. And so… but of course, with my mother having told me in such a, sort of, sensible way like that, I just thought it was a bore and nothing else. I didn't actually know, to begin with, that it was connected with… with… I don't think I knew, that it was connected with having babies. But I got that sooner or later, quite clearly. From books.

I mean, I was always in love with somebody. Back to the first one of all. I… I do know his name was John Sherbrook. I suppose I was five, but I was going to marry John Sherbrook. I can't remember him at all. But I was always in love with somebody. But my first, sort of, recognised being in love with David, was when I was nine. And he was a lovely… and that was a very sensible love, because he was a very nice boy. He was very sensible and kind and brave. An admirable boy, two years older than me. Just died the other day, poor old boy. He grew up, I think, to be one of the most boring men in England. I adored him for a long time. Until I was 15, when I met my first real love, who was Tony, the one I fell in love with, who was in Instead of a Letter, who was called Paul.
[Q] How did you meet him?
Hm?
[Q] How did you meet him?
He came to be my brother's tutor. My brother was an idle boy, who didn't like being at school. He was also, I think, and we didn't know it in those days, he was slightly dyslexic. And to the end of his days, he wasn't much good at spelling. And it was realised that he'd got to have a bit of help to get into his public school. And what you did in those days was, you got in touch with friends at Oxford or Cambridge and found out some nice young man who wanted to earn a bit of money in the vacation. And Tony turned up. Tony enjoyed any situation in which he was. I mean, he always made the best of any situation in which he was. And so he set to, to sort of teach us about life. I think he taught Andrew a bit of lessons, as well. But on the tad… I mean, he was… but I think I was in love with him before he turned up, actually. You know, a tutor was arriving. How exciting.

We had a lovely time. He used to do… he knew more about birds than anybody else I knew. He knew more about everything, really, and to begin with, it was just that he was… oh, I just loved him from a distance. And he was extremely kind. He used to give one lovely presents. And he gave me books that were interesting to me. And the first time that I think we went… I went to a dance. We used to go to dances in those days. Lots of dances. In the winter, there was always someone giving a dance. And I went with my cousins when I went. By that time, two years on, I was 17. And Tony was there. He'd come along with somebody else. And he peeled off from his party and danced with me.
And he took me out to the carpark and told me a long story, during which he put his arm around me. Heaven. And then he obviously sort of gave me a look and thought, 'Oh, she's growing up'. And he said, 'I'll drive you home'.
I said to Joyce, my elder cousin, 'I'm going home with Tony', and sort of disappeared. She was very agitated, and when they got home, her lot, she rang up Mum, and said, 'Look, Di said Tony's giving her a lift home'. And meanwhile, he was. He was driving me home, and we stopped at a level crossing at which the gates were shut, at a place called Halesworth. And at that point, he kissed me. That was the first time I had properly been kissed. And it was sort of disappointing, because he'd been driving with the window down, and his mouth was cold. And it was sticky. Not really very nice, I didn't feel. But on the other hand, I had fortunately read something quite recently which said, 'First kisses were always disappointing'. So I said to myself, 'Well, first kisses are always disappointing, so it doesn't matter'.
We got to the level crossing and he kissed, that's right, and it was a little bit disappointing, but I knew it was going to be disappointing. So that was all right. It was the most exciting thing that had ever happened to me in my life. Because after all, I was in love with him. It was thrilling.
And when I got home, my mother was sitting up in bed, tense with worry, and called out. And I said, 'Yes, I'm back'. And I couldn't resist telling her. I was so glad. I said, 'Tony kissed me'. And said, in a voice, 'Did he mess you about'? And I was so angry I flung out of the room and banged the door. I thought, 'How could she say anything so horrible'? And after that, I felt very sorry for her, really, because mothers have a hard time.
[Q] Did you know what she meant?
Yes, I knew what she meant.
[Q] How?
But I did… by that time, I knew the facts of life. I mean, I had read my Marie Stopes. I knew quite well what she meant. But I thought that, you know, saying that in a nasty, sort of, dirty-minded way… and there was I, in a state of complete glow of happiness.
[Q] So you were really in love?
Oh, completely. And actually, not wrongly, because he was an extraordinarily attractive personality. I don't know what would have happened if I had married him, whether… well, he wouldn't have been faithful to me, I know that. But I don't think I would have minded very much about that. But I suppose I never would have written a book, but I'd have probably had a large family, because he was very keen on our family.  We got engaged fairly soon after that, and he used to love talking about when we have children, what we're going to call them and everything, and I used to sort of play along with that. It meant nothing to me, really, that. I didn't want to have children particularly. But oh yes, I was absolutely sure that that was going to be my future.

We got engaged, and I was… went up to Oxford. Tony had been at Oxford himself, and so he knew that I was having a lovely time, and he didn't, sort of, want me to stop being at Oxford. He said, 'Well, we'll wait until after Oxford before we get married'.
And then he was posted to Egypt. He was in the air force. And off he went to Egypt, and I'd had quite a number of letters from him there, all about what we were going to do and where we were going to live, and it was all going to be so delicious, and I was going to have a white Arab to ride, and I was going to have a Saluki dog to run behind me. And we were going to live on 400 a year, which our elders were all rather depressing about, used to say, 'How are you going to manage'? We thought it was a lot of money, we thought we could live perfectly well on 400 a year in those days. And so that was all lovely. And then, you see, the war came, and he was posted to Transjordan, which was in a state of emergency. I think this was just before the war that he was… it was already in a state of emergency for some reason. And so we had to postpone this… I got a cable saying, 'Look, it's not going to be possible for you to come out, because I'm not allowed to have anyone out in Transjordan with me'. And after that, I had two letters from him, all about how interesting it was and how lovely it was. Rather good letters, actually.
And then he went completely silent. And I went on writing, because he had said to me, in one of his letters, 'Look, I'm not as good a letter writer as you are. Don't ever stop writing to me because I'm not writing to you as often as I should, because I'm not good. But I'd die if you stopped.' So I went on writing and I went on writing and I went on writing. And I told him, finally, how awful it was not hearing from him. And I still didn't hear from him. Two years. I didn't… I mean, in the end, of course, I stopped writing. And it was very, very deathly, really, because it was… I didn't know what had gone wrong. I mean, if I had known what had gone wrong, it would have been extremely painful, but that would have been the end of it. If he had written and said, 'Look, I'm terribly sorry, but I've met somebody else', whatever, but he never had the nerve to do that. His nerve failed him. I know what happened, anyway. He said to himself, 'Oh, I ought to write to Di, I ought to write to Di'. And then he thought, 'Well, I haven't written to Di for so long, I can't now'. And he just, sort of, put it out of his head.
What had happened was he had started an affair with his commanding officer's wife. That wasn't eventually what carried him off, but that's why he stopped writing. Someone I know… no, not someone I knew, my cousin heard from somebody who'd met him at about that stage, when they were having a very drunken evening, and Tony got very drunk and cried and said how awful he was and how he was ashamed of himself and how I was his great love. And she foolishly told me that, because it rather made me go on hoping. But then, after that, he met a young, and I think, very nice girl. And by that time, the war was well on, and he was flying in bombers. You know, he knew perfectly well he didn't have a great deal of a chance, really, of coming out of it. And he fell for her, and she fell very much in love with him, and they got married. And then I got this little brief, brief letter, awful little formal letter saying that he'd met somebody else who he wanted to marry, would I release him from the engagement?
It was awful, really, because that was… you see, it was as though one's whole future was gone. It wasn't just that one had lost a man, one had lost one's job, one had lost everything one had been believing in and counting on. And that knocked the stuffing out of me very badly. I lost my self-confidence, I lost my sexual self-confidence very badly. I couldn't believe that I was attractive to anybody, which was why I became very, I think, for quite a long time after that, very promiscuous, because any sign that I was attractive, even warning signs, was such a relief, you know?
He married her, he… they had a son, but he was dead before his son was born. I have met his son, quite recently, since he surfaced. And he discovered me. He discovered me because he'd been going through his grandfather's letters, and he found a letter I had written his grandfather on… when Tony was killed. And he showed it to me. And I wrote a very nice letter, actually. I wrote a much… I hadn't realised I was quite a sort of… I was a good deal more mature, then, than I thought I was. Because I was fond, very fond of him, the old man. And the old man was fond of me. We used to go on meeting quite a lot. His son was a bit like him. Not quite… not a very happy man. I think having… he liked his children a lot. I think he was having quite a difficult time with his wife. But we didn't see each other after one meeting. And I found I didn't mind meeting him a bit. And it was interesting to hear that his mother had been a very charming and very loyal young woman, and who had adored Tony. Got married later again, had quite a happy life. By that time, it didn't matter, but it was some…
[Q] I mean, you were engaged, but had you also been lovers?
Yes. Yes. We had been. And we became lovers when I was at Oxford. But it was… it was a very, very bad blow and took a lot of getting over. And didn't really completely stop influencing my life until after, all those years later, when it came out in a book. And I wrote it. Wrote it all out, absolutely. Finished. Gone. Relief. All was well.

It came out. I had discovered, unexpectedly, that I could write stories. That just came out, out of the blue. And then there'd been a gap. I wrote nine stories, which sort of proved to me that I could write, which was rather fun. And then no more stories came, but there was one I had begun and didn't go on with. And I found those two first pages about a year later, about a year afterwards. And I thought, 'Well, this could be worked into a story. Perhaps I'll have a go at it tomorrow.' And I put paper in the typewriter and I began to write. Not the end of that story, but Instead of a Letter, that book. It just simply came out of the blue. I never intended it, I never planned it at all. At no stage did I plan it. And I used to come rushing home from the office, dying to go on with it, but not knowing what was going to come next. And I would read what I'd written and say, 'Oh yes, I see', and then I would go. And that's how that book came out. It was the most extraordinary experience of my life, and completely successful.
Having written it, I thought: Oh, you know, what's my mother going to think about it? And so I thought of a way around this, which was rather clever, really. I thought, well, I knew there was an American publisher who wanted it. I said, well, I'll have it published in America and it'll then be a book, a respectable-looking book. So I can then show it to her as a book and say, 'Now look, this has been published in America, which is far away'. I knew she wouldn't mind that, because no one she knew was there. 'If you really can't bear it, I won't give it to a publisher in England, but I would, of course, like to'. And I sent it off to her with that letter. And I got no answer. And days went by, no answer. Weeks went by, no answer. I thought, well, perhaps she didn't get it? But I found myself completely inhibited. I couldn't ring up and say, 'Did you get that book I sent you'? I couldn't. And we were going to meet at my godmother… my godmother who lived just outside London. Mum was coming up and we were both going to be there for a weekend. And then I was going to bring Mum here for a couple of nights. And I said, I'll talk to her about it when we're at Aunt Phoebe's. When we were there, I couldn't… I couldn't. Well, I can't talk to her about it now. I'll talk to her about it on the way back, when I'm driving her back to London. And in the car, and: no I can't. I couldn't make myself do it. And so I thought, well, I'll talk to her… I'll make supper and I'll talk to her about it after supper. And I was in the kitchen next door, making supper, and the telephone rang. And she talked for a moment on it and then she called me and said, 'It's Andrew'. That's my brother. So I came in and picked it up, and he said, 'Di, I've just been talking to Mum about your book. She showed it to me. She doesn't want you to publish it. I've just told her she's talking nonsense. It's a bloody book… a bloody good book, you've got to publish it'. I hung it up and I said, 'He thinks it'll be alright to publish my book'. She said, 'I know, he told me so. I was going to ask you not to, but I suppose I mustn't'. And I said, 'I think perhaps you oughtn't to'.
Then, in an extraordinary way, we had supper and we sat here, in this room, and we talked about it. And there was practically nothing that was in that book that she didn't know. And we talked like two adult women about it, perfectly easily and pleasantly. And I thought, well, this is marvellous. This is a new, sort of, stage of my relationship with my mother. We've now become two grown-up women who can talk about things.
She never, ever said another word about it. Never. I sent her the reviews and things when they were good, and she never acknowledged it. It was as though it hadn't been done. And I thought at first, well, this is really so absurd, it's unbelievably silly. And gradually I came to the conclusion that it was actually a pretty good solution to the problem, because, you know, if you have a daughter, you love your daughter. You want to go on loving your daughter. She has done something that you don't really approve of, but let's pretend she hasn't done it, and then we needn't bother about it. And it worked, you see. I mean, our relationship was always very good. It didn't matter to me, really, that she didn't want to talk about it.

[Q] Do you think… I mean, is there something rather unusual about that book, in terms of… I mean…
Well what…
[Q] As a woman and as a woman of your background, and…?
I had written about sleeping with someone before I was married to them. I had written about having an abortion later on, actually put it down in black and white. Well, those were things that she did not like the idea of anyone talking about in public. I mean, the thought that her friends would read that, no. She herself didn't mind knowing it, but she didn't want other people to know it. And she felt it was unseemly to talk about such things. There are plenty of people who still think that, who still think that there's no reason to talk about such frightful things. I mean, there are people in my family who think that. Barbara downstairs, who writes for The Economist about foreign affairs and has done for years, but wouldn't dream of writing about her private life. We're very, very, very great friends, and it took a long time for it to be quite said between us that she didn't like the books I wrote. Once it was said, it became very much easier to go on being great friends, but I mean she said to me, 'Do you know, it's impossible for me to imagine how someone I love can do something that would kill me'. She would find it so difficult to write a personal book. And I think my sister-in-law would probably find the same thing. My sister-in-law is very conventional.
[Q] Did you have to think, at the time, though, about whether it was unseemly to write about?
Well, I didn't think that, because as I say, I didn't think anything about it when I was writing. I just wrote it. I mean, it came out. And then when I did think about it, later, it seems to me that if you are going to be writing about personal experience, there's absolutely no justification for doing it unless you do it as honestly as you possibly can. I mean, you've got to keep doing... What Jean Rhys used to constantly say about writing, you've got to get it right. And, you know, a lot… this was a very… a lot of the things that we weren't supposed to talk about were the most important parts of one's life. But I think that it's valuable to try to get to the bottom of how things really were. It's certainly valuable for the writer. And I think it's also value for some… you know, people have responded to reading it as being valuable. I got more letters after that book than most of my writers that I published ever got. I got hundreds of letters. Because they were letters from people who had similar sort of experience, saying, 'What a relief to see it being described and written about'.
[Q] I don't know who said this, or exactly what the phrase is, but it's some famous dictum about the unexamined life being not worth living or something. Have you ever heard that? It's from Socrates. Something like that. 
Yes, it does sort of… it rings a bell, but I don't…
[Q] Do you know what it means? You say it's valuable for the writer to… what are your thoughts about…? I mean, because there is a risk, isn't there, of self-indulgence. I mean... 
There's a risk of self-indulgence, but what I found was that it simply got rid of… I mean, the first book was so valuable that it god rid of the sense of failure, that was a foolish sense of failure. And then I wrote two other books, which were both written deliberately. Having made that discovery, and these two other books were deliberately to get rid of distressing things. One was about poor Waguih Ghali, who was a friend of mine, who I knew stayed here for a long time, committed suicide, and everyone of course… and that was awful. But, you know, it got… it stopped being so awful once I'd really, sort of, written it out. And another was another extraordinary situation I'd known, which had ended up distressingly. And so I thought, in the end, that obviously my motive in writing was therapeutic. It must be something that I depended on. I never felt like a professional writer, because I thought that it was somehow just a sort of therapy, as far as I was concerned. And it wasn't until I was quite old, I'd retired, that I then wrote two books just for fun, which was Stet, and instead of… Yesterday Morning and realised I could also write. I didn't have to be writing to cure myself of something, always. I could write just to remember pleasant things.

Well, what happened, in fact, was that actually, you see, the Tony thing was made, sort of, worse by the fact that, after… before I got into publishing, it was still during the war, but rather towards the end of the war, someone… the big house was commandeered by the army and people were stationed there, and, on the whole, because we lived across the park in the farm, you know, we got to know various people who were there, stationed. And one of them was an Irishman who, to my great… I mean, this was wonderful. It seemed like life coming back. I fell in love with him. And Tony, by that time, was more than two years, I had really enough recovered from Tony, and I fell in love again. But in a way, it was completely… it was sort of... it was sort of suicidal. I mean, I knew that he was married. I knew that he, quite quickly, I realised that he was not the sort of man who would want to break his marriage up or anything. And he hadn't quite expected to be having this affair at all. He was much older than me. He was… I don't know how much older, but I suppose about 15 years older, maybe. I was 23 by then. I suppose he was nearly 40. A very intelligent and very nice, amusing man. And a very attractive man. It was a brief affair, because he was soon moved away, but it was an affair. I mean, I was head over heels in love with him. He was sort of in love with me, although I, you know, when he said that, I knew perfectly well what he was saying wasn't what I was feeling, quite. And anyhow, I didn't actually want him to go overboard. I respected him too much. I mean, I thought that this would have been out of character if he'd, sort of, said, 'Let's break my marriage up and get you… get married'. I thought that would have been just… it would have been wrong. And he would have… he wouldn't have done that. But nevertheless, the fact that then, when he had to go away, which he did, and sensibly enough, didn't continue writing, because what would have been the point? And it was again another blow on the same place, as it were. So that by the time I got my job, I really did feel pretty… pretty finished.
But the job was wonderful. First of all, the job, I had a very good, amusing job within the BBC, nice people working with, in a sort of team of people. And then I began… then I thought to myself, well, look, it's no good just sitting here feeling dimmer and dimmer and iller and iller, which I did. I mean, I was getting… I was anaemic. I was very, very low, physically. Once I got to a point of being so low, physically, that I had to go home for three weeks on sick leave. And when I got back, I thought well, now, the thing to do, I've got to snap out of this somehow. The next chap who offers, I will take up, like it or not, just to cheer me up. And a very merry chap, who used… had been having an affair with a friend of mine, and she'd gone away, turned up. And so I said, 'Alright', I would go ahead with this. And it was wonderfully cheering up. I mean, it didn't make me feel, like writing the book, that everything was over and better, but it was cheering up. It got one through a lot of time because it was fun. And that one went on for quite a long time.
[Q] Was he married?
He was married, yes. He was married and a naughty old womaniser, if ever there was one. But funny, very funny. We used to have a lot of… we used to laugh a lot together, which was a great help. And that did me a lot of good. I mean, there's no question about it, it was a naughty affair and it did me good. And so after that, I was quite sort of prepared to go in for more affairs. And did, from time to time. None of them were such fun as that one, but that was the best. And they did… I mean, they restored one's self-confidence to a certain extent. And there was no danger in them. One wasn't going to fall in love again. And when I did finally, after the war, once more fall in love, that didn't work either, you see, actually. He… that was very sad, in a way, because it might have worked. He wasn't illegible, I mean… not illegible, what do I mean? Inedible?
[Q] Eligible?
Ineligible. He was someone who would have been a very good match, actually. He was rather rich and a very nice man. And all that went wrong there was that, although he liked me, we got on quite well together, but he never fell in love with me, not quite. Nearly. He thought he might be going to, but he didn't. And he was a nice, brave man. He had the nerve to say, 'Look, it's not going to work. I'm not falling in love with you'. Which takes quite a lot for a young man to do, you know? I really do admire a person who has that nerve. And as a result, it was pretty shattering, but I got over it quite fast, because it was… I knew where I was. You know, there was no false hopes. Tony had been so long, I'd been thinking, 'Well, it may be going to be alright. He may come back, he may… but this one, with this nice man, finito'. Cry, cry, finish. And that was much better.

I would urge anybody who wants to break off an affair, to break it off and to do it quickly. It really does… it does much less damage to someone than trying to be kind.
[Q] Did it bother you that some of these lovers had wives?
No. Not… well, the one who was most married, which was the cheerful one, was… and he was so, sort of, I mean, it was so obvious that he had lots of girlfriends, I was only one of many, and his marriage had survived it perfectly cheerfully. Didn't bother me in the least.
[Q] Did it bother you that he had lots of other girlfriends?
No. I wasn't in love with him. I liked him very much, and we had a lot of fun, but I wasn't in love with him. And that seemed to me, at that stage, to be what one wanted out of life. I wasn't… I didn't expect to fall in love with him… and I think that, you see, one of the reasons that… that Geoffrey went, that this nice one went wrong was because I knew it was going to go wrong. I think I went into it sort of expecting disaster. This is love, and so therefore it's going to be unhappy.
[Q] So one might say that…
Because when I met Barry, which was quite a long time afterwards, there was no question, again, with the falling in love with either of us. It was friendly.
[Q] Barry? This was…
This is having… this is when finally, I'd been cured. I was better. I was happy. I wasn't wanting disaster, but I met this…
[Q] Hang on a minute. You were cured? This means of what? Of romantic illusion?
I was… I was no longer feeling that I was a hopeless failure, because in a way, although I was a successful publisher and I was enjoying my job, taking… thinking of myself as a woman, I was a failure, because I was still feeling that if one hadn't succeeded in getting married and having a family, one hadn't made it properly. I'd stopped feeling that. I now felt that I was perfectly alright. It wasn't that I was… anything dreadfully wrong with me that this had happened. My life was quite enjoyable. And so when I met Barry, I wasn't wanting to be in love, particularly. And I wasn't frightened of the idea of being in love anymore. I wasn't, sort of, fretting about it. I was just meeting someone who we got on terribly well together. And so it turned… it was a different kind of relationship. It was… I've always thought of it, and I think he's always thought about it, as a loving friendship, more than being in love. And that worked terribly well.
[Q] Is that a good thing to be doing? Is that a better… I mean, it's funny to say this, but is that a… really, is that a much better way to be doing things, a loving friendship?
Well, it seemed to me to be better. But that may be simply because of my history. And I think, in fact, that a good… you see, I've known, in my family, a lot of happy marriages, and I think that what happens, if you're very lucky, is that the lovely romantic first love happens to be with exactly the right sort of person, so it turns into a loving friendship. I mean, that I'm sure is what happened… my sister and her husband were as happy as bees together. He died when he was 82, not very long ago, and every time, I used to be so amused whenever I was staying with them. They had been living a long time in Africa, and so their pattern of life was that you had your bath before dinner, because you come in from… and then you had dinner. So that always, when one was staying with them, they pottered off to the bathroom, had their bath before dinner, and I used to listen and hear them talk, talk, talk, talk, laugh, laugh, laugh, laugh, talk, talk, talk, talk. There they were, they'd been married God knows how long and they had four children, and still had, as much as anyone, to say about… and liked being together. It had worked. And I think a lot of marriages do, thank goodness. You know, the one thing simply naturally develops into the other thing.
[Q] Going back to before you wrote Instead of a Letter, during this period when you had a good job and so on, but there was… as you say, there were these questions you had, or feeling about not being successful as a woman or whatever. I mean, how much was loneliness part of all that, and looking for company and… how does that all balance?
Well, you see I didn't have to be lonely, really, because the job was very full of people, interesting people. I shared a flat with my cousin Barbara, downstairs, who… we were very close and good friends. I wasn't aware, really, of loneliness, much. I think that could be, if circumstances hadn't… I mean, if one had been doing a boring job, that would be awful. But my job was very time-consuming and interest-consuming, and the people I was meeting were interesting. I didn't really need much in the way of any other social life, because it provided it itself, the job did.
[Q] So really, you were… Were you just a very long time, I guess, recovering from just the most terrible…
I was a long time recovering from that blow, but during that time, I had a lot of nice things going on. I mean, I loved my holidays abroad and all that.
[Q] Did you have close friends? I mean, apart from lovers, I mean, did you also have maybe…?
I had close friends. I had close women friends, very good women friends. I didn't have many men friends. I mean, André of course, who was a pain in the neck most of the time. But I mean, I knew him terribly well, just like family. And I had… of course, I had family. I was… I don't think loneliness figured.
[Q] Does it surprise you that you've got such a… a good memory for everything? You know, it's completely… it's impossible, really, to believe that you're 90 now, that you can remember all these things. 
Well, people of 90 can remember the past. What I don't remember is what happened yesterday, you know? But I do remember, very vividly. I still, to this day, when I'm back in Norfolk, driving through Halesworth, where that level crossing used to be. It doesn't go there anymore, the train goes underground, I think, now, at that point. But at that point, I can't drive that road without remembering the car stopping there and Tony kissing me. To this day. But with pleasure, now.

He put his arm around me, he put his hand on my breast. That was thrilling. Yes, I think that was one of my big moments. I mean, to me, well it seemed at the moment, this is the best thing that had ever happened to me. Because I had been, you see, all this time rather modestly thinking I was too young to be interesting to him. Now he had… I had always intended that sooner or later, he would see me, so to speak, and now he had. It was what I'd been hoping for, aiming for.
[Q] Hence the shock of your mother's…?
I think my mother had a very shrewd idea of the kind of girl I was, really. But you see, we used to go sailing together, before then. We had a wonderful time. And I used to… he had a sister who was his favourite sister, not far from his age. I used to hang about her as much as possible, knowing that… you know, I loved her, too, but it just brought me closer to him. I had my sights fixed on him.
[Q] And when you were at Oxford, he would come to visit you?
He would come to visit me, yes. He used to fly down from Grantham, which made it awfully glamorous, my young man flying down.
[Q] And under what circumstances was he killed?
He was killed over Greece. He was coming back from a raid, he was the only one left, I think. His son wrote, actually, a very good account of his life for his children, which he sent to me to, sort of, get a few details. It was pretty awful. He was flying some really… they were flying some absolutely ghastly bombers, which were known to be clumsy and useless and heavy and impossible. And he, I think, was probably running out of fuel at that stage, and he wasn't shot down, but he ran into a mountain. And no one knew where he fell for a long time. It was… but he… it was… they knew, the ones who were flying in those planes, that it was very, very dangerous, because the planes were so unwieldy and… and bad.
[Q] And they were so young, weren't they?
They were so young. He was very wicked and naughty, because he'd been… he'd done a dreadful thing, then it'd have worked. He'd been forbidden to go out to bomb an oil… a huge oil supply somewhere that the Germans had. And he thought, it's mad not to go, and he'd taken his bomber and he'd gone out, against orders, and he bombed it. And something awful had happened, as a result. I think some other person who'd gone with him had got killed, or something. And he was court-martialled. But in the end, the person who was sort of in charge, gave him a sort of furtive congratulations and let him off, because it had been such a dashing thing to do, and it had worked. All that oil… oil tank went up and that was splendid. But he was very reckless, very reckless man.
[Q] So the fact that he was killed, I mean, on top of the other thing. I mean, I suppose by the time he was killed, he still mattered a great deal, so this was like a…
Well, it was sort of… just more of the same, really. I think I felt quite sorry for his poor little wife, actually.

Well, you see, I suppose I have, by nature, a fairly optimistic and a resilient nature. It made me think, when I came across that story of that old 103 year-old lady [Alice Herz Sommer], who is still… who had been through infinitely more frightful life than mine, and is still able to say that life is beautiful, life is wonderful. And still plays the piano for three hours a day that, you know, being born with a resilient nature… She had a sister, she said in an interview, who was always unhappy. Always saw the dark side of life. Well, this is what you're born with. One of them was born unhappy, one of them was born able to be resilient. And I think I was born able to be resilient, in the end, because these were fairly sort of squashing blows, but one survived them.

What had happened with Barry was that I had gone off sex with him before he did. After about eight years, I just sort of actually began to be fairly bored. It didn't affect our friendship, and it didn't really worry him all that much, because he could… you know? I'd never, never felt dog-in-the-manger. If he wanted to have another… an affair, he could. And knew he could because he, very strongly, was un-possessive. He hated possessiveness, quite sort of fiercely. And so, our relationship had stopped being sexual, although he had then come to live here. We were sharing a flat. I mean, it was just like two friends sharing a flat by then with, behind it, the fact that there had been eight years of very happy and successful affair, which gave it that much extra depth. And then he was putting on a play in Jamaica, and he had to audition for the main part. It was called White Witch of Rose Hall. It was a Jamaican, sort of, legend. And he could cast most of it in Jamaica, but the witch herself had to be English. And so he was auditioning to… someone to go out with him to put this production on. And I think Sal had been the first person he auditioned, and I remember she came to see him here, and he thought she would be the one. What did I think? And I said, 'Well, she's very attractive, but I'm not sure'. I didn't think she was quite the right kind of attractive, because I had a fairly clear picture in my mind of the White Witch who I thought ought to be rather eccentric kind of beauty. And Sal was a more ordinary. She was a pretty girl, but she wasn't, sort of, eccentrically pretty. But actually, she did play it pretty well. And anyhow, he'd thought, fine, she'll do. And so they went out together, and quite soon, from his letters, it was obvious that they were having an affair. But when they got back, I realised quite quickly that it was not at all a sort of passing one, like mostly he was… it was pretty serious. And when I met her and got to know her better, I could see why it was pretty serious, because I liked her so much. I mean, she was really a remarkably nice person, not just a charming, pretty girl, but an exceptionally nice woman. And she was… came back to London, went back to auditioning, which she hated. And had lodgings somewhere near here. And it struck me quite soon that this was daft. I mean, she was spending most of her time here, certainly most nights here. I said, 'Well, why, don't you move in'? And so she did. And I… I remembered it as being about four years. She said the other day, 'Don't be silly, it was four years, not two years'. And I said, 'Well, do you know? Isn't it funny? They were about the happiest times I had.' And she said, 'They were certainly the happiest times that I had'. We had a wonderfully good friendship, which to this day goes on.
And she, in fact, went out to see Barry the other day, and reported… because I think the journey was a little too much for me, and has reported about it and is keeping an eye on him as much as I am. More.
[Q] So it wasn't really a ménage à trois?
It wasn't a ménage à trois, not properly, because that would… it should be if it was three people all having sex together. We weren't. I… it could only have existed because the sex had gone out of Barry's and my relationship. I mean, I wouldn't have tolerated it for a moment if we'd soon been… still been sleeping together, but we hadn't been. And I had completely accepted that that was gone, it was out of the relationship. So there was nothing particularly odd about it, really. But it just looked odd from outside.
[Q] So it would be a mistake, then, to think of you as a person blessedly free of jealousy or possessiveness?
Yes. I mean, I wasn't. I was only just free of irrational possessiveness. I mean, if Barry had been… if Barry and I had still been lovers, I should… I mean, I wouldn't have accepted it. I'd have said, 'Well, this is the end of it, isn't it'? I would have been sad.

But Barry had been married when I met him, and was still married for a long time. I mean, the best part of our affair was all the time when he was married. And he did get divorced in the end, but not because of me, because of somebody else, in fact. But because she would have had a difficult time with her family, they quoted… I was quoted as being technically the person he was divorced for.
But his wife actually was divorcing him about somebody else. I don't think his wife knew about me. I'm sure she suspected, but I don't think she knew. But he, you see, had always tried to argue her into being not at all possessive, instead. Because he would have quite happily gone on. He was very fond of her, but he just felt that one ought to be able to have affairs as well as wives. And he was like any other unfaithful old boy: he just wanted to have his cake and eat it. In the end, she wouldn't let him.
But then he came… I don't think he was living here yet when Terry turned up. He was going to be living here quite soon, but he wasn't yet. But our affair was all but over - not quite over. And the awful Terry, who was very predatory, very beautiful, and she turned up… now I can't remember how it all rather mixed up, because she was really actually attracted to my then-lodger, but somehow, he got mixed up, and the then-lodger was away or something, and she… Barry fell in… into bed with her, thinking that it was quite unimportant, really, to me, as it ought to have been, because I was going off. And I did feel, then, for a night, very conscious that… not that I had been supplanted, but that I'd got old, that there was this wretched blonde beauty who had… had it all stretched ahead of her, and with me, it was finished. It was a sad night. But it was only really sad because of that, because I did know perfectly well that our affair was over, really. But it was just that was when I sort of faced it. And Sal happened a good deal later, when I had… long after I had faced it. So there was no feelings about it at all.
[Q] And so was that the end of your love life?
After Terry, that was the end of the love life, completely. After that, you know, both of us said, 'No, that's finished'.
[Q] And what about your love life?
And my love life, I then thought, was probably finished as a result. And I was really quite prepared to accept the fact. I mean, it was sort of sad to be older, but there you are. It happens. And then dear old Sam heaved over the horizon, and I got a sort of new shot of life.
[Q] Sam?
Yes. Who's in… in this book.
[Q] What can you tell us about him?
Well, he was from the island of Grenada, Granada, Grenada. He had been… he was a very impressive man to look at, a big, tall man. He had just come back from Africa, where he had been to Ghana, and had been… not a member of [Kwame] Nkrumah's government, but Nkrumah had sort of employed him as press officer for his government, because Sam was a very good broadcaster; he had a very good voice, and he was a personal friend of Nkrumah's. He'd had a marvellous time in Ghana, really had. It was a palmy time for him. And then he travelled with Nkrumah all over the world, and he had things like a lovely golden watch that Haile Selassie had given him after a visit. You know, it was… he'd had a nice life. But when Nkrumah… they were all in China when there was a coup, and Nkrumah was kicked out. And when they got back, Sam might well have gone to prison, but he didn't because he had a good reputation in Accra; he was known to be an honest man who'd never taken bribes or anything. And so he was just told he'd got to get out in four days' time, and he couldn't take anything excepting his clothes. So his house and his car, everything, he lost. All he had was Haile Selassie's watch and the most wonderful camelhair overcoat with a sable collar, which he hung onto through thick and thin. But no sooner did he get back to England than he got a good job with the British government as… I can't remember what the Race Relations office was called, but he was… he wasn't the chief of it, but he was on it. And that's what he was doing when I knew him. And he I met at a party. We had quite a connection with Nigeria at that time, because André had started a firm in Nigeria, and there was some party or other with a good many old African hands at it, and he was one of them. And he made what I described in the book as a stately swoop, which tickled me a lot at the time, and we took up together. He didn't want a romantic affair, I didn't want a romantic affair. Neither of us wanted to cause any trouble to anybody, including each other. You know, it was just really a friendly and quite successful sort of sexual affair. And I used to go and see him about once a week, in his flat, and we used to have supper together and I would stay the night. It was not a very respectable set of affairs, but it was very, very nice, really. Lasted for seven years.
[Q] And how old were you when you met him?
I was, I suppose, still in my 50s, but late 50s. I mean, it went on well into my 60s. It was… and when it ended, it just went off quietly. Gaps became longer, and that was it. Of course, Sam, who was older than I was, he would never have admitted it, but he was also getting gradually less sexy, and actually, without his knowing it, his heart was getting bad, because he died of a heart attack. But, um… I mean, there was no sadness or anything there. It ended quite friendlily. And by the time it ended, I was perfectly happy to think of my sex life over and done with.
[Q] You don't miss it?
No. I'm free of all that nonsense.
[Q] Did I get this from your book, or is it George Melly saying something about when you finally lost interest in sex, you felt like you'd been unchained from a lunatic. 
I think that it was George.
[Q] Oh, was it George?
Melly.
[Q] George Melly, it was. Terribly funny. Is that in your book?
Yes, I think it was… I loved that book. No, I didn't quite feel unchained from a lunatic, but one does feel life's become much simpler. Room for other things, now.

[Q] Your publishing life really did begin with André, didn't it?
My publishing life started before… it start… before André was a publisher. I mean, George brought him to the party that Marjorie and I gave to warm… a flat-warming party we gave. He had turned up with a small Hungarian, who was rather charming and comic. I remember he attracted attention because he sat on the floor and he sang, In the Foggy, Foggy Dew. And it seemed so funny that a Hungarian should sing [In] The Foggy, Foggy Dew, but he did. And he and I picked each other up and had a little flutter for a time. And he always said that he was going to… oh, he was just beginning to be in a publishing firm. He'd come out of the Isle of Mann with an introduction from somebody there to a bookseller. And the bookseller had given him an introduction to a publisher. And he'd got a job as a publisher's traveller rep. And from that, it rapidly moved into the office itself, because nearly all the men had gone to the war, and this chap, who was called John Roberts, very lazy anyway, was delighted to find this extremely intelligent, enthusiastic little Hungarian who was perfectly prepared to do everything. Read books, print books, design books. André just took to it like a duck to water. And he was there. He was in publishing as a result, which made him very glamorous to me. And he said, 'Well, you see, I'm going to start a publishing firm of my own after the war'. He hadn't got a bean, and he hadn't got any contacts. I mean, he'd come to England to read economics at the London School of Economics, which he never did. I mean, that's what he was supposed to be doing, but he'd come as a student, and then the war had caught him. And then he'd been interned, because he was a Hungarian. So he had no background in publishing or anything at all, but he said he was going to go into publishing. And I can well remember, I mean I've said this so often before, it's an old story, but we were walking through Soho and he said, 'If I start my publishing firm and you join me, how much would you have to earn'?
And I thought, 'Well, he'll never manage to do it anyway', so I can be sort of wild, and I said, 'Oh, £500'. And it seemed a terrible lot of money then, you see, to me. But I didn't earn it. I remember when we started, it was a long time before I reached £500 a year. It was £300 a year for a long time. But he was… you see, I hadn't realised about André at that stage, he was somebody who, if he had an idea, he acted. I mean from the idea to the acting on it, with him was almost one thing. And that is a great gift. If you have that gift, you get places. And that he had. And he raised money. I mean, the amount of money he raised was, in fact, £3000. And everybody said in those days: you can't possibly start a publishing firm for under… I think it was [£]15,000, was the sort of amount that they said. Well, we started it on three. And it was quite true. You couldn't really start it on three. I mean, we ran out of money constantly. Oh, it was agony. I mean, to me.
[Q] But what does that involve, then, trying to run a publishing company on so little money. And presumably not with much staff. I mean…
It was André, me, one secretary, poor Mr Kaufmann, who was the accountant, and a friend of ours who ran the children's side of it, but that was it, to begin with. The books were designed by someone who sort of came in on a freelance. But what it meant was, you see, we constantly had to get new people in, because to me, I had no idea about money at all. I'm still very, very bad about money. But to me, money was something you either had enough of, in which case you spent it on something nice, or you didn't have any, and then you did without.
But I didn't, sort of, think… that there's two different kinds of people about money: people who are like that, or people who think of money as something you manipulate and make and play with and increase and… it's quite a different approach. Well, André really had much more of that. To him, when we ran out of money and no one would… I hated it when the printers would come round and say, 'Look, you've simply got to pay the bill'. And André would always manage to be away, and I would have to be the one who answered. Because I didn't… it made me quite sick with misery and horror. It didn't worry André at all, because he always knew he was going to be able to get, somewhere, some… somehow going to get some money. And he did. Six times. And we were saying: what are we going to do? We've got no money. Finished, done with, awful. Six times, André found, within three days or four days, somebody who'd always longed to be investing some money in a publishing firm.
And as a result, you see, this was wonderful, but he was brilliant at doing that, but he was also very romantic about English people, and he had a strong belief that an English gentleman's word was as good as his bond. You know, a gentleman's agreement. He never had an agreement written down with any of these six people. Six times he got them in, their word was good enough. It was a gentleman's agreement each time. When, need I say, soon all of them got fed up with it, excepting two. One of them bought the lot out. No, two of them bought the rest out. And therefore, owned the firm, in fact. Which André had not foreseen at all. And we had this terrible time. We were that… by then, we'd really got to be quite clever and quite good at it. The whole thing was mad. I mean, I… the nerve of it, when I think of it. I was the editor, I was the person who chose the books. I'd never been a publisher. How could I have the nerve to read manuscripts and say, 'Yes, we'll publish this' and 'No, we won't publish that'? But I did. Absolutely crazy. And André knew quite a lot. He'd been for a year with John Roberts. He'd really… and he'd picked up an enormous amount about how a book is produced. He sort of swallowed it in through his pores. He was born to be a publisher. But he knew that English wasn't his first language. He was actually quite a shrewd editor. He could have been. He picked things… if he read a manuscript, if he made a comment on it, he was always right. But he was very diffident about making a comment, so I had to do that side of it.
[Q] What was his background in Hungary? Was he a Jew or not?
His father was a Jew. His mother, I think, is… I don't know whether his mother was a Jew or just became… when… she didn't look at all Jewish, but she did, for instance, when she died, she was given a Jewish funeral. So she may have been a Jew, as well. Or partly so. But his father was a dentist. They were, sort of, middle-class Hungarians. He'd had an uncle who knew a lot about England and was very fond of English literature, and that was why André, was given a choice at school, as a second language… if you were Hungarian when you went to school, you had to do Latin and then you could choose between French, English or German. And he chose German and English, and English was his favourite language. So he knew English quite well, because he loved his uncle, and his uncle influenced him in that way.

[Q] Can you say a bit more about him? You know, his personality and character and what first drew you to him. And also, I wonder… I mean, was it important that you started off by being lovers, or what? I mean, you were…
No, that was a very minor thing, really. I mean, just… we got to know each other that way, and we became quite good friends, and he sort of obviously spotted that I would be quite interested in… I mean, I was very interested in books. I had read a lot. I'd read English at Oxford, for what that was worth, but I'd read a lot. And I had really quite good judgement of books. But it was guesswork… actually he was very bad, actually, at choosing people. I mean, the moves he made… because he was always… if he wanted a very forceful salesman, the next man who he met, was that, because he wanted it.
If he wanted a sensitive editor, the next person he met was a sensitive editor. Well, I was, in fact, quite a sensitive editor, but it was bloody lucky for him I was, because I easily might not have been. But what he wanted, he instantly thought he'd got. And it would be no good at all… he was pig-headed. You would say to him, 'But look, darling, there's no… this man's never been anywhere near producing books before. He hasn't got a clue.' 'Oh, he's wonderful, he's got a flair, he's got intelligence, he's got this'… disaster after disaster, we had. But we always survived them. I mean, a good percentage of people were alright. But, I mean, we had a wonderful man once who… he brought him all the way from Australia to be our sales manager. We didn't have a sales manager to begin with. I mean, André… when André was being the sales manager, he did it very well. But then he decided we must now… we'd reached the point where we could have a sales manager. And he'd been to Australia on a trip. He realised quickly… he had a great sense of publishing… that we'd got to go to America, we'd got to go to Australia, we'd got to sort of get a feel of international publishing. And he met this chap in Australia and he imported him, and he arrived, and he did seem a bit, sort of, peculiar. Very peculiar, really. And after about a month, he didn't appear in the office for about three days. And we knew he'd been living in a hotel, so André and I drove around to the hotel to find out what had happened to him. And we asked after him, and the receptionist said in respectful tones, 'Oh, the Colonel has left for Berlin'. We said, 'The Colonel'? The Colonel had left for Berlin. We never knew. Was he really a colonel who'd been pretending to be a publisher, or was he a publisher who thought he was a colonel? Had he really gone to Berlin? He vanished. We never saw him after that.
[Q] Can you tell me about Louise? I think, as an example of the sort of people that…
Yes, well, she, bless her heart… of course she wasn't called that, and I won't reveal her name. He'd met her in New York, and what she'd been doing in New York, she'd been working in Tiffany's as a public relations person. And he came back and he said he'd found this lovely girl and she was going to be organising all… not just organising publicity, but she was going to be organising the sort of method. She was going to make an… we're not… we weren't going to be, sort of, hand-to-mouth anymore, there was going to be a system. She was going to organise a system.
He said, 'And you've all got to obey her. I'm going to obey her.' And then this figure appeared. I must say, she was very pretty, very elegant. And very New York. She was… sort of, could… whatever she put on looked extremely expensive and smart. And so I thought, 'Well, I better obey her'. We were all looking at her with great hostility, as you can imagine. But she looked very charming, so I thought, 'Well, I better do my stuff, so I'll ask to take her out to lunch'. Took her out to lunch, and we hadn't got halfway through lunch before the dear thing told me the reason why she'd accepted this job: she was in love with Ken Tynan, who she'd met in New York. Did I think that perhaps she'd made a mistake following him over or not? Well, I thought she was pretty well bound to have made a very bad mistake indeed, but I couldn't quite tell her that. But she had, of course, made a terrible mistake, so she was all heartbroken. But she was completely and utterly useless, but she had a… she came on with incredible confidence. You could meet her at a dinner party, and you would instantly think she could cope with anything. But when she was actually working, and we only discovered after she left, when she was, for instance, after a meeting about how we were going to promote a book, and we said, 'Well Louise was going to send out copies to X, Y and Z for preliminary quotations', she put all the copies down behind the radiator. She hadn't sent them out at all. She… meanwhile, of course, she was having a completely broken heart, and I was having to try and cope with her. She came and stayed with me for a bit. Floods of tears. Of course, awful Ken, I think, had no interest in her at all, really, and been very unkind. And I've always remembered. She said, 'Oh, Diana, you've been through this. How long does it… how long does it last?' Meaning heartbreak. And I thought, well, I could tell her, it's cheering up, really, that you really only felt very, very bad for about two years. 'Two years!', she said, and fell on the bed, because she was only 26, so two years seemed to her forever. Poor, poor girl. And she then took her… pulled herself together, and she then had a sort of cheering up affair with someone. And she instantly got pregnant. I mean, she was a disaster, a disaster area.
[Q] At some point, I suppose, you had to get rid of people.
Well, we… you see, André never could, but we were frightfully lucky, yeah. Tom Maschler met her at a dinner party, and she presented herself as she always did, as so effective, and Tom rang up André, and said, 'André, I've got a terrible confession to make. I've poached your lovely girl.' And André said, 'I hope I didn't sound too thrilled'. And she went. And all these awful disasters about getting pregnant and having to be sent back to New York and everything, happened after that. I mean, I was still looking after her, because she'd sort of fallen into my lap, as it were. But she was not working for us anymore after that. I saw her since, in New York, and she always was going from strength to strength, and then always some terrible disaster. But she always came out of her disasters.
[Q] When you said she came to stay with you for a while, was that here?
No, that was… no. Yes it was, the second time. It was here. There was a… I moved… it was just before I was moving here. She actually came to stay here for a bit.
[Q] The reason I ask is because I mean this flat has seen perhaps more than its fair share of...of…
Drama. Yes. She was a wonderful girl. I hope she's alright now. She'd be quite an old woman by now.

I was doing all the nice bits, you see, the bits that interested me. I was doing the… the editing side. I was an editor, really, I wasn't a publisher ever, because I'm too, sort of, useless about money, but I knew about producing books. I could… to begin with, we had to turn our hand to anything. I mean, I could lay out a book. I could do… design an advertisement. I could… I even did a few… made a few book jackets. But that was the side of it that I was involved with. André did the wheeling and the dealing. I mean, I used to occasionally go over to New York, and usually with him, but sometimes by myself, to buy books and things. And I was not really good at that, because I was no good at bargaining or… I could read and decide that we wanted to do a book, but I wasn't… I have no business smart at all.
[Q] And were relations between you always okay? I mean, were there ever times when you wanted to just pack it all in and throw your hands up and walk out, and say, that's it, I'm off, or…?
I always enjoyed the job too much. There were times when André drove me up the wall. He was… had a terrible habit. He always had somebody in the firm that he was down on, and he would make their life absolute hell. And this was… could be… make one very… He did it to me for a short time, once. He would… he was like a sort of little searchlight, and it would fix on somebody, at which point they could do nothing, nothing right. And it was awful, because it would make them do things wrong. They would get so tense that everything they did was in fact wrong.
But he could never praise anybody. Never could say, 'You're doing well'. And I went, right at the beginning, through this myself with him once. And then it dawned on me that really one just had to take no notice. And also, you could always defuse him if you had made a mistake, by saying, 'Oh André, I've made a terrible mistake'. And that took the wind out of his sails. 'What have you done?' 'Oh, I've done this and that.' 'Oh, well, it could be worse.' And he'd be perfectly alright. But you see, I saw him drive people almost into nervous breakdowns, from time to time. And I don't know what it was that made him do it. And then he could never actually sack anybody. He would say this person was impossible, he would go around telling everybody this person was impossible. He would create an atmosphere that was so awful that finally, if the person had any sensitivity at all, they would leave, because they would just feel they couldn't go on. But once it happened to a very nice man indeed, who was a completely square peg in a round hole. I mean, he'd been taken on for a job that was not his kind of thing. He was an intelligent man, but he ought to be doing something different. And André became so awful to him, about him, and he would be awful about people to the switchboard operator, to everybody. And I finally said to him, 'You know, you can't go on like this about him. You can't. You've got to pull yourself together and tell him it's not working.' And he said, 'I can't, I can't. You've got to do it.' And by that time, I was so sorry for this poor man that I thought, 'Well, I suppose I shall bloody well have to'. And I had to go downstairs, sit in his office and tell him, 'Look, my love, it's not working, you've got to leave'. And he went white as a sheet, this man. He hadn't a clue that this had been going on. It was awful.
And I took him… I never forgave André for that, really, making me do that awful thing. And he did various things like that, and there was a time, also, when he'd been demanding… he always demanded sympathy, you see, for himself. His love affairs and things. One had to… everybody had to listen to him worry about… when he was having a fit of jealousy for no reason at all, he used to have to drive around, which meant he drove around where he thought she might be having dinner with someone at a restaurant. And he used to say, 'Come with me'. And I said, 'No, I'm not going to come driving around with you'. I said, 'It's disgusting behaviour'. So then he would get somebody else to do it, you see? On and on, this would go. But I was once heartbroken, or very depressed. I wasn't quite heartbroken. And I was going through a rather bleak time. And André and Nick, and Nick's wife and André's girlfriend… I mean, they used to go to the cinema or the theatre or restaurants every week together. They made a foursome. And I thought, well, it'd be quite fun, really, at this miserable time, and I'm really getting a bit depressed, if they just occasionally said to me, 'Well come to the cinema tonight', to me.
So I said to André one day, André, 'I'm having a horrid old time at the moment. Do you think you might occasionally ask me to come to…?' 'Don't be so sorry for yourself!' And at that point, actually, that point, I really did think for a whole night, I thought, am I going to put up with this any longer? For hours, I've had to go on listening to him, and then he does this. I thought we were friends. I thought… I didn't think we were twin souls, but I thought we were good friends. He's simply not capable of being a friend. Can I stand it anymore?

And then I thought, well, if it wasn't for him, I would not be in this very interesting job. I am in this interesting job, I like this job. He can't help being what he is. I was expecting from him something that he can't give me. Stop expecting it, lump him for what he is, and that'll be that. And it was. I mean, after that, I never did a thing for him that I didn't want to do. I mean, if he'd be… he had this habit of he'd be… if he had something arranged, interesting, for the evening, and he was let down at the last minute by someone, he would say, 'Oh, so-and-so can't come to the theatre with me with this evening. Will you come?' And I would say, 'No, I won't. I can't come.' And he say, 'Oh.' At one time, I would have said yes to it, but if I didn't want to go to that particular thing, I would say no. And once I'd reached that stage, I could work with him still quite well. And in certain ways, he was a good colleague, because if you were ill or anything… if he had… if he could do something practical for you, you know, if he could bring round a meal or whatever, he would do it. But he couldn't possibly put himself in anybody else's shoes. He couldn't understand what other people were feeling, at all.
[Q] What did he want out of it?
I think he was… he was just… I've never quite understood, but I couldn't imagine him being anything else but a publisher. He… he did read all his books. No, he didn't read all his books. He read quite a lot of his books. He liked the non-fiction side of it better than the fiction side. He loved things like meeting [John] Kenneth Galbraith or people like that, you know? It interested him a lot. He liked the actual process of producing a book: costing it, promoting it. He enjoyed it very much. And he loved… pouncing on interesting things, when you still could, when people were… when firms of our size still had a chance. Pouncing in and under other people's noses and getting something interesting.
[Q] What about money? I mean, you say you weren't very good at money and maybe still aren't, but did you make any money out of all of that?
Oh, he made… we made a good… I mean, the firm was profitable until André left it. Then after he left it… and he was extremely… but it was profitable really by good housekeeping. He was very, very frugal. He was… I always remember we were having supper one day, and… in his little house. This is early in our acquaintance. And were making an omelette and I broke the omelette and I threw away the shells. He was horrified. He said, 'No, when you break an egg, you must do this, get the last bit of white out'. That's what his mother always did. Well, he was that sort of frugal, and really, when we were very poor, to begin with, we had to reuse envelopes. If he saw someone going out of a room and not turning out the light… and he… he was as frugal as that. And with a small firm, like we were, we could not have got by without that. He then became… eventually, he was famous for being mean. And he was as mean as you possibly could be to his authors and everybody else, to a fault. Occasionally he made the mistake of going too far in that way. But on the other hand, we were in profit, even to the end of his days, before he sold the firm. He sold the firm when it was beginning to be almost impossible for a firm that… of our size and kind to survive, but we still could, but it was getting very difficult. But the minute he went, it wasn't in profit anymore, quite quickly. But you see, he would never… for instance, we had a book and it was going to be illustrated. If it was André running it, you gave it six illustrations if you were lucky.
[Q] And what about you? Did you make any money out of it?
No, never. And I mean to get a rise out of André was almost impossible. I lived. I mean, I had… I could pay my rent, I could have holidays, but I never made… I never saved a penny while I was working there.
[Q] Did you mind that?
No, I didn't. I ought to have. I was… it was my mistake. I should have been much tougher about it. I should have insisted on being paid what I was worth. But I was lazy, really, and I didn't want to make an issue of it, and as long… I was very idle about money. As long as I had just enough money for living how I liked, which is a very simple way, really… I blame myself for that, often. I've never owned, you see, I've never owned a house in my life.
[Q] Really?
Never owned anything. I mean, this flat is… I now live in this flat for free, because I couldn't live it any other how. My cousin is… you know, we're like sisters, in fact, and she's… when I could no longer afford to pay rent for it, which I can't do now, she said, 'Oh never mind, you go on living here'. I'm living on charity.
[Q] Do you mind that?
I do mind that. I mean, I wish I wasn't living on charity. I kick myself for not having made an issue of it. I could have said to André at any time, I suppose, 'Look, I'm going to leave and go somewhere else and be paid what I'm worth'. But I never did, because I enjoyed… you know, I liked our firm. So I don't… I mean, I blame him a bit, but I blame myself just as much, really.

We published some very rum books to begin with, because you do. I mean, you pick up anything you can. But our first successful book which launched us into a lot - it had launched us into doing a lot of American publishing – it was Norman Mailer's The Naked and the Dead, which we would never have got if he hadn't been turned down by everybody else, because they were all too frightened of the language. It was a war book about soldiers and the Far East. And even… well, I think America, America was probably almost more prudish than England. You could not print the word 'fuck'. And of course, he wanted to... I mean, his dialogue, because you know soldiers, every third word practically. And there'd been a lot of argument what they should do. Would they put a dash? And honestly, if you had put a dash in that book, it would have looked like network. It would have been hopeless. So then… this was really so absurd. It was agreed that they would substitute the word 'fug'. I mean, what could be sillier, in a way, than that? Because it was perfectly obvious to everybody what the word was. Why was it harmless because it was F-U-G and un-writeable because it was F-U-C-K? I mean, the whole thing was so daft.
Anyhow, English firms all turned it down, all the big ones that he had sent to. We were very small, so it must have been the agent was in a state of despair when it was offered to us. And it was Norman's best book by far. I mean, I haven't read it for years. I don't know what I would think of it, now, but it was… it seemed to me at the time a remarkably good book, and did give you an extraordinarily clear picture of what fighting was like in… in those awful circumstance. I can, to this day, remember certain descriptions, manhandling guns through mud and things, which are very vivid and clear. And so we took it on. And we sent out the review copies, three weeks in advance, like one does. And the literary editor on the Sunday Times left a copy on his desk.
And the editor of the Sunday Times came into his office and happened to pick it up and look at it. He was an old man. I can't remember his name, but he was an elderly editor. And he opened it, and there was 'fug', 'fug', 'fug', 'fug', all the way down on the page. And the next thing we knew, on the Sunday… on the front page of the Sunday Times, written by the editor himself, was this scandalous and awful book was being published, which, 'No decent man could leave where his women or children might see it'. Those very words, he used.
And it was on about 8 o'clock in the morning, on Sunday, half-past eight, André turned up, bang, bang, bang, on the door. And I was in bed and I got out of bed. And there was he. And he was almost in bed. He'd pulled on things over his pyjamas. 'Look! Look! Look at this!' I looked and horror, 'What are we going to do'? We were so naïve we thought, this is the end – this is going to be so awful. Because, of course, you see, we had quite a big printing of this book and we… if he had not… if we'd had to junk it, we would have been completely bust. I mean, our investment in it had been taken out. And I remember we said, 'Well, we better take a copy round to Desmond McCarthy', who André vaguely knew, and beg and beseech him to quickly read it and to say that it was obscene, that he would be a respectable person.
I remember we leapt into André's Baby Austin and drove… I can't remember where… Desmond McCarthy lived quite far away, and we got there and we left a copy with our letter, beseeching him to help. And on Monday morning, we went into the office and we could hardly get in through the door, because the orders were that deep inside. I had to push the door open. And of course, it was absolutely fabulous, but we still didn't know whether we were going to be able to publish it, because there was also an enormous detective who was going round talking to everyone, all of us, in a sort of smooth way, trying to get to the bottom of how we could be doing this awful obscenity. And then we had an injunction. We couldn't do anything. We weren't allowed to publish it until it had been raised in the House of Commons and decided whether or not we could publish that book. And there was three weeks, I think, of awful suspense and anxiety. Were we going to be ruined, or were we going to be immensely successful? As we could tell, because the orders went on coming in. And then finally, I think André got someone who… I can't remember who… an MP of his acquaintance to ask a question in the House, because nothing was happening, nothing was happening, is this book going to be banned or is it not?             
And Sir Hartley Shawcross, it was, made a statement and said he didn't think it was a particularly good book, but it wasn't going to be banned. And we were away. You see, it wasn't only that that book was published, but it meant that agents, from then on, thought: they're a bright young house. You know, they're dashing, they're adventurous, they go where other people daren't go, and also it gave us a lot of connections in America. I mean, André loved going over. He went over every year to New York, and he made friends with a lot of… we had more American friends, really, than we had English. And from then on, we got a lot of American writers.
[Q] Did you get to know Norman Mailer at all?
Yes, he used to come over from time to time.
[Q] What can you tell me about Normal Mailer?
It always irritated me about him that I thought, later on – I didn't like his other books, much – and I thought he talked an awful lot of hogwash. And I used to get very irritated with him, what he said and did. But on the other hand, every time you met him, he was so charming, you couldn't help liking him very much, if you didn't happen to be one of his wives who he was stabbing. But… I mean, he was very genial and pleasant to meet. But he was… he was an awful old phoney, a lot of the time, I think.
[Q] An awful…?
Phoney, really. He used to talk such rubbish. He came over once, and he wasn't going to give interviews, but we'd got to hire a theatre for him. And he would have this one occasion when he would get out on the stage and would talk, and all the people who were interested, all of the reviewers and everyone, could come. They all came, docile and listened to him holding forth. And really, he was talking such codswallop, but nobody said so.

I made one bad mistake of my… of my own, but I really wouldn't… well, we didn't have a disaster, ever, that we lost a lot of money over, or anything. My biggest mistake was just inefficiency, or an act of bad memory, which was Peggy Atwood, Margaret Atwood, who we published her first book, before anybody knew about her at all. And I knew her quite well. She came over to live in England for a year. And she, you know, became a friend. I liked her very much indeed, and I loved her work. And then there was this awful thing that happened. Peggy wrote and said, 'By the way, next summer' – this was six months in advance – 'I'm going to be going to Australia for a sort of book tour'. And I did call up the sales department and say, 'Margaret Atwood's going to be in Australia in six months' time'. And then I forgot. I didn't make any note in my diary to remind them, which is what I should have done. I mean, the most simple, basic, common sense would have been to have made a note that in about five months' time, to remind the sales department that this was going to happen. And I didn't.
And Peggy arrived in Australia and went the whole way around it, and there was never a single copy of her book to be found wherever she was. So that was a disaster. We lost her. Her agent very properly said, 'You leave André Deutsch'. And it was my fault. Which, I'm happy to say, she now firmly denies. She says, 'Nonsense, it was awful old André's fault'. Where it wasn't André's fault, it was mine, I know, but I don't argue with her about that.
I did… it was very lovely, actually. What finally happened was… I think it was about the… about her third last book, my local bookshop… I'd been so ashamed of myself that I'd never wrote to her again, I never tried to get in touch. I just couldn't face her. And my local bookshop said, 'We've brought off a great coup. We've got Margaret Atwood coming to sign copies'. And at that point, I thought, really, I can't, after all these years. I mean, it was really something like 20 years. I can't be such a… go on being so sheepish about it. I must take my copy of this book and go and stand in a queue and get it signed, because she was going to be just around the corner.
So I stood there, in this queue. And there she was, and she looked very tired, because there was… she had just come off an aeroplane. She was looking down the queue and you could see she was, sort of, thinking to herself: Oh God, how many more left? And her eye ran down the queue, past me, and then came back. And a lovely smile lit up her face, and she said, 'Diana!' And when I got there, I said, 'Oh Peggy, how lovely to see you', and 'I thought you'd never speak to me again'. She said, 'Oh, don't be a fool'. And there we were, friends again. And what was even more magical was that… it was when she won the Booker. She told her publishing firm to ask me to the party, which was going to be going on all the time while the Booker evening was going on.
And Peggy and they would be coming to join us at the end, to say whether she'd… you know, to celebrate if she'd won it and to commiserate if she hadn't. So I went to this party and it was in a smallish place in Soho, a small room, packed with people talking at the top of their voice and standing shoulder to shoulder. And I simply couldn't hear a word. I'm deaf, and I couldn't hear a word anyone was saying. If I put my hearing aid in, it was… the noise was so awful that it nearly drove me mad. You couldn't even see the television screen against the wall, which we were supposed to be watching. And I thought, I just can't wait here until 11 o'clock tonight. I'll faint if it goes on like this. So I left, got in a taxi, and came home. Came upstairs, went into Barry's room, and he was watching the television, and it was the Booker Prize. I was just going to say, you know, I had to come home, and it was just the moment it had been awarded, and Peggy was standing there, and the words she was saying as I went into his room were, 'And there's another person I must thank, and that is Diana Athill, who published my first book here'. And it was so lovely. It was really the most extraordinary occasion. And so we're still very good friends.
[Q] Do you get enough of that, you know, in your job as an editor? I mean, it must… that would be nice, wouldn't it, when someone…?
Oh, I have fond friends, yes. I've had very good friends, being an editor.
[Q] I mean acknowledgement of your role. You know, is that an important thing?
Well, people who… you don't get much of it. You don't get much. I mean, people… the mere fact that they accept what you say, which mostly they do. If you talk sense, they accept it, which is what… the best you can expect, usually. It isn't often that you get high praise.
You see, chiefly, of course, the most important people that one edits, or is the editor of, don't actually need any editing at all. I mean, they just… Vidiadhar Naipaul, Jean Rhys, John Updike, you don't have to change a word. I mean, they would be horrified if you did. You wouldn't dream of it. So all you're doing, really, is writing the blurb and giving them lunch, and saying, 'Darling, you're wonderful'.
[Q] Which is quite a nice job, really.
Lovely job. Lovely job.

Q] There is another mistake… I mean, not a mistake, but it's an interesting story, it seems to me, about the time when you… with Vidiadhar Naipaul, where you did more than just say, 'Darling, you're wonderful'. You told him what you thought about a book.
That was a mistake, yes.
[Q] Will you tell me that story?
That was… that was a silly thing to do, really, because someone who is as good a writer as Vidiadhar, if one particular book, it strikes you that something is a bit wrong with it, really you shut up about it, because it's… I mean, you know, some Dickens isn't as good as other Dickens. But in this particular case, the novel was based on events that I knew about. It wasn't… it was not meant to be… I mean, he'd used these events for his own ends. It wasn't meant to be a portrait of those events, so it didn't really matter that they… the people weren't at all like the real people who were involved. But it struck me that the people were… the two main characters… one of them, anyway, was quite… so wrong. I mean, she was so completely unlike the real person was that she was actually… she didn't function well in… as a part of the story. You didn't care what happened to her. Because he had… she didn't… she was an invented character who hadn't come off, something which is very rare in Vidiadhar. And I said, I was unconvinced by this character, which is, after all, quite a big thing to say to someone about the main character in their book. And I shouldn't have done it, really, because he… it was pointless. We were going to publish the book anyway, because we weren't going to lose Vidiadhar because… not particularly liking one of the books.
[Q] What exactly did you do that you think was a mistake?
Hm?
[Q] What exactly did you do that you think was a mistake?
Well, that I criticised it at all. As an editor, I mean as a publisher. I wasn't there to be a literary critic, I was there to be his publisher, and I should have had the sense to have thought, well, I think myself this is not as good as it ought to be. I think there's something rather hysterical about this book and he's got it a bit wrong.
And I should have let it go by. And I didn't. And he just said, 'Oh, oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry you don't like it, because there's nothing I can do about it. I've done the best I can do'. And left, quite gently and nicely. And I was rather relieved that he hadn't been angry, apparently, with me for saying it. But he went straight to his agent and said, 'I'm leaving Deutsch'. And did. And went to somebody else and very soon came back. The reason being, according to his agent, that the people he went to announced his book as being by the famous West Indian novelist, and Vidiadhar believed this sounded sort of regional. Vidiadhar, by that time, he'd been living and writing as an English novelist. I mean, he was just the famous novelist. I mean, no one in their senses would have made that mistake. That was really naïve of them. But anyhow, he wasn't having that, and he came back. And from then on, it was… in a way, life became easier, because we saw less of each other in a friendly way, but went on perfectly all right as editor and writer. And seeing him in a friendly way had been exhausting, because he gets terribly depressed, or used to get desperately depressed between each book. He used to go into a fearful gloom, and one used to have to spend so much of one's time trying to cheer him up. And really, people's depressions are very, very… taxing to other people. And I no longer had to bother with trying to do that anymore.

We used to talk about him and why he suffered so much. And I said, 'But don't you just… can't you just feel, you know, when you go to bed into a nice warm bed, it's a lovely feeling, or you look out of the window and it's a sunny day, it's nice. You know, or I'm eating a peach, it's delicious'. And he said, 'Do you really? Do you… do you actually get enough out of, can you feel enough to feel life's worth living from that sort of thing?' And I said, 'Yes, I can'. And he said, 'I can't'. He lacked what I felt was… what people used to call in the old days 'animal spirits'. He just hadn't got that to buoy him up.
[Q] But you have?
I have, yes.
[Q] What are animal spirits?
Well, it's just that one's got the sort of resilience or ability to enjoy life. On the whole, one likes life, rather than not liking it. And on the whole, Vidiadhar doesn't like life.

What's the sad this is, that he lost his… he could write funny books, to begin with. I mean, brilliant. I think that very early book indeed, Miguel Street, is an absolutely delightful book. Just straight observation of character, with a… not trying too hard to be funny, but it is. And he did three early books. And he did his wonderful about the West Indies, about his father, really, A House for Mr Biswas, which is a superb book.
                         And he's written very interesting books since. I mean, he is good. And I like his nonfiction very much. I think it's extremely observant and interesting, and tends to be right about things. He will sometimes, just occasionally, draw big conclusions from small things. Too… you know, a little bit making too much of a limited experience of a place. But on the other hand, for instance, his book about the… about Muslim civilisation… there's… there's nothing… he's extremely… it was written some time ago. It's a very perceptive book. He's a very intelligent man.
[Q] And did you like him a lot?
I got so fed up with the glooms, and I couldn't like very much his relationship with his wife because he was so dismissive of her, really. I knew him for a year before I knew he was married. He used to say, 'I live, I've moved to new things, I went to a cinema last week'. Never, never said the word 'we'. And when I finally happened to see him at a party with a girl, and I thought, oh good, Vidiadhar's got a girlfriend at last, and said to him, 'Who's that girl you were with the other day'? When he came into the office. He said, 'My wife, of course', rather crossly. He'd never given a hint of being married. And then, shortly after that, I said something to her about it. Because by then she was allowed out of the shadows a bit. And I said something about it seemed odd that I'd never met her before, and she said, 'Oh well, you see, I don't come to parties very often, because Vidiadhar thinks I'm such a bore'.
                         I think, now, looking back… I mean, no marriage… all marriages, there are two sides of it. I think that that Pat was really rather masochistic. I don't think that it was just Vidiadhar being horrid to her. But… and I don't suppose he… they married very young. He was at Oxford and I believe he had a nervous breakdown and I think she stood by him and was kind. I don't suppose for a moment, he thought the marriage was going to be like it was, any more than she did. So probably he can't be blamed for it, but not wholly. But I did use to, quite cruelly… I mean, I said this, I think, when I was writing about him: If feeling low and trying to count my blessings, I have said before now, 'Well, at least I'm not married to Vidiadhar'.
[Q] I don't know whether I… no, sorry, I don't know. I mean, he had a mistress as well, didn't he?
Margaret. Yes, he did. And that seemed to have been… I mean, Pat knew about that, too. I mean, that was something that was accepted. I think he's now quite happy with his new wife. I hope so.

He [Alfred Chester] was a very, very remarkable person, and I think, in a way, a wonderful writer. But he was a very ugly man, poor Alfred, because when he was a child, he had some ghastly illness, scarlet fever or something, and as a consequence, he'd lost all his hair. He was completely bald, he had no eyebrows and he had no eyelashes. And poor Alfred wanted to be beautiful more than anything. He was gay, and he would have… he longed to be beautiful. And there he was, hairless and not very handsome anyway, and wearing a perfectly ghastly wig, so that he was very… I think that's why he began to go mad, eventually, because he always… he remembered when that wig was put on his head when he was a little boy, it was as though he'd been split as with an axe on his head.
But he was a beautiful writer. I mean, his writing… his actual use of words, was very elegant. And very clear and very precise. His subject was often extremely bizarre, not to mention obscene, so that was… it was a most strange mixture. We did his first novel and his first stories, which were not so extreme, and then we did a very strange one, which I think has now been reprinted twice in America, which is now fairly famous. But after that, he went quite… and we did some stories of his. But he went quite mad. And he went to Morocco. Paul Bowles invited him to go to Morocco, and he went there and he thought that it was heaven, exactly what he'd wanted more than anything, because it was a place where you could be gay without it mattering at all. It was just all natural. And it was a place where you could smoke enormous quantities of delicious kief as easily as you could drink tea. And of course, what I didn't realise was that he was using a lot of other drugs, as well, I think, at that time. And he had a lovely, very handsome boyfriend who he'd picked up on the beach, called… what was he called now? I know perfectly well. It'll come back to me in a minute. But anyway, he wrote me an imperious letter saying would I please arrange for a foot surgeon, because he was bringing his boyfriend over to have his foot operated on. He had a spur on his heel, and I must say that they were staying with me, so that they could have an invitation that I was responsible for them, and they would be here any minute. So I wrote back saying that of course I would send him an invitation. He said, 'We won't be staying with you, of course, but will you please say that?'
And they turned up, and Alfred no longer was wearing his wig. And he looked much better, because he looked like a sort of… he was brown in the sun. It was almost like a carved Indian head, which was rather fine. And I thought, this is wonderful, Alfred's found a place where he can be himself. And it really seemed as though that was so. They came to supper quite early, and they had these awful adventures they'd had. What was he called? Not… Driff… but he couldn't speak anything excepting Spanish, so we couldn't… all we could do was just smile at each other. But he definitely washed up the supper afterwards. I said, 'Alfred, we can't make him wash up'. 'Oh yes, it's… we're talking, of course he can'. And then he stuck his head around and he said, 'Alfred, she ought employ… she ought to have my brother, because it's not right that she should be doing her own washing up'. And Alfred said, 'I think perhaps you'd better not have his brother. He is very beautiful, but he is very, very louche indeed'. And the story was that on their way over, they had had a car accident. Alfred was driving. In France, not in Spain. And Alfred must have been, actually, as high as a kite, I think, when he was driving. Driff had been lying on the ground, groaning, and an ambulance and had come and whisked him away. And Alfred didn't know where he'd gone. He vanished. Well, actually, it's quite easy to ask a policeman where, if you're not as high as a kite, where it's gone. But he said he then roamed about for about a whole night, and met up, just by chance, with his boyfriend, who'd walked out of the hospital. Of course, he, the boyfriend, had had a brilliant, brilliant wheeze. He'd laid on the ground and, although he had blood pouring out of his head from where it had hit, he hadn't actually been hurt at all badly. But he had thought, 'I'll go to this hospital and I'll say that my leg's been very badly hurt, and they will do me an x-ray, and it will save Alfred money'. And so he moaned and groaned and held his leg, and was taken to hospital. But on the other hand, when he got there, unfortunately, they wouldn't allow him to smoke. And so therefore he was fed up and he walked out. And Alfred was telling me all this dramatic story, and his boyfriend was sticking his head around the door, saying, 'Tell her this, and tell her that'. And it was… they'd somehow got together in the end and driven on. And they arrived and they… I think, saw a doctor. And I think… it all became a bit hazy, then. I think they were told that he had something wrong with his foot because he had… I think it was some form of rather peculiar illness. It wasn't AIDS, because we weren't having AIDS in those days. Gonorrhoea, I think it was, but why that should have given him a spur on his foot, I don't know. But anyway, that sort of thing was always happening with Alfred.

Then what happens next is… I thought there he was and he was having this lovely time and he had got this lovely boyfriend and all was well. Next thing is I come into the office one day and a rather alarmed-looking switchboard girl leaps up and says, 'There's someone here for you'. And I look around and there's Alfred, sitting. And I thought… I looked at him and in one look, I thought, 'This is bad news'. I said, 'Come upstairs, Alfred. What is it?' And he comes upstairs and he says, 'I want you to get onto the Prime Minister and tell him to stop the voices'. I said, 'What voices?' And he said, 'You know'. I said, 'I don't know, Alfred'. And he said, 'Yes, you do. We were talking about it when you were in Fes the other day'. And I said, 'But Alfred, I wasn't in Fes'. And he said, 'You were'. And I thought, well, wait a minute, I must be careful here. I said, Well, I'm not aware of having been in Fes'. And it then turned out that he had absolutely gone around the bend, completely. And he had, in fact, apparently attacked poor Drif… Driss. Driss, his name was, I think, because he'd been denying that there were any voices. And Alfred said, 'But he cannot possibly have failed to hear them, because they were going on all night and he was there in bed beside me'. And then he'd gone over to New York to try and get some money from his mother, and he'd attacked her with a knife, apparently, too. And I thought, well, what does one do? And I said, 'Well, I can't get onto the Prime Minster. I don't know the Prime Minister. But if you like, I can ring up an MP.' And he said, 'Well alright, you do that'. And then he became rather rational, and he said, 'And can you give me some typing or something to do meanwhile? Because, if I have typing, I don't have… it smothers the voices'. Well, with a great piece of luck, I had a manuscript that needed to be typed, so I was able to give him that.
And he typed it beautifully and very well. And he also said, 'Do you have a good dentist, because I need to go to the dentist'. And I gave him my dentist's address and he went to the dentist and he was perfectly sane with the dentist. And meanwhile, I rang up an MP, who I, you know, someone I knew, and he said, 'Are you mad? Don't you realise that practically every day some nut rings us up and tells us to stop the voices'. And I said, 'No, I didn't know that', and so I… then I thought, when he was coming in, I thought well, now… I asked… I was a bit frightened. I asked someone to be in the room next door, because it was quite clear that I might become one of 'them'. At the moment, I wasn't, but I might, because I had to tell him that, no, I couldn't ring up the… I couldn't find anyone to do anything about it. The MP wouldn't do it. But somehow he'd gone a step more sane for that moment. And he said, 'Well now, look, you did try, and so in exchange, I will go and see a psychiatrist if you'… he said, 'It's… you must understand that I know you think I'm mad, but you must understand that these things that are going on in my head are as real to me as that bus going by in the street'. I mean, he was sort of sane about his own madness. And so I got hold of… not Ling… no Lang, but his… he had a man who worked with him a lot, whose name I've now forgotten. An Irishman. And he agreed to see him. And he went and saw this man, but he wouldn't work with him, because he said to me, 'He's exactly like my Irish bookie, I don't trust him'. But the man did suggest to put him in touch with a sort of psychiatric social worker, who was rather a nice young man, who agreed to go and see him, and talk him through this thing. And who did that. Alfred had a friend somewhere, in a remote suburb, I can't remember where, that he went and stayed, and this boy went and talked to him, and rang me up to tell me that it had been a privilege to be in connection with this wonderful mind. And finally, I, by that time, was really chickening out. I thought, I cannot cope with this. I mean, I'd never come across anyone who was really absolutely as bats as that. And I didn't know what to do about it. I felt I was letting him down terribly, but I was actually, sort of… you know, I thought, well, I suppose I ought to go and see him, but I thought, well, I'm not going to. I can't. I really can't. And then the psychiatric social worker rang me up and said, 'Well, he's gone back to Morocco'. And I said, 'Do you think he's any better'? And he said, 'Well, I do think that at least he was able to make his mind up to go to Morocco'.
He was no better. He went and he was quite mad, and they threw him out from Morocco, and he went to Israel. He was a Jew. He thought he might feel happier in Israel, and he felt awful in Israel. He finally died, I think… we don't know whether he actually committed suicide or whether it was just drugs and brandy were too much for him, but he died all alone. Dreadfully sad. But… and left one very brilliant but terribly mad remains of a book. Because he could write very clearly, always, but he could write very, very clearly about this mad world. And so why… you know, the first time he did it, you just thought that it was perhaps, sort of, imaginary. But it wasn't imaginary. What he was writing about, you see, was to him as real as the bus on the street. Which was why it was so powerful, really. It was awful. Awful, awful, awful. But he did leave me an inheritance of… my best friend, now, was his oldest friend, an American poet called Edward Field. And Edward, who was trying to find out, you know, came across and said, had I got any letters of Alfred's, because Edward works tirelessly to get his letters and things read in America. And Edward and his boyfriend, Neil, have now become my dearest and best friends. They're lovely people. I adore them. They come every year.

When involved in these curious situations with people, I'm not really all that involved emotionally. I'm more curious by what's going on. I'm watching it. It's as though I was reading a very interesting book. So that I'm not really as much as kindly involved, as I appear to be. I'm more distanced.
[Q] And that's what meant by a beady eye?
That's what I mean by a beady eye.
[Q] It's very honest of you to say that, isn't it?
Well, when I write, I try, always, if possible, to get it right, how it really is. It's just everyone always goes on about this honesty thing, because I don't think there's any point in writing about yourself unless you try to get it right.
[Q] Even if it's sometimes uncomfortable?
Even if it's sometimes uncomfortable.
[Q] So is there anything about yourself that you've noticed or come to realise, that makes you uncomfortable?
Well, I think probably that there's a sort of a… a sort of… somehow, I… In Instead of a Letter, when I was trying to… at the end, thinking well now, out of this long, long… not Instead of a Letter, the last book, this long life, there must be things I regret about myself. And I say that it's a sort of… it's a sort of selfishness, basically, right at the bottom, although I can do unselfish things from time to time. A self-protectiveness, of not getting too involved. Being an observer rather than a participant, which I think is not very nice.
[Q] Aren't you a bit hard on yourself?
Hm?
[Q] Aren't you a bit hard on yourself?
Well, I don't know. I mean, one is a participant in some ways, obviously, in certain circumstances, but I think that that's probably something that I must blame myself for.
[Q] But has it had any consequences that matter?
It probably has. I mean, I think it's odd, you see. It was very, very odd that I don't regret more not having children. And I think that that is part of it. I never was, when I was young, in the least maternal. Didn't have the slightest wish to have babies, and it overtook me in my forties, when I very nearly did have a child, but had a miscarriage.
And I suppose, if I'd had that child, I should have been a perfectly good mother to it. I think I would have been, but when… having wanted it very much, as I thought, after the miscarriage, I never really have minded it. That I had a ... partly, because, you see, it nearly killed me. And the fact that I was still alive was so wonderful that it quite swept away everything else. But that always seemed to me to suggest a sort of coldness somewhere. I mean, I ought… other people, many another woman would be eating their hearts out after that. And I can't say that I did.
I know that a lot of writers say this about themselves, you know, that they can sit there watching their parents die, and they mind, but they're still observing all the time. I certainly did that. I mean, I minded my mother dying very much, but I certainly was watching it, and watching my own reactions all the time. I think writers do it and probably… probably makers of documentary films do it, too.

Molly Keane was remarkable, because she was so charming and so lovely and so nice. She was a lovely woman, and she had become… it was really odd that she became a writer, because she came from a completely philistine Irish gentry background. And she always insisted that she started writing purely because she had to make some sort of money to buy dance dresses with and go to parties with.
And why she had first always written under a pseudonym was, that if her young men had known she wrote books, they would have thought she was brainy, and that was the most awful thing to be thought. And I recognised that, because it would have been the same in Norfolk. I always remember going to a dance with a rather handsome, desirable young man, and he said, 'Oh, oh, you're the brainy one, aren't you?' That was a sort of absolutely chilling thing to be said. And so Molly had chosen herself a pseudonym from the name above a pub somewhere. And her first, I think, 11 books were written or something… nine books, perhaps it was, under that name, so no one would know. And… but, if you read the books, even though they weren't so good as her last books, you still don't think that she can have written them just coldly to make money. She must have been enjoying them because they are so good and so funny.
And then she had a long spell of not writing, because her darling husband died young, and quite unexpectedly, and she was absolutely broken by that, and she had to somehow cope with bringing up her two children alone, and managing as best she could, and struggling terribly. And one day, Peggy Ashcroft, who was an old friend… she… her first books had been made into plays. She'd been a playwright, to start with, and very successful. And one of the people who acted in her plays was Peggy Ashcroft, and she'd known Peggy ever since and was great friends with her. And Peggy went to stay with her in Ireland, and said, 'What a pity you don't write anymore'. And Molly said, 'Well, you know, I have actually written something recently'. And Peggy said, 'Well, show it to me, show it to me, show it to me quickly', and went and took it away to bed with her. And came downstairs the next morning and said, 'You're mad, it's wonderful. It's the best thing you've ever done'. And Molly said, 'Do you think it is? Is it alright really?' And Peggy brought it over and I think showed it to Chatto's, where she knew them. And to our great good luck, they didn't like it and turned it down. It went to an agent who had worked with us. And she rang me up and said, she knew the sort of thing I liked, and she said, 'Diana, I think I've got a book here that you'll love'. And she sent it to me. And I did, I thought it was marvellous. Terribly funny and very, very good. And so we took it on. Called Good Behaviour. And it is a really, really good book, and it's the best book she ever wrote. It was about how these people were, her people, these impoverished Anglo-Irish people in their huge big houses. And she does a very clever thing, because she makes the person tell it, who doesn't know half the time what it is she's telling. She's a naïve person and she doesn't know how she's portraying herself. And it's brilliant, in that respect.
And then she wrote two more, when she was quite old. The last one, she was very old, and she had a very bad heart attack in the middle of it, but she still managed to finish it, and I loved the last one, too. But the thing about Molly was that she was so completely unconceited about her writing. She really didn't… I mean, she did, in a way, know that she wrote well, but she didn't think it was important. And she thought it was much more important to be a good mother and a nice person and have lots of friends and things. She was a lovely, lovely person.
And she was very charming. And she was not… so many people who are very charming become corrupted by their own charm. You know, you can't help knowing it, I think, if you're a great charmer, and so you exploit your charm. And I've known charming people who were really quite chilling to know, because they're… in a way, it's become automatic with them, to turn it on. And Molly could turn it on if she wanted to. She could. I've seen her do it if she was wanting to get through an interview or something. But on the whole, she was the most charming person I've ever known who didn't ever exploit it. She didn't fall into that trap.

Brian Moore, who I think came to us through Mordecai Richler, who was a Canadian and who knew Brian in Canada, and told… we published Mordecai's books, and he told me, this friend of mine who is very good, and put us in touch. And Brian's first novel was a novel about… called Judith Hearne, about an Irish spinster. Unpromising subject. An Irish spinster who drunk… drank too much. But a very good book, and I always thought that all his books which dealt with Ireland were the best. He wrote… he couldn't write a bad book; he was an extremely efficient writer, but his Irish books were particularly good. And when I met Brian, he was married to Jackie, who was a Canadian, and they were a very happy and successful couple, it appeared. They got on very well together, and we became great friends, saw a lot of each other. And I stayed with them in New York and they came to England a lot. And Jackie was a very amusing and very interesting person, and she was a journalist. And the last time I stayed with them, they had some friends called the Russells. And the Russells… Frank Russell was a writer, a nature writer. And he was off in some exotic place, I don't know where, writing a book.
And so his beautiful wife, who'd been an actress, was staying with the Moores, and the great news that year was that the Russells and the Moores had bought a property which they were sharing. The Moores were going to be living in the house and the Russells were adopting the… the barn and were going to make it into their house. And there we were, happily staying… we went to New York, they were in Amagansett for the summer. Jackie and Brian and his… Mrs Russell, whose name I know perfectly well, but am now forgetting. So awful, I'm sorry about this thing with names. I mean, I forgot poor Driss's name, and now I'm remembering it perfectly well, and then in one minute, I shall remember her name, but I don't just now.
And it did occur to me once, in the course of that stay, as we walked down to the beach. Jackie was ahead, with her little son, ten years old, and I did think, you know, Jackie is going a little bit far in letting herself go. She's getting a bit too fat and she oughtn't to be wearing those shorts. And she really ought to bother with her hair a bit more. And I might have… I think I was thinking because of how beautiful the other girl was, walking beside me, but I didn't think anything else. Nothing, no sense of anything looming at all. And I'd only been home in London three weeks before I had a letter from Jackie saying, 'They've run off together'.
And I'd always thought that I was rather observant of human beings, and I felt very ashamed of myself. I hadn't noticed a thing. But neither had Jackie, poor girl, and what had happened, the most ordinary cliché of life. She'd been sending a suit to a cleaners and she had found a letter. And there they were, much in love. And she had said, 'What is all this?' And off they had suddenly gone. And the extraordinary thing was that Brian was so angry with me for siding with Jackie. I didn't really side with Jackie, but, I mean, Jackie was the one who was hurting. Jackie was having a horrible time, and I knew them both equally well, and Jackie and the child had been dumped. And so of course I was writing letters to her and answering her letters. And I didn't really particularly want to write to him at the moment. I was quite prepared to believe that I would become, sooner or later, I would think, well, people can't help who they'll fall in love with. You know, if it happens, it happens. But I just didn't want to hobnob with him at the moment.
But he got into a state of, he who is not with me, is against me. Apparently I wasn't the only one, he said there were other people. And he broke off with us, said he was never going to be published by us again. And his letter that he wrote to me, telling me this, started quite sensibly, saying that he didn't think we'd been advertising his book enough, and all authors think that. But you know, that's a reasonable sort of thing to say, and it gives the publisher a chance to say, well look, we'll advertise your next one more. But then, the rest of the letter, which was much longer, was, 'And anyway, you've sided with Jackie'. It was absolutely shocking, really. And it upset me very much, because he was such an intelligent person. We'd spent so much of our time, all of us together, gossiping about people and the extraordinary way that people behave. And there he was, sort of so blindly behaving in this extraordinary way.
We never really made it… we made it up in that when we met after that, we met perfectly friendlily, but we were never great friends again. But what was funny was that Jackie and Frank Russell, who were left to tidy up this business of sharing something, started an affair and then got married. So they did a swap. Which would have been a very happy thing if it wasn't that Jackie died rather soon afterwards of awful, awful, awful cancer, which was very bad luck on poor Frank, who had to cope and that was a tragedy.
 

Well, I think that, in fact, he's not far off it when it comes to romantic love, because I do think that when you fall in love, you are not in a natural state. You are as mad as a coot, half the time. You really know less about that person, at that stage, than you ever will again, because you're not seeing that person, you're seeing your need, I think. And so I'm very dubious. One of the things that we used to… It was interesting, though, you see, because one of the things that we used to talk about a lot, Jackie and Brian and me, he had had a terrible romantic passion for a woman who he met in Poland after the war. He was working for UNRRA [United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration]. And she was an alcoholic, and it had been a desperate, desperate thing. He was absolutely crazy about her. And then she'd left him and gone back to Canada. That's why he left Ireland and went to Canada, he was chasing her. And when he… and she would have nothing to do with him. And he then married… he thought: well, that's… I've finished romantic love for me. And he married Jackie, because he liked her very much and they got on terribly well and it seemed like a sensible love. But, you see, no sooner does the very, very beautiful… What is? Oh, I think it's so awful of me, I must be blocking her name, for some reason. She turns up, and off he went again, you see. And that time, it worked. That time, it suited him very well. And her. It was a good marriage, that second marriage. They were… it worked perfectly well. But I think, really, that being in love is a sort of unnatural and lunatic state. I mean, you're going to have a happy marriage if you're lucky enough to fall in love with someone who really does suit you. And fortunately, it happens quite often. And I can… I've seen enough happy and successful marriages, even in my own family to know that you really can hardly have anything better, and it can well start as being perfectly romantic and end up being very good all around. But on the other hand, it can start by being very romantic and end up being hell, because you've just not been able...
I look back at my second great love. Tony, I think, the first one, I think I understood him very well, on the whole. The second one, well, I would have gone through fire for him, I was so in love with him. I knew nothing about him at all. Really nothing. I mean, he was stationed across the park from me. We met, I suppose, in all about ten times. We knew…  I mean, I knew about him, what he was… what one could see, which was that he was a lovely man to look at and that I liked making love with him. I knew that he was intelligent and well-educated and funny. But I didn't know whether he believed in God or didn't believe in God. I didn't who he voted for when there was an election. I didn't know how patient he could be, how kind he was. I knew nothing about him. And yet, if he had said to me, 'Come and marry me tomorrow', I would have gone like a shot. And I think it is a form of madness. I think it should be tried out, and you should never marry anyone until you've had a bit of a trial first.
[Q] Until you've stopped being in love with them?
Well, stopped being madly in love with them, till you know the, you know, the things about each other which are quite annoying in many ways, which you are prepared to put up with, and that sort of thing.
If you're young and you do happen, in a romantic way, to marry the right person, that's fine, because you're there together, and you shape yourselves together. And so that you really do belong together in an extraordinary way. But it is largely a matter of luck. But I think that happened to my sister, for instance. She married when she was 21 and I think was, you know, quite properly in love. And they were… it was an absolutely admirable marriage, couldn't have been happier.

Well, Jean Rhys, of course, was the person I had to do most for, because Jean was absolutely incapable of life… living. I mean, life was just hopelessly beyond her. And when she was young, she floated from man to man in a hopeless way, being looked after by whoever picked her up. And by the time she was old, she floated from kind woman to kind woman, who picked her up. And well, we had a sort of committee. We had what we called the Jean Rhys Committee, which was Francis King… not Francis King, Francis Wyndham, Sonia Orwell and me. And we used to have these lunches together saying, 'Now what are we going to do?
Because, by the time we took her on, we thought she was dead. You see, everyone thought she was dead. It was Francis who introduced me to her writing who said there was this wonderful writer called Jean Rhys, who wrote before the war. Do you know anything about her? No, I didn't. And he lent me her books, and I said, 'Yes, she is good'. And he said, 'Do you know, I think we ought to reissue them'. And I said, 'Well, I don't think yet', because this was just before the war that she wrote her last book. It's not quite a long enough time to make a dramatic thing about reissuing somebody. I mean, she's still, sort of, out of date rather than in the past, but yes, she ought to be finally reissued. And then Francis discovered that she was, in fact, still alive, because the BBC had been approached by a mad old actress who…
[Q] Selma? Selma?
Selma, Selma Vaz Dias, who had done a dramatic version of Good Morning, Midnight, which she wanted to act herself, and they had advertised for anyone who knew anything about the late Jean Rhys. They'd advertised it in the New Statesman. And the late Jean Rhys saw a copy, or had a copy of it, and wrote to them, 'Oi, I'm here, living in Cornwall'.
And what had happened was that her husband, who was her third husband, I think, poor old Max. He was a retired naval officer, not very sensible. They were very poor. He met a… a wicked rogue of some sort who had mad schemes about how to make money, and had got carried away. Max had gotten involved. And Max was, I think, a solicitor by then, working in a solicitor's office. And he actually embezzled some money, thinking he was going to invest it in something and make great quantities of money at once and pay it all back. He ended up in prison. And they had been living absolutely on their uppers, having a most dreadful time. Poor old Jean had been hitting the bottle like mad, and she'd been coming up in court quite often because of people complaining about her. And then Max was in prison. Awful, awful, awful time they had. And when he came out, their mutual family said, 'Look, get lost, you two', and gave them just enough money to go down to Cornwall and get themselves, sort of, rooms somewhere. And they'd lived… once, they'd lived in a caravan. But they got lost down in Cornwall, and because the war had happened, and everyone did… you know, people could get lost during the war, Joan… Jean had been, sort of, vaguely known in the literary world before. She never was well known, but people had known her. And people would say now, 'What's happened to Jean Rhys?' And all kinds of stories. Some people said she'd drowned herself in the Seine, which was the sort of thing she well might have done. And she was supposed to be dead, but she wasn't.
So Francis wrote to her and said, 'I'm so glad you're not dead. What's up with you?' And she said, 'I'm writing a new book. I'm not finished yet, but it ought to be finished in about six months'. And he wrote, got us… got me to write, because he was working… not quite working for us, but being our literary advisor, at that time. And I wrote and said, would… would she accept a small amount as an advance, which wouldn't be the total advance for the book, but it would be to make sure that she would come to us with it when it was finished. £25! Even in that day, that was all that André would rise to for that kind of thing, when even then… when, after all, £25 in the 50s, was a good deal more than it is now, but it was still pretty mingy. But of course, what we didn't know was that the poor woman was really absolutely on her uppers. I mean, she was desperately short of money. And poor old Max was by that time, in a very collapsed state, and was pretty ill. And she was sort of saved by her… she had an old brother who disapproved of her terribly and didn't do much for her, but who bought her a miserable cottage in a place called Cheriton in Devonshire, so at least she had a roof over her head by then. But I mean, what a roof! I mean, when I first saw it, I was so shocked. It was on the edge of the village, over the hedge. You couldn't see anything, because the hedge was rather high, but behind it, there was this little row of five little joined-together bungalows. Tin roofs. I mean, it was… they were piteous little houses. The thought of living in one of them simply chilled one's blood. And there she was, in this wretched little place. And Max, by that time, was half the time in hospital and half the time at home, and although one didn't know it, when he was at home, he was being starved by Jean, who was quite incompetent to look after an ill man. And drunk half the time, anyway. Oh, I mean she did have a most awful time.

But, once we had discovered what was up, Francis then was wonderful. He gave her £100, which was quite a lot of money. And generally, everyone rallied around, and we finally helped her to get the book finished.
I didn't go down at that stage. Esther Whitby, who was an editor who worked with me, went down and helped her, took dictation and got it, sort of, written out. She had these awful shopping bags with scribbled versions. She wrote in a completely chaotic way. A little bit of paper here, back of an envelope there, little notebook there in her scrawly, spidery handwriting. And she said herself, 'Nobody but me can make any sense of this'. And she was the only person who could.
But anyhow, she got it now finished, excepting for said she would have to come up to London. I got it typed out by someone in London. I shall have to come out to see… I must come up and see the typist, because there are two sentences that have got to be altered. But then it'll be finished and done.
So I said, 'Well, come and this is wonderful and we'd have lunch and we'll celebrate and how delightful'. I knew where she was going to be staying, so I rang up the hotel that morning to say, 'I shall be picking you up at half past 12', or whatever. And the woman at the hotel said, 'Thank God, somebody knows the lady. She's had a heart attack'.
So I tore around to the hotel, and I found this poor old thing. And the first thing I had to do with Jean was pack her up, put her in an ambulance, and get her into St Mary's hospital. And she said, 'Promise me one thing. Promise me one thing. You're never going to publish that book until I've finished it'. And of course I had to say, 'Yes, of course, I absolutely promise'. It was only these two sentences that were left. You know, it could perfectly well have been published. And I then went away, saying to myself, 'Well now if she dies, oh my God, am I going to have to keep that promise?' Actually, I never would have, because I could perfectly well have went around and got to these two sentences and could have put a footnote, saying, 'Had she lived, she was going to alter them, but we don't know how'. But I thought, 'Well, perhaps, perhaps'… her brother did surface enough to be in touch and to know that she was in hospital. And I thought, 'If I ask him to go to the cottage and get all those bags out from under the bed, I might be able to sort of find out by going through them what it is that she is wanting to alter'. Because I knew where it was, about. And he did that and he brought it up. And it was absolutely hopeless. Nobody could possibly have found out. And so we… she never knew that I'd done that. We took it all back and put it back exactly as he found it, we left it. And anyway, she didn't die. She came around above that. And quite a long time after that, I mean she was too weak to do anything for a long time, but apparently either she had a new doctor, or her old doctor gave her a new drug. Something happened that she suddenly felt rather better and was able to do the tiny, last finishing touch.
And she wrote me… and Max died, and she wrote me this pathetic little letter saying, 'Max is dead'. And the book was finished'.
[Q] But she did change the two sentences?
She changed the two sentences. 'The book is finished. At least, I think it must be, because I've lost all interest in it'. And so I got the book published, and it was of course a great success, because it's a lovely book. And we had decided that if it was a success, we would then follow it with all the others, reprint all her old ones, you see. Which we did, promptly. So from then on, she did have enough money to live. I mean, not in luxury, but at least without this constant thing of where was she going to live? How could we get her into somewhere better? But she never would leave at all, because she hated the place, but she wouldn't move. 'Better the devil I know', she said. But at least we got it warm, and lovely nice friends. She had all these keen people, like Di Melly and such, who wanted to help her. And they went down and they painted it and they made the furniture nicer, and they warmed it up, cleaned it. You know, it became more habitable. And Sonia, marvellous Sonia, used to bring her up to London every winter.
[Q] That's George Orwell's wife?
Yes. And used to pay for it. Put her in a really comfortable, luxurious hotel. Buy her pretty nighties and things. Give her parties. Because, Sonia never was given credit for it, really. She was very self-conscious about having George's money from his books. And she had made a resolution that she was going to use it mostly to help penniless writers. And she really spent an awful lot on Jean, and not just money, but time and thought. And she was very thoughtful. She would fix her up at a hotel and she would go and see the people at the hotel and she would explain the sort of thing that Jean needed. She would pay all the tips in advance. I mean, she was wonderful. She would even go shopping with Jean, and my God, was that a task. I always got out of that.
[Q] Shopping with Jean Rhys?
Yes, shopping with Jean Rhys. Wow. But there were endless, sort of, devoted women turned up, who would go and do these things. There was a wonderful couple of gay ladies who didn't… went down and one of them became her amanuensis for a bit. Anyone who did anything for Jean was in trouble before long, because, you know, always they did something wrong or they were… you know, she would be paranoid about them. But they were really helping her tremendously. I mean, Di gave her… had her for a whole winter in her house, gave up her own bedroom to her, looked after her completely. And at the end of that, Jean was saying that she'd stolen all her jewellery, which was… I mean, she'd gone very… she'd always been paranoid, really. I mean, I remember saying to her, 'Darling Jean, don't be so paranoid about things'. She said, 'But I am paranoid!'
But Di was marvellous to her. But Jean was really drinking heavily by then, and being torture when she was like that. I remember David Plant, who was helping. David Plant was doing all her typing out of her last book for her, and David and me and Di sitting downstairs in the kitchen, saying, 'You know, it's quite simple, really. What one of us ought to do is go upstairs and just take the drink tray out of the room!' Which of us? And Di saying, 'We're about as much use as the three wet phoenixes'. None of us could do it. She would have thrown such a… such a rage.

The best winters Sonia gave her were in the Portobello Hotel, which was fairly sort of early in its career then. Very French, lots of people from France came to stay there. And it was then being run by this lovely fat girl. Very, very dramatic, wore the most extraordinary clothes and gave special terms to Jean because she thought she was such a wonderful writer. I think, as a consequence of these generous sort of gestures she made, that was why she didn't last as a manager for very long. So she was there for two years. And on the reception desk, there was the most delightful figure. He was tiny, a faun-like being who usually wore a pink T-shirt which had a little bit of swansdown round the top, and it had two little slits with dips over each nipple, which were kept open. And when I first saw him, I thought, oh perhaps even for Jean, this might be a bit much. But it wasn't. She loved him dearly. And he was perfectly sweet. He used to bring her in cups of cocoa. So nice. And she was really happy in that hotel. Suited her down to the ground.
[Q] So this sounds funny to ask you, but did you like her?
Did I like Jean? Oh yes, one liked Jean. I mean, she was a headache and a worry, but one liked her, because she was funny, and she was very… she was helpless. And if someone… there's a great power in being genuinely, completely helpless, because people really can't let you go out and die in side… in the gutter, which is what you will do. And really, to ask Jean to be competent about life, you might just as well say to a child of eight, 'Do my tax returns for me'. She couldn't do it.
But she was all… you know, she was… she was a genius, anyway. This extraordinary creature, because when she was talking about her books, she was absolutely different. She was completely in control of her writing.
[Q] Hence knowing that she needed to change two sentences. 
Yes. And this, I've told people so often that it's a sort of cliché, but it might go in here. She once said to me, 'Why did you let me publish that book?' It was the Wide Sargasso Sea. I said, 'What do you mean, Jean?' She said, 'It wasn't finished'. I said, 'Jean, what do you mean?' There were two unnecessary words in it. One was 'which', and one, I think, was 'then'. And I had not pointed these out to her and made her cut them. And I was being given a pretty nasty, cold, icy look about that.

The 60s to me, although everyone goes on, or went on about it at the time, but to me they were just… just some more years going by. And they didn't really seem to me all that different.
And Jean used to say, 'What is all this nonsense about?' She said, 'People have been taking drugs and sleeping with each other forever'. And she, of course, had come to England before the First World War, but she had joined a very, very bohemian group of people. So in her group, they had been sleeping together and taking drugs. It wasn't really quite so common as she thought it was. But even so, I mean, the sexual revolution seemed to me to be a lot of nonsense, because people really had been sleeping with each other quite merrily for quite a long time, whatever anyone says. But fashions changed. And you know, you did notice that places like Biba and such were different. But of course, I was… it's an awful thought, but I was actually too old for the 60s. I never shopped at Biba's. That could be a very sad title for a book.

It seemed like ancient history, but I can remember, for instance, on the road, driving between Norfolk and London, just as you approach Ball Dock, there were five separate, smallish white houses, exactly like each other, each of which had a sign in front of them saying 'Eggs'. Eggs, eggs, eggs, eggs, eggs. And they had been sort of set up for ex-officers who were meant to be making themselves little… their living by selling eggs, and we used to always marvel as we went past, 'Why, five next so close to each other, how could they possibly all make living selling eggs?'
Still, as I went down that road. I mean, now one bypasses it, but only very recently has there been a bypass. I still thought of those cottages as: 'eggs, eggs, eggs, eggs, eggs', and one knew that that was for ex-service officers. And I… but on the whole, one didn't really hear about it very much. You see, my father never mentioned the war. He'd been in it, but he never mentioned it. Never mentioned it.
[Q] Do you know anything about what he did during the war?
No, I think… I know he was invalided out, I don't think from a wound. He wasn't on the front for long, and then he was in the War Office most of the war. I think he was… I think he probably didn't mention it because he was… not so much because of how traumatic it had been, because he was rather ashamed of himself having had an easy war, I think, very likely. But quite a lot of people who'd had a terrible war, never mentioned it because it was too terrible.
[Q] Yeah, that's right. 
But we had very, very few records in my grandfathers… grandmother's house. There was an old gramophone in the corner of the morning room, and there was a little collection of records. And I was very thrilled when I was about seven or eight. I found a record which was a sort of take-off of Who Killed Cock Robin? And it was Who Killed Bill Kaiser? And it was… then I said, 'Whatever', you know, there were all the names of the politicians and people. And I thought this was his… a matter… almost as thought I'd found a great archaeological discovery. And I rushed to my mother, saying, 'I've found this wonderful about the First World War'. And she said, 'Oh, is that old thing still there?' And of course, to her, it was just that boring old record that they'd bought four or five… six years ago, or something. To me, so much was the gap that it really seemed quite an extraordinary thing that it was still there.

I know I chose, sort of, the very first classical record, almost, that I ever listened to, because we didn't have much music. Oh, I chose Tit Willow, Tit Willow, Tit Willow, because we did have that. We had a few records of... I don't know which… I think it was only one of the… the Gilbert and Sullivans that… we thought… the children adored these records, but no one bought us records. These were ones that our aunts or uncles had bought. Tit Willow. Tit Willow, we loved. We played it again and again and again. So I chose that, because that was one of the first things I ever listened to. I chose the first, sort of, serious classical thing I ever listened to, almost, which was a song of Sibelius's, which a friend of mine at Oxford had, called Der Erste Kuss. Terribly sentimental song, but we used to listen to that over and over again, and we adored it.
I chose… oh, one of the… one, if not two, of the things we always used to dance to. I've Got You Under My Skin, I think it was. I chose Mozart… something out of The Clarinet. You were only two minutes, you see. It's quite difficult to choose a bit of music which was only two minutes made sense. I can't remember. Then I wanted to have a bit out of The Creation, of the bit when Adam and Eve are walking around, and he's introducing Eve to the wonders of the world, because it's wonderful writing for the soprano voice, that. But there wasn't a bit of it that would fit into two minutes properly, and by that time it was getting a bit late. Because, you see, having made one's choice, one then went down an hour earlier in order to choose the two minutes. And so in the end, we just said, 'Oh well, we better have a bit out of… out of one of the choruses', which I didn't actually… I'm not particularly keen on the choruses, but that was… it made quite a good ending. I think that was all.

Myra Hindley came into my life because… now how was it? The firm was approached by David Astor. David Astor rang up André and said… you know, he was very interested in her and he used to go and see her quite a lot. And said that he and a man called Timms, I think, who was a prison chaplain, had been working with her. And they both felt that it was very important for her to get to the very bottom of what she'd done, for her soul's sake, as it were. And would we consider me working with her on her autobiography. And if so, could we come and meet him and Simms at his house and talk about it? But my first and instant feeling was 'no', and I think André's really was, too, but still we both thought it was too interesting not to go and talk. And so we went and talked. Timms was quite… I mean he was a chaplain and he was, like a good Christian man, believing that she could perhaps save her soul by total penitence. You know, proper penitence. She had admitted guilt, but she had always had, sort of, saving clauses, you know. That she'd been young and that she'd been frightened and that he had hypnotised her, more or less.
[Q] Ian Brady?
Brady, yes. David, I think, thought that probably, as a psychiatric… more psychiatric approach, that it would be very good for her, that there she was in prison for the rest of her life, that it would be sort of be a help to her, and it would help all of us to understand evil.
Well, really what I thought was, A: that I didn't see why that it would really save her soul, probably. And B: that one doesn't understand evil beyond a certain point. You… and, you know, knowing more about it doesn't really help. It just gets on being more and more mystifying.
But, on the other hand, my curiosity was so much aroused at the idea of perhaps going and seeing her and talking to her, that I… what really… they then gave me the first chapter or two that she'd worked on, which was impressive. It was her childhood, and up to the point where she first met Ian Brady. And she wrote well, she wrote simply, she was obviously an intelligent woman. She could clearly… absolutely could clearly explain, make one understand how this working-class girl who was very conscious of being more intelligent than any of her relations, and had rather a chip on her shoulder about not being much educated, gets a job.
And there's one very peculiar man at the job, who everyone's a little bit scared of, and he's clearly brilliantly intelligent and he's read millions of books, and he takes her up. She's 19. And makes her his friend and starts lending her books. You can understand why she was deeply flattered by this and excited by it. And you can understand, up to a point, that his whole idea that his scorn for the rest of the world, how one ought to be above the sort of moral considerations of boring, ordinary people. At the age of 19, you know, it was quite seductive. And all that she described very well. But when she began to come to the point where it actually began to happen, she ground to a halt, not unnaturally, and wanted help.
Well, I went there. I saw her. We were alone in the room together, the wardress was sitting outside an open door, snoozing, I think, most of the time. I saw her for an hour, we talked. She was an extremely interesting woman to talk to, because it was extraordinary that you could have been in prison, as she had, I think it was 22 years at that stage, and be so little apparently institutionalised. She was on tranquilisers. You could tell that at first, because her voice was a little bit slow and careful, and Timms told me afterwards. I said, 'Was she on tranquilisers?' He said, 'Yes, she has been on tranquilisers for quite a bit, since she volunteered to help'. I do remember that. She volunteered and was taken out of the prison up to the moors to try and find one of the children's bodies, which never has been found. And that was a very, very disturbing thing for her, and she became quite unable to sleep, and they put her back on tranquilisers after that. But towards the end, of course, the tranquilisers were wearing off and she was talking more fluently. We talked about writing. We talked about the boredom of being in prison. We talked about what she called 'my old men', which was Longford and David Astor, who she laughed at in a scornful way.
And she was… we could have gone on talking much longer. She was interesting to talk to. And in a funny way, I liked her. But at the end of it, I was absolutely sure that I wasn't going to do anything of the sort, because I thought, now look, she had worked… if it's talking in terms of her and her soul, she had worked out a way of surviving in prison. You know, she could fool herself up to a point that she had become a Catholic, that she had confessed. You know, she'd made a modus vivendi for her, and there she was going to be in prison for the rest of her life, and she might as well be allowed to live it as best she could. And if she was made to truly relive what she had done, I didn't think it would save her soul at all. I thought she would go mad. I thought she would simply flip. Because she was quite intelligent enough to know that she ought to be dead, and she'd faced that fact and it would do no one any good. And I thought, and I went on thinking, as I had about David's argument, that one wouldn't know any more how or why anyone could do such a dreadful thing. So I simply said 'No', and that was that. And, you know, everyone agreed in the firm that if we'd done anything anyway, it would have just been News of the World at a higher level, so what was the point of doing it?
[Q] It could have been a quite successful and financially profitable book, I suppose. 
Well, yes, but I mean, you know, still at a News of the World level, I mean. Because it was obscene.
[Q] Similar to Gitta Sereny and Frank Stangl, except that she did do it and you didn't with Myra Hindley. 
Yes, in a way, because in fact… No, in fact, you learnt more, you learnt more about how he had been slowly corrupted from him than one could learn from Hindley, really. Because she hadn't been slowly corrupted, she'd sort of plunged into it. I think she had been very scared by him, you know. I don't think she was making that up. I think he had become scary. But on the other hand, with nothing to prevent her scooting away to the police station and saying, 'Help, help'.

[Q] Do you have a view, actually, on moral responsibility for actions? In other words, do you think we can… do you think we really do decide to do the right thing, or are we just manoeuvred by chemicals and hormones and genes into doing things, and…?
I think up to a point, we are manoeuvred. Up to a point, it's… but there are places at which one can stop and think and say, 'No', because you have been taught when you're young, that is good and that is bad, and at a certain point, you must stop.
I once came up against this problem with one of my nephews. He was having great fun. He was working, you know, earning his living by washing up, sort of thing, in London. And he was working for a time for a firm which did lovely wallpapers and things. And all the young people working there were walking off with rolls of paper under their arms.
And I was wanting to decorate something, and he said, 'Oh, I can easily get you enough paper to do that with. What colour do you want?' And I thought about this, and I thought, 'Now am I being po-faced or am I not?' And in the end, I thought, no, I'm going to say it. And I dropped him a postcard and I said, 'No darling, thank you very much for the offer, but I'm not going to accept it. It's a foolish thing to steal, because you might get into great trouble and wreck your life. And apart from that, it is wrong'. Silence for quite a long time, and then I had a lovely postcard, saying, 'First of all, rage, then shame. Now, thank you. Love from…'
And I was so pleased, because he'd thought it out and he'd thought, yes, she's right. And I think if you… I think that a lot depends on what people around you say and do, so that you are shaped by other things, but that you can at certain points, stop and say, 'I'm not going to do that, because I think it's wrong'.

Well, the chief thing is, I think… the only thing that is different is the degree of physical discomfort one is going through, because, and that has sort of slowly grown. I think, as from the age of 80, I began to think, really, I am getting a bit old. Before that, one hadn't really noticed any difference at all. But… well, of course I had noticed differences, but not really big ones. But once your body does start, sort of, packing up in one way or another, then you do notice it.
And my 90 thing, really, is that I have now got arthritis or something, I don't know what. I'm going to have it X-rayed. In my hips. So that most of the time, I'm in pain. And that is not very nice. And it's not very bad pain, luckily, but you know, that is something that you can't ignore, quite.
[Q] But are you in pain now?
If I think about it, I am, but if I manage to think about other… it's quite interesting, as a matter of fact. One discovers… I mean there are certain degrees of pain. Now toothache, didn't matter what I was doing, that was going to be hell. But this kind of, sort of, nagging old pain, it's amazing how, if you're really interested in something else, you forget about it. And then you stop being interested and you come back to it and it's still there. I mean, people talk about pain control. It is obviously possible to, up to a certain point, learn how to live with pain.
That and forgetting. Oh dear, forgetting. I mean, that is a terrible bore. Being really very doolally, the other day… and this is… this has happened before. I have a tap in the kitchen, which is a very, very slow tap, for the filter. And you put a jug underneath and it goes dribble, dribble, dribble, and so you let it go dribble, dribble, dribble and you turn away and do this and that and the other. And twice before, I have in fact gone away and completely forgotten about it, and come back… God, a puddle on the floor. But not a very bad one.
This time, I went away and downstairs, poor Georgia, who lives in the flat below, suddenly came tapping up, shouting, 'Diana, Diana, there's water coming through our kitchen ceiling'. And I had completely forgotten, and the whole of my kitchen was swamped with water. I mean that sort of thing is… and if it had been the first and only time, it wouldn't have been quite so distressing, but since I knew it was a risk, and I still did it, that was worrying. I didn't care for that. But…
[Q] This is short-term memory, is it?
This is short-term memory. I can always remember the long-term things, easily. But short-term memory, where I put my glasses, where I put my keys, that sort of memory. But everybody has the same problem, I think. I don't think it's necessarily the beginning of Alzheimer's. I think it's just old age. But it's a bloody nuisance. You waste an awful lot of time. I don't think I ever leave the house without having to look for my keys or thinking, oh, I'm halfway down the stairs, I haven't brought with me the letter that I want to post. That sort of thing. There are things like not being able to drink, which I've not been able to drink alcohol for a long time now. Which, to begin with, which was very sad, because I enjoyed my drink. But that really, in the end… if something like that goes against you, so that it actually makes you feel ill, you don't finally miss it, because you don't really want it anymore.
It's funny, I can remember, as a young girl, hearing my mother say to somebody that she'd got out of going to some dance, thank God. And I remember thinking, I hope I die before I reach the stage of not wanting to dance. And when you don't want to dance, in fact, you don't want to dance anymore. And so it's no hardship. And it's the same with sex, that died out. And with anything, there is a stage, to begin with, when you realise it's dying out. And you feel sad, not so much for the loss of the thing, but just because it means you're getting old. Oh dear, it means you've got to accept the fact that you're getting old. And that is a sort of hump you have to get over. But I've found that once you're over that hump, you don't really regret these losses very much. Oh, I know one I do regret, and that is music. Being deaf, which I hadn't understood in advance, does mean that your hearing becomes distorted, not just… you don't just lose it. And with my hearing aid in, I can hear music quite loudly, but it sounds awful. I mean, high notes. The violin is painful to listen to. A soprano voice used to be my favourite sort of voice to listen to, is now really not at all attractive to listen to. I can still hear the piano straight, so to speak. But the orchestra, a full orchestra, is most extraordinary. It loses its shape completely, because certain sounds come through and others don't, so it all becomes very peculiar. You keep on hearing the same high notes, they're going 'ping, ping, ping', whenever it comes. It's misery. I wouldn't dream of trying to listen to a symphony now. Or a string quartet. And now that is a loss I miss, because that's not like drink or anything. You know, that's something that would be nice, still, if I could hear it.

I have to say that I've now reached the point when I can hardly bear it to be mentioned. But of course, everyone, of course, when they're reviewing the book, when they interview me, has come back to the sex thing. And so I seem to have talked about it forever. I talked myself out about it. So that I don't quite know what to say. What sort of thing do you want to know?
[Q] Well, that's a bloody good question, isn't it? 
Yes
Well, um…
I mean, yes, I did enjoy making love. And yes, I did, because I'd had a very bad blow when I was young, as far as being romantically in love was concerned, so that in a way… in a way, my self-confidence had been shattered, but not… it was funny. I had a basic kind of self-confidence that endured, which was as a result of having had a sort of snobbish upbringing. You know, you've been brought up in an English middle-class country gentry, who do quite, or did in those days, quite firmly believe that they were best kind of people in the world indeed, you know. Perhaps lords were a bit better, but mostly, I mean even lords were sometimes a bit, sort of, showy. So that you were terribly smug, basically, right from the beginning. And even then, when you grew up, you began to see through that and think, what an awful attitude it was, you nevertheless had gained from it a sort of very strong basic self-confidence. And that, of course, I suppose, I still kept. But my sexual self-confidence was completely wrecked when the man I was going to marry vanished out of my life and married somebody else.
And as a result… I mean I went through two years of just real blank misery. And then I did… reached a stage when I cheered myself up with affairs. I fell in love again, of course, but that was also unfortunate. And then I discovered, what I think I did, was that whenever I did seriously fall in love, it was doomed. And I think one… I think there was something very messy going on there. I think I had begun, by that time, to equate loving with pain, so that I sort of took it for granted that someone who was going to… was either married or was obviously not going to be in love with me, you know, I would hurl myself into love with them, in a dreadful sort of way. It was very painful. Three times, it happened.
And so it was better just to have funny and nice, enjoyable, unimportant affairs, which was what I settled for, for a long time. And which did make life much more fun. And quite… it got one through a lot of years, happily, considering that I was also doing, at the same time, a very, very, very interesting job. So that I can't say that all those years that I was unhappy. I wasn't. And in the end, I got myself out of that situation, not deliberately, but when I wrote my first book. When my first book happened to me, which is what happened. I mean, I didn't sit down and say, 'I'm going to write this book', it just happened to me, and which was a full account, as full as I could make it and as accurate as I could make it, of the original sad affair. After which I felt fine. I got rid of it completely. It was a most extraordinary therapeutic exercise. So that until when I was 43, I met my old friend Barry and started what I thought, again, was going to be just a cheerful, frivolous affair, but turned out that we liked each other very much and it went on and on and on and on for years. Because we suited each other very well. It was never very romantic. I mean, at no point did we feel madly in love with each other, but we did love each other. And that was lovely. That was… you know, I was extremely happy for a long, long time.
[Q] Well, I didn't know what I wanted to know, but now I do know, you just told me all that. But so… but you don't miss it?
Well, no. It's like drink or anything else. I don't miss it. I don't miss it. I think that women are better at recognising that it's finished in their lives than men are. I've know a lot of cases of men… not with my own friends, but I've seen a lot of cases, with poor old men desperately trying to go on persuading themselves that they were active sexual beings, when they really ought to have given it up, because they weren't. And what they were fussing about, I don't know, but they just couldn't give up the idea of themselves as being sexual, whereas women can, I think, much more easily. Or I could, anyway. I mean, it didn't worry me, finally, giving up. I liked it, in a way, because it sort of frees you to think of all kinds of other things.

[Q] Can one generalise at all, about men… men's attitude to sex and women's attitude to sex? I mean, you know, there's this endless, perennially interesting question which is, you know, are… do women feel about sex like men do, or not? And I just wondered…
I don't think they do. I mean, I think one can… I mean, the varieties of how people feel within the sexes, are very great. I'm sure there are some men who feel very much like women do, and some women who feel very much like men do. But on the whole, to my mind, it seems fairly obvious that there is a difference. And I think that the difference is based purely and simply on biology. After all, if every time a woman fucks, she could be going to be pregnant. She could be going to have to change the whole nature of her life, completely. And that's not true of a man. He's much, much freer, and I think that to say that the pill ended that situation is not true, because the pill, in fact, is quite a drastic interference with your physical nature. You're interfering with yourself when you use it, and I think that it's going to be a very, very long time before women can genuinely feel as free about sex as women… as men do. I'm not sure that they ever will be able to.
[Q] And what about simply levels of desire? You know, you read these surveys sometimes that say that, you know, men think… the average man thinks about sex once every seven seconds or something. And, you know, I'm making it up, but just in terms of interest in…
Well, when I was young, I thought about men all the time. And the thing is, one thought about love. One was constantly thinking about love, because one was mixed up between sex and love. One thought one was thinking about love, on the whole. I think I always thought I was thinking about love.
[Q] But really it was sex?
Not necessarily. I didn't. When I was sexually attracted to someone but didn't love them, I never thought I loved them. But I think what I really wanted, always, was love, not sex. I mean, sex with it, but that was really what I was after. I think it is for a good many men too, isn't it, really?
[Q] Yes, I'm sure it is. I'm sure it is. And while we're on this subject, do you have any…? And given you that you're involved in publishing and so on, do you have any views about pornography? I mean, either about… I mean, at all about it, I mean like whether or not it's of interest only to men or to women, too, or any views at all that might be interesting about and what it sort of means, you know, really?
I haven't thought about it much. No, I think it baffles me a bit. I mean, I've read one or two, sort of, classics of pornography, and because they go on… it's the same thing over and over again, they seem to me to get rather boring quite quickly, because what they're doing is trying to make you excited again and again and again, you know, and it comes to the end when you begin to think, well, now it's time to think about something else. And I would… I would say, from my own experience that women aren't all that turned on by pornography. But of course some women may be. I don't know.
[Q] Did you ever read the Story of O, for instance? I mean, when you say classic pornography?
I read the Story of O and I couldn't bear it, because there's an awful lot of sadistic stuff in it, which simply turns me clean off. I mean, I can't find... I've never been able to find that exciting.
[Q] It's quite mysterious, because it's now… I mean, I don't know exactly what the figures are, but it's supposed to be, like, a bigger… in terms of money turnover and all the rest of it, it's like bigger than all Hollywood movies and music put together, or something.
I can't understand it. I mean, it is… it's sort of pathetic to me. And it seems to me that there must be an awful lot of people out there who aren't getting it, you know, and this is the only way that they can. But it can't be quite that.
[Q] It can be another of the mysteries, like evil. 
I think that's a mystery like evil, yes. To me, it is.

I don't think a lot about it, but I have thought about it. Chiefly, my main thing that has contributed to me not being as worried about death as I might have been, was my mother's death, which I did dread for a long time, because she was very ill. She was 96 when she died, and she had been getting slowly, slowly, more and more obviously… well, I think I… the way I put it in the book was the feeling that death was up there in the attic waiting to come down to do something horrid to her.
And I used to… I spent more time with her in her last two years. I couldn't quite give up my job and go and live with her, but I spent every week, I spent four days with her, three days in London working, four days with her, three days in London working. And therefore, was… I wasn't frightened of her being dead, because she was 96 and she'd had a full life and that was all right, you know? I was pretty scared of the thought that we were soon going to have to go through the process of her dying, which I did dread.
And it turned out that she was amazingly lucky. She had two days that were bad. She was planting a tree… I mean she wasn't planting the tree herself, but her old boy who helped in the garden, she'd gone up to the end of the garden, was showing him where this eucalyptus tree was to be planted. And he looked up and thought there was something wrong, and said, 'Are you all right'? And she said, 'I'm feeling a bit odd. Perhaps I'd better go back to the house.' And he took her back and settled her in her chair and looked at her, and thought, 'Oh dear' and rang the wonderful home-help person who used to come in and see her every morning, who happened, thank God, to be at home. Came around at once, spotted at once that she was going into heart failure, got her to the hospital, little local hospital, rang me up that evening and said, 'I don't think you have to get into the car and come quick, quick, quick, but I think you should come tomorrow morning'.
                         So I got there very early the next morning, and by that time, she was in a bad way. My brother had come, one of her nieces had come, and she was purple in the face, unable to breathe. It was dreadful, dreadful, and one was longing for it be over, really. But this was amazing, because I put my hand on her hand and she opened her eyes and she looked up, and there was a moment where she was sort of groping for it, and her face absolutely lit up. It was as though this smile of recognition had come out. It was like a flame. It was so extraordinary. And it wasn't just me who thought it was, my brother said afterwards what an amazing smile she'd given me. And then a doctor came and gave her an injection, which I suppose was morphine, and she sort of settled down. And she… we found a proper bed for her. She was in the old men's ward, because they hadn't got any other bed to put her in, and all the poor old men were getting a bit agitated with this going on in the corner of the ward. Anyhow, she then was put into a room of her own. And she went to sleep and the nurse said, 'Look, I don't think anything's going to happen tonight, you'd better go and'… she wanted… anyway, her dog had to be fed and things, and so my cousin and I went back to the house and got there again the next morning early, and she was looking fine, sitting up. Pale and tired, but perfectly, sort of, alright, really. And she said, 'Oh darling, could you please brush my hair for me? It does feel so horrible.'
And so I brushed her hair and I went and said to the nurse, 'She's better'. And the nurse said, 'She's feeling much better, but she's very, very poorly, still'. And I knew what she meant. I thought, 'Well, she means that one's not got to expect her to get better'. And I spent that day sitting beside her. My cousin was there, too.
And she slept, and then she had a little talk about this or that, and then she slept. But she was herself, really. She told us where she'd left things on the desk and that sort of thing. She had two moments of being a little bit confused. She thought her dog had come into the room at one point, and… but she was perfectly alright. And then she went to sleep again, and then she woke up, and she said to me, 'Did I tell you that Jack drove me to the nursery to buy that eucalyptus tree last week'? And I said, 'You told me he was going to. Did you have fun?'
And she said, 'It was absolutely divine'. And then she shut her eyes and went to sleep again and she didn't wake up again. Which was such an extraordinary way to go, really, that one was able to think, I mean, that she'd gone away with, thinking in her head, a happy time about this lovely… he told me, too, the old boy who had driven her, that it had been a lovely, lovely drive. Very, very beautiful June day, and she'd chosen which way they would drive, because it was where she used to go riding when she was a girl, and she loved it. And he said, 'Oh yes, she did enjoy it. She had a lovely time on that drive.' And that was terribly encouraging, because it made me realise that you don't have to go through a hellish time when you die. I mean, you're not… I think the older you are, probably, the less likely it is, because I think your heart is more likely to give out quickly.
And then I thought of other deaths in the family, and most of them had been, you know, comparatively easy, I think, as deaths go. There's no terrible story of endless pain and misery. I know death can be perfectly awful for some people, but in our family, we seem to be lucky. So I say to myself, 'Well, with any luck, I'll be lucky'. And I hope for the best and try not to think about it otherwise.
[Q] Do you hope to live a lot longer?
No, I don't. I do not want to live until 100 and all that stuff. I don't want to die tomorrow, certainly not. But if I did, I wouldn't really think it was a terrible disaster, because I've had a goodish long life and I've had a good life. Oddly enough, I've ended up by thinking it was a happy and good life. A successful life, I would even go so far as to say now. So that I think, having got… You know, you can't think much about it, because there's not much to think.
[Q] And what about the idea of extinction itself?
That doesn't worry me, and never has, because if you're extinct, you don't know. So that's that. You're not there, you don't have to worry. That's not something that's ever frightened me. I can't understand why it should. After all, we go to sleep every night, during which time, most of it, one's extinct.
[Q] What sort of things, if anything, do frighten you, or did frighten you?
What sort of things frighten me? I'm not at all brave about any sort of physical pain. I don't like that at all. I don't think I spent much time being frightened, in theory, about anything, really. I have no doubt if the house was on fire or something I should be as frightened as anybody, if not more so.

[Q] Have you ever seen any dead bodies?
I've only… isn't it extraordinary? I've seen my mother's and I've seen… the first dead body was André Deutsch's mother. Poor old lady. He was abroad, and she had a fall, obviously, in the morning, and banged her head. And her home-help came in and found her dead and got onto the police, and the police got onto his secretary and onto me, and we had to go and identify the body. And this, I think, had quite a strong effect on what I feel about death, because I was quite nervous at this thought. I imagined that we would go into a room, and there would be this poor corpse under a sheet, and they would pull it back and we would have to stand there and look at her and think, yes, it's her. And in fact, they do it very tactfully. You go into a little small room, and there is a big picture window behind a green curtain. In this case, it was a green, sort of, sage green, horrible-looking curtain. And they pull the curtain back, and on the other side of the glass, there is lying the body, in a box, covered up to the neck. And there was poor little Maria Deutsch.
And, you know, people talk about the beauty of dead bodies and how they look noble and splendid. She looked pathetic. I mean, she just looked.... no one had tidied her up and combed her hair, and she looked sort of grubby and miserable, and as though something horrid had been done to her. She wasn't distorted or anything, but… and actually, when I saw her, without meaning to, I said, 'Poor Maria'. Because, I mean, she did look, poor little thing. But she was dead, so she couldn't possibly feel as poor as that, which is a relief to know. And I had noticed, coming and going, you see, that at the coroner's place, there were white vans coming and going all the time, and there was a sort of… unloading bay. And there was… it looked as though they might be unloading groceries, but you knew what they were unloading was a body. And when you came in, you went down the passage and there were all the chaps who drove the vans, or some of them, sitting having tea. And they gave you sort of looks out of the corner of their eye as you went by. And I thought that their looks were just slightly ribald. I don't know quite what the… you know, they knew much more than one did about this, and they were long past being squeamish about death and probably rather despised squeamishness about death. And I went away, and I thought, now, they know that however nasty death is, there's not really much to it. They see it every day. There's nothing really to it. There's no answer to it. They know. And I found that, in a curious way, encouraging. I thought, well, really, I suppose there isn't much to it. It goes on all the time. All the time. Every single person, every single thing, is going to die. You know, what's all the fuss about?  And that did, sort of, stay with me rather. If you're not religious, there's not much reason to think much more about death, really. I'm not and never… really never have been.
[Q] Did you never have any relationship with God?
But I remember being pretty disappointed when I was confirmed, how nothing happened. I suppose I had expected that I was going to be… I mean, when I was little, Granny used to read us Bible stories, which one believed. I mean, I still, when I read the Bible, think, you know, there they all are, those lovely stories. I'm sure they were all true, in a way. So as a child, I believed in God. But I did think that… I did know, really that perhaps I didn't believe… I do know that I didn't believe enough to move mountains, because I thought I would try, once, to cause a storm to stop. After all, Jesus had said, 'Peace, be still', and it had been still. And so I had a good try, and it made no difference at all. So I thought, 'Well, I don't think much of my faith'. It isn't up to much. And I think that after I was confirmed, really, that I began to think, 'Well, I don't really believe in this'. And it was vague. I didn't, sort of, argue it out, really, until I got to Oxford, I suppose, when I… I mean, the more I thought about it, and the more you think about the size of the universe and the complexity of the universe, and the absolute triviality of our little tiny planet in this enormous thing, and the smallness and triviality of each of us in the planet…Things we imagine, things we make up, can't really be great universal truths. I mean, we're groping towards universal truths, we're flattering ourselves if we think we've managed to get to them. We can't have. And I don't see any reason why we should be able to understand what it is, the universe. I mean, when people are groping towards its working, but what started it all, I suppose one day someone may get to it, but I don't think we will. I don't see why we should. Why should we? We're little beetles, really, in the…

My poor old brother died not very long ago, and he… he didn't want to die at all. I don't think for a moment that he was frightened of dying, but he just loved his life. He had made himself, cleverly, really, exactly the life he liked. He was living on the edge of the North Sea, he was teaching people sailing. At one time, he was growing oysters. He was mucking about with boats to his heart's content, in this lovely place near Blakeney on the Norfolk coast. And he simply loved it. It's where he would have chosen to live, and so he lived there. And he'd found a wife who exactly liked his kind of life, too. And their children loved coming back to them, because they loved the place, too. He was really a very happy man. And so when he began to pack up, he resented it. He had begun to go off his food for quite a long time, and Mary had been… his wife had been worried about not being able to persuade him to eat. He would come in exhausted, and sit down and start eating and fall asleep. And she was getting worried about that, and it was an obvious sign that he was pretty old. He was in his 80s, coming into his 80s. And so there came a time when it was worse than that. He began to feel terribly cold. I remember going to see him, really, just before he died and he was ice cold. His circulation had gone, of course, and he was miserable. And we said to him to go up and have a hot bath, and then he felt better. But when I said goodbye to him that time, went upstairs and said goodbye to him, he gave me a look and we sort of nodded. We sort of recognised that this was probably… he knew that he was, in fact, dying, or going to be dying soon. And it then got… it was quite quick, but it got bad enough for Mary to feel that he had to go into hospital, and she's kicked herself ever since for putting him in hospital.
He was only in for five days, and I think that it wasn't really… it was quite a nice hospital and everything, but he bitterly hated being in hospital. He wanted to be home. He wanted to be home. He wanted to still be alive and kicking. He had… by that time, I suppose, they were putting him on drugs. He had, sort of, he said what he couldn't bear was he was losing control. He would have illusions. He didn't know where he was. He saw things that weren't there. But they were quite nice things. He saw ducks flying over everything. He saw a weasel on his bed once. But he was resenting the fact that he wasn't at home doing what he wanted to do, rather than that he was in hospital. And then, fortunately, when he did die, he died very simply. She was there, having… sitting there watching, helping him have his lunch. And I think she went out of the room for a moment, came back and looked at him, and thought, 'Oh, what's happened', and called the nurse, and he was dead. So that his actual dying was extremely simple and plain. But what he had resented was losing his life, because he loved his life so much.
Well, I think in a way, that is a very lucky thing. I mean, anyone who likes one's life so much, when one's in their 80s, is lucky, really. One has to pay for it by hating losing it, but… I mean, I would be glad to have a little bad time if I liked my life as much as Andrew was liking his.
When I think of death, it's not that I'm frightened of the death. It is that I am rather sad to think of losing life. I do like life, in spite of how awful it is, really, in so many ways. I mean, you know, in a general way, rather than individually.
[Q] Is it?
Oh, all this awful global warming and everything and the wars and cruelties and... I'm sure, if you really think about it, it's pretty dreadful. I mean, look, look at Iraq. Endless, endless… And look at Africa, look at the awful things people do to themselves and, you know, other people. I think it is pretty cruel and awful, but on the other hand, I can't help feeling that it's also very beautiful.
[Q] Do you have a sort of secret? I mean, you seem to have achieved, you know that [unclear], or being at peace with yourself, and let's say, for want of a better word, happy. Do you have a sort of secret for how you've done this?
No. I think it's purely genetic. I think that either you're a positive person or you're a negative person. I mean, optimistic or pessimistic. There was this wonderful old lady who's 103, who was interviewed not long ago in the Guardian, who'd had a most terrible life, really, in that she'd lost… she was Jewish, she'd lost her husband when they were in Theresienstadt, and he was taken out of that camp and murdered. She made it through to the end of the war. When she got home with her little boy, there was nobody there. Left. All her family had gone. And she went and brought up her little boy in Israel, and he grew up and became a doctor and brought her to England, and she lost him when he was 60-something. And there she was, a solitary old lady, living in North London after being through all this, and she still said, 'Life is very beautiful, and the older you get, the more you know how beautiful it is'. She still played… she'd been a very good pianist. She still plays the piano for three hours every day. And then she said something about how she had a sister, who was always very pessimistic. But you see, the sister was born pessimistic, she was born optimistic. She came through all these things and was still able to feel, not just to say, to feel, that life is very beautiful. And that she was grateful for it. And this is, I think, purely genetic. I mean, you just happened to be like that. And I think I, genetically, am a cheerful person, really. My father was, rather. My mother was. I mean, the family, on the whole, go in for cheerfulness.

There were three parties, the last of which was entirely family, about 20 people there. And it was a lovely party and everybody was having the most gorgeous time, enjoying themselves tremendously. And I was sitting there looking and I thought, 'My God, we are a lucky family'. Really, nearly all the marriages have been happy. All the young are successful. Nice, attractive, kind, doing well, intelligent people. It's amazing. Hardly any… the two divorces, if one digs about, one can find two divorces. And I said to myself, 'No divorces… almost no divorces, no problem children'. When I said that to my sister, she said, 'No problem children? What about Jane?' And I remembered that her daughter had, of course, been a huge problem, but on the other hand, made it even clearer how lucky we are, in that she's now no problem at all and she's absolutely lovely and has a gorgeous family and everything is perfect. So that we are a very lucky family. And we both of us had sat there watching these people, and we both of us had the same thought.

Well, I think that all lives could be said to have a point, in that all lives have some sort of effect. I mean, either they have begot new lives, because basically, of course, what we exist to do is to procreate the species. Well, either they've done that and they've made other people to follow in their footsteps, or they have achieved something, or they have done something horrible. You know, they may have planted a very nice garden or they may have cut down an important forest. There's… you know, they have done something which contributes to how life is. Even the merest person has done something that contributes to how life is, in a general way. It builds up. It's like little grains of sand, building up. So I think that's… I mean one… all lives, each life contributes something to life in general, so it's… we can't say they're pointless, we can't say they're… that there's no reason for them to be there. I think they're worth examining because of that.
[Q] And perhaps, if you had to pick the… the lowest moment of your life, and the highest moment, would it be easy to identify those two, do you think?
It would. The lowest moment of my life, I know quite well, was when my mother came into my room and gave me a letter which told me that Tony was dead. This was the man who had left me and had married somebody else, and he'd been killed in the war. And so I thought to myself, well, at least that's the end of that. And then I thought, oh my God, it isn't, because I had an awful image in my head of a bridge going out, and one of the things that held up the other end had been knocked away, and the bridge was still sticking out there, into space. It didn't mean that I was going to stop being heartbroken by the bloody man. I still was. And that was the lowest moment of my life.
And I think the best moment of my life… in fact, I'm sure the best moment of my life, I had started writing before I wrote my book. I had started writing stories, and they came out of the blue. And I hadn't… hadn't taken them really very seriously, but I was enjoying writing them a great deal. And I had sent one of them off to The Observer, who was having a short story competition. And this was early in the spring. And you had to send it in and you had to send in with a… you had to do it under a pseudonym. And I had just won a small sum of money on the horse who'd won the Grand National, who was called either Mr Who or Mr What, I can't remember which. And so I called… I used his name. And I think it was Mr What. And then, the year went by and I really didn't remember doing this at all, it had gone completely out of my head. And on December 21st that year, which is my birthday, the literary editor of The Observer telephoned me in the office, and said, 'Diana, I think I've got good news for you', and I was very pleased, because I had just been going to write to him to say, 'Look, did you get a copy of this book of ours? I mean, are you not reviewing it because you don't like it, or did you not get a copy?' Which one didn't often allow oneself to, sort of, bully a literary editor in that way, but I wanted to, because I minded about this book. And so I thought he was going to say, 'We're reviewing that book next week'. And I said, 'Oh good, what is it'? And he said, 'Are you Mr What, by any chance'? I said, 'Yes', and I quickly said to myself, 'The consolation prize is, the consolation prize is', because there were consolation prizes of £25 each. And he said, 'You've won it'. And that was so wonderful. That was the most tremendously wonderful moment. £500, which in those days seemed like a most wonderfully large amount of money, and just the fact that… I didn't know until he told me later, 2000 stories had been entered for that prize. And my story had won it. That was terrific. Pure, pure joy.
[Q] That's fantastic. That's really very good. And was that the beginning of your writing, then, really?
That was the beginning of my writing, and I then… the stories ran out and there was a longish pause. And I started one which didn't come to anything, put it away. And after a year's gap, took it out and thought, I wonder if I could do something with this? Fetched out the typewriter and put some paper in the typewriter and began to write. And I didn't finish that story, I began to write Instead of a Letter. Most extraordinary.

I haven't had any children. The first time I got pregnant, which was during the war, and panic stations. But there was a famous lady doctor to whom we all went to get our Dutch caps. Sort of like The Group, you know, that book of Mary McCarthy's. And I went to see her. I didn't really expect her to say that she would do anything, give me an abortion. And she just very firmly said, of course she wouldn't do anything of the sort. And she was… she was a very, sort of, schoolmarmish, sort of, high-minded lady. And she said, 'Well, of course it's up to you. You could perfectly well have this child and we can do the… there are alternative things. We can do various things. We could either get it adopted.' And I thought, well, I don't see the point of going through nine months of being pregnant and having a child and then getting it adopted. I don't like the idea of that at all. 'Or, we could have it fostered and then, when you've found another man or made enough money, you could have it back'. And I thought, well, supposing I never do find another man or make enough money? I don't think I really like the idea of that. She said, 'Well, the best thing would be, of course, if you simply told your parents and let them help you. You'd be surprised at how often this works'. And I said, 'My parents would be absolutely horrified'. 'Oh, it would do them good, silly old things'. And I thought, you bloody woman! You have no idea of who my parents are, what they're like, what our relationship is. You've no clue as to whether it would do them good or not. And she said, then, and she sort of shifted… I can see it, still, she shifted the ruler from that side to that side, thinking, on her desk, and she said, 'Of course, it's entirely up to you if you choose to murder your own child'. And I said, 'Yes, it is. Thank you so much. Goodbye'. And went away. And… one always knew… in those days, you know, one always knew somebody who knew somebody who'd had an abortion, and I knew somebody who knew somebody and they gave me the address of a doctor, and that was it. I thought that this was… she was manipulating me, and I did not feel… and I don't know… this whole problem of abortion is very, very dicey, I know. But I still don't feel that, at that very, very early stage, what is happening inside one is a person. Not yet. It's going to be, quite soon, but it isn't yet. I don't think it makes much different whether you're interrupting its life by using a contraceptive or whether you have an abortion. I may be wrong about that, I would say that I'm prepared to believe people who very strongly do think I'm wrong. Maybe then, they're right, but I still feel like that about it.
[Q] But in those days, the actual business of having an abortion… I mean, I've got notions in my head about what that might be like, I suppose from films and books and so on, but I mean this was when that we're talking about? During the war?
During the war.
[Q] So what was that actually like? I mean, should…
You went to see him in an empty flat in Chelsea, where he was, with a lady who may have been a nurse or may have been his wife, I don't know. You lay on a desk and it wasn't in any way… I mean, he gave you something. It didn't hurt, nothing hurt, because firstly it was very, very early stage. It was a, sort of, rather indecent procedure. You didn't like lying on a desk with your legs in the air. Not at all. Horrid. But it wasn't difficult in any way. You had a cup of tea, and you went home. And he said, 'You've got to be at such and such a café in three days' time, and she will come and see you to make sure that all is well. And here is a telephone number, but don't ring it unless you absolutely have to.' And I didn't absolutely have to. And I went and met her and we had an embarrassed sort of cup of tea together, this lady and me. And she said, 'Well you're alright', okay, and that was that.
And I can say that the only result in my life was that before that, I used, from time to time, to have very painful periods, and afterwards, I never had another painful period. So it did me no physical harm whatsoever. And nor, I'm sorry to say, did it give me any psychological harm. I feel rather ashamed of that, but it didn't.

Isn't that extraordinary, that one can have this long conversation about your life and not mention having lived through the war? Well, expecting the war was really perhaps the worst thing. I was a very convinced pacifist from school on, and the thought that this thing was coming and there was no question in one's mind, when I was at Oxford. One knew it was coming. And one tried not to think about it and to have as nice a time as one possibly could, while one could.
But there was an old boy called Garvin who wrote regularly in… The Observer, who was a real old Cassandra. I mean, not a Sunday went by when he didn't say, 'It's coming, it's coming, it's nearly here'. And my father got so fed up with it that he cancelled The Observer. It wasn't that he didn't believe it, he just… you know, he didn't want to have to go on thinking about it. And I always remember, there was a night at Oxford when there a pair of planes going over. They were bombers. And we knew enough about… because of the Spanish war, we knew enough to be able to distinguish the sound of bombers. And I thought, that's what it's going to be like. That's what's one going to hear. And it was so sort of bleak and awful, one couldn't even cry, you know, but I remember saying to one of my friends, 'I think I'll kill myself if it starts'. And she said, 'Well, why kill yourself because you might be killed'? And I said, 'It's not that, it's just the thought of the horror happening'. But of course, then it did start and one didn't kill oneself, one just did whatever came on next. One got little jobs and things. And it was a deadly bleak time. It really was. I mean, I can't remember any… people remember, sort of, wartime gaiety and things. I can't. I just remember one sweated through it and one felt it was never going to end. It wasn't that it was… I mean, there was just no way of seeing how it was ever going to end. I never thought we were going to lose it, but I did sometimes truly think, perhaps it will never end. And a cousin of mine was killed, a man who I'd had an affair with at Oxford was killed. Tony was killed. You know, everything ghastly happened. Worse things happened to other people. I was in the country quite a lot of the time, because the BBC, which I was working at, was… we were sent off down to Bletchley. And when we came back, after the first bits, and we had quite a long time when nothing happened until the… I was once, during that time, in the Blitz time, in London. And the room where I was staying for the night was blown out, only I was out in a restaurant, so I didn't have to… I wasn't there, luckily.
And then, at the time of the doodlebugs and the other bombs, the long-distance bombs, again, there was once… actually, the only time it came, sort of, really near… every night, one woke up and thought, oh God, I'm not going to do downstairs, I can't, what's the point? You know? But there was one day when the curtains suddenly, rather slowly, blew in and a china bowl that was on the windowsill went whoosh and fell on the floor and broke. And that was the nearest bombs actually came to me. So I didn't have to… and I never went and slept in the underground or anything. Just occasionally, I went downstairs to the ground floor, but it always seemed to me that that might be worse, that, you know, if the house was going to fall down, perhaps I didn't want it falling on top of me. Mostly, one just pulled the covers over one's head and shut one's eyes tight and hoped to hear the all-clear soon, and then one did. But it was dreary and awful. And even… and I remember, actually, VJ Day… no, VE Day, that was the first one. Sort of going out with somebody, I suppose with André, maybe, to sort of rejoice in Piccadilly. Not… I mean, having a problem to make myself believe that this had happened, that it was over. And I couldn't feel that it was over. I couldn't feel happy, really, because I couldn't believe it. And also, I kept on thinking, yes, but think of all the people it's not over for. Think of all those people whose sons have been killed and everything. I don't remember that as a happy night, at all. It took quite a long time for a sort of relief to come though. VJ Day, which happened later, we'd got used to the fact, and that was happy. I remember that was a lovely day, and we all went roaring down Pall Mall and yelled for the king to come on out on the… you know, and it was extraordinary. They were a huge crowd, huge crowd, and there were geraniums planted in those beds in front there, and they were all standing on all the flowerbeds, and they were all so well-mannered that they stood with their feet on either side of the geraniums. And it said in the paper afterwards that only two geraniums had been broken. That was a lovely night, because then that… one got around to… and I didn't… I know some people who, even then, were so filled with horror by the bomb, but I wasn't. I was just thinking, well, now it is over.
[Q] The atomic bomb?
Yes.
[Q] Hiroshima and Nagasaki?
I mean, there were other, more sensitive people, who were so horrified by that and realised the horror of it. I didn't realise the horror of it until a bit later on, when the photographs and things began coming through. But no, it was bleak. Long, long, long. It seemed incredibly long. But it was long. It was all one's 20s, gone. And people who say the 50s were difficult and appalling, they just don't remember how wonderful it was that the war wasn't going on anymore. Didn't matter what the 50s were like, they were fun.
