doris.lessing

British writer Doris Lessing (1919-2013) was awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize in Literature. Her novels include 'The Grass is Singing', 'The Golden Notebook', and five novels collectively known as 'Canopus in Argos'. She was described by the Swedish Academy as 'that epicist of the female experience, who with scepticism, fire and visionary power has subjected a divided civilisation to scrutiny'. Lessing was the 11th woman and the oldest ever person to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature.

Well, The Grass is Singing was my first book. It was written in Southern Rhodesia... that is... Southern Rhodesia was before Mugabe and Zimbabwe. Now, I had been saying and behaving as if I were a writer; all I had done was in fact to write some short stories for South African magazines, and they weren't very good... they were rather smart and glossy, because that's what the magazines were like. And yet, the interesting thing people treated me as if I were really a writer; they were always bringing me their manuscripts, and things like that. And I would pronounce on them quite well, I suppose, really. That was only because of the amount I read. So there was a point at which I thought, well, enough of the talk, let's do it!
Now, at that point I was working in a lawyer's office, not earning very much... it's a question of my... you know, what was I going to live on? Anyway, I marched in to my boss, Mr Hill, and said, 'I'm going to resign, and I'm going to write a novel'. Well there were hearty gales of laughter, of course, because why not? And at that point I was married to Godfrey Lessing. He was earning a living in a large variety of amazing ways, like the tobacco auctions in Salisbury. They're still going. People would get out there about five in the morning to work for the tobacco auctions... you earned a bit of extra money. And... we were all like that... we were all precarious earning money in various ways. So he said, what... he said, what a good idea!
So I then got work at a... a profession which no longer exists... shorthand writers would go into the parliament – it was the same as our parliament – for 20 minutes, record what was said and come out and dictate to typists, one of whom was me... there was a bank of typists, and... which you earned quite a lot of money, actually. And then also, the same idea, the same shorthand writers would go into government commissions and dictate to typists. One of these men was a man called Mr Lamb, who... now there you are, you see I'm going off into the distant past of... of South African history suddenly... Milner's Kindergarten, I bet you've never heard of Milner's Kindergarten. He had a bank of very bright young men, of whom Mr Lamb when young was one, and he'd ended up as a shorthand writer in the parliament – a very erudite, well-read man. People like that were so... stuck out like sore thumbs in that culture, I can tell you.
Anyway, he would... I would go up to his house and type. A government commission on the recruitment of native labour, for example, the government commission on tsetse fly, the government commission... this kind of thing. Oh, the funniest one was the Kariba Dam, because half of the experts on the Kariba Dam said you couldn't build a Kariba Dam because there would be deep clefts in the earth, and the water would just go gurgling away down into the depths of the world and vanish completely. I mean, I typed all this stuff!

So once again I'd far more money doing that, so with this money I started to write a book in the afternoons. At that time I had a child as well, but luckily he was a very good child, who never cried. So, I wrote The Grass is Singing, and there were problems about... I remember thinking, what was I going to write, because I had far too much material. You know, my... even as innocent as I was, I realised my life had been quite amazing; I had all that stuff, I didn't know how to attack it.
So I... I had this little cutting from a newspaper which went something like this... The Rhodesia Herald, one of the world's great newspapers: last week in so-and-so, the cook of so-and-so murdered his mistress and is now awaiting, whatever – hanging, presumably – and no one knows why he committed this crime, that was the thing that got to me. So that is why I took that, because I knew perfectly well why he had committed this crime because of my upbringing. No one now can believe the... what it was like. For example, on the next farm there was a woman who was gossiped about because she would allow her cook-boy to button up the back of her dress and to brush her hair. Now, this is so appalling, I cannot begin to tell you what a violation this was of... of our behaviour, I mean, you couldn't do that. It was so awful, you could hear the voices hushed... as the story went around the verandas: she allows him to button up her dress! This kind of thing.
Well, I thought this a perfectly good reason why, if one minute she was... he was buttoning up her dress and brushing her hair, if she then behaved as white mistresses behaved towards their servants. It was perfectly obvious to me why it had all happened: she had treated him like a friend, and then started treating him like a servant. And believe me, they treated them abominably. Not because they meant to... they're stupid... stupidity, like most of these things.
These... there was a saying, or it was said, that the white women didn't know how to treat their servants, and it was obviously a sex thing – hidden, of course: it was because here is... in African culture for a woman to tell men what to do was impossible. Yet all these houses had menservants, not female, as they would have in South Africa; they were all menservants. All these menservants had white mistresses who always spoke to them in a kind of high, harassed angry voice, because they didn't know how to talk to them. They couldn't talk to them like people, because that was impossible, so they had this – God, that voice, I can sometimes hear it – it's a dreadful, peevish voice, in which all these poor black servants were spoken to; this is how they spoke to them. I'm not going to try and imitate it, just not spread the virus of horror. Anyway, this... you'd listen to this and you'd curl up with shame.
Anyway, so this is why Mary Turner was murdered, and I... perfectly obvious to me why it was. So I thought, but first I'm going to have to leave that at that point and say I wrote two books before that.

I have to mention them before The Grass is Singing – I wrote two books. I was then working as a... what we now call an au pair, but... which sounds... now au pair was then called working as a nursemaid... I was working as a nursemaid in Salisbury, and I went home to the farm and I wrote two novels.
One was... I certainly learnt a lesson with that. It was written in longhand, very fast, and I could never read it back, so I was obviously inspired by something. But the other one, you see, was a... something I was not equipped to write... I was making fun of the white culture which, believe me, could be made fun of, it was so appalling, but I didn't have the experience to write it, I couldn't write it, I didn't know how to. So I wrote this novel, which was very mannered; I don't know where the authority came from or what book I'd read before that enabled me to write a very mannered book about white society in Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia, but it was terrible. And I'm glad to say I tore both of them up at once, which goes to show I had some sense, even then.
So then time passed, and then I had to write another book, and that was The Grass is Singing. And so there I had this newspaper cutting and a lot of knowledge about that culture. So I have... this had a very long history, The Grass is Singing. One part of it was... a quite short part of it... was to do with the white assistant on the farm, and he observed what was going on with the Turners, but the rest of it was an immensely long book which would have been very good if I'd been equipped to write it. In those days, you see, there were... the white assistants came out from England. They were... because of the slump – which one should never forget – this was the '30s... everyone was unemployed, and I mean, there was the most dreadful poverty here in... among the working classes – a phrase that seems to have disappeared – the most dreadful poverty. And there was no work for anyone; there was nothing.

So the... anyone who could get a fare from anyone – in other words, the better-off people – went out to the Colonies. And so Southern Rhodesia was full of the middle-class who tried to get a farmer to teach them how to grow tobacco or something like that. So there were these assistants. Now, what happened with the assistants was one of two things: one was that they were so appalled at the society they found, they were so shocked at the way the Africans were treated that they – if they could get the money together – they instantly left and went back to England. And there were very many... many of them.
The other thing was that they became worse than their employers, which is another way of dealing with a... a thing... they became... they were quite famous for being worse – more brutal and more stupid. Because the old-style white farmers who had been there for a long time had acquired some kind of humanity, some kind of... it wasn't very good, but it was paternalistic and quite... it was better. And so if someone was trying to fit in – because it was very important to fit into this society – they might become worse than the worst of the white farmers. And so my... I had a... I thought I would have a character who would be neither so shocked that he'd have to go back to England, because then there'd be no more to be said, nor would he become worse than the people who'd employed him – he would remain and be shocked.
Now, here we have a great comic theme, in fact. An idealistic young Englishman – and they were loathed and hated by all the white settlers – an idealistic white Englishman shocked at what he found and trying to improve anyone, is a wonderful comic idea. It's a beautiful idea, and I'm sorry I couldn't write it, because even now when I think of it, the... the white people who... There were two classes of white people – I seem to be going off again – one was the girls who went out to get married, because, you know, people didn't have any money here – they... they couldn't get husbands. If they went out to the Colonies, they instantly got husbands because there weren't enough women, so they instantly got... immediately they married farmers or something or other, and they were... had to fall over themselves to be careful and not to criticise what they found, because of course they'd lose the husband at once; they'd have to... they became even worse than the white mistresses... the white missus.
The white assistants in due course became farmers themselves, and probably have lost their farms now under Mugabe, but... so I have this idealistic young white man... chap from England who keeps saying to all the white farmers, ‘But you know, this is not right what you're doing; it's not... you really shouldn't talk to them like that; you should... it's not... I really must explain'. It... it was in fact a great comic idea, but I blew it.

So, I had this novel in two parts. One was my beautiful comic idea which I wasn't equipped to write, and the other was a short part of it, which was really the young white assistant observing what was going on.
Now, this novel, which was set – this is in wartime, mind you – in wartime, when U-boats were patrolling the oceans, so if you did send something, most often it got sunk or... so I sent this novel over to England, and it was rejected two or three times, and that now took a... you know, I'm saying that it took months to send a thing, if it ever... ever got here, and if it did get here then it would have to go back again... months again, if it didn't get sunk. So it was a great practice in patience, this whole process of learning to be a writer.
So there I had this manuscript, and it suddenly occurred to me – I had a perfectly good book here if I threw away two-thirds of it. So I threw away the parts that didn't work, the... the young assistant with his high-flown ideas about morality and decency and justice and all that, and I left the rest, and that was The Golden... that was The Grass is Singing... what remained is The Grass is Singing – a short novel – which is the remains of the... the big mass of manuscript I had. Once again, thank God, I tore it up, and because that really wouldn't sink me. So...
So... so there we are: that was The Grass is Singing. And the next thing that happened was, I had this manuscript, and I'm supposed to be a writer. Somebody comes up from Johannesburg and says, 'Oh, I can get you a publisher'. Takes it down to Johannesburg and sells it to a publisher, whose name I've now forgotten, and then he said he couldn't publish it because it was too abrasive. You know, it was, for the idea of the time, it was very abrasive – couldn't possibly publish it. So there it was sitting, and I had a, you know, a copy of a... I remember a page, a page of agreement between me and this crooked publisher...
So I came to England with this child and no money at all to speak of, and a lot of very unsuitable clothes. And so there I was near the Portobello Road, in a place that was very badly bomb-damaged, with... the walls were all crumbling; it hadn't... war damage hadn't been there yet, so I was in a part of that, living in a room and another room with the walls cracking, and of course since I was a Rhodesian used to warmth, the cold was quite hard to bear. You know, bringing a few lumps of coal up from the basement several times a day, and of course you never, I was never warm, so... and then what happened was, I wrote, I had some short stories that I'd written, and I sent them to Curtis Brown, which was and is one of the big agencies, and it got to a woman called Juliet O'Hae, who wrote back and said – which is routine, but I didn't know it – 'Yes, very nice, dear, but have you got a novel?'
So I wrote back and said, 'I have a novel, but it's been sold to a Johannesburg publisher'. 'Let me see the agreement', says she, and she was so angry – she said she'd never seen anything so crooked and wicked and disgraceful. And she sent this man a telegramme – a telegramme, remember – saying, 'Release this author or I will expose you for what you are – a crook and a...' So he released me, and then he sold... she sold the novel over the weekend to Michael Joseph. The sub-clause... so much time has passed... is, of course, that Michael Joseph had been her lover, and she had a 'in' to Michael Joseph; she sold an immense number of books to Michael Joseph, and mine was one of them. And so it came out now.
Then what happened was, it... I got let... telephones from Michael Joseph saying, 'We are reprinting your book'. But since I was as green as I was, I thought this happened to everyone. 

So this was me being almost unbelievably innocent, and thinking that everyone had their book reprinted before publication. So it came out, and it got good reviews.
Now, this was partly luck, and one can never, ever... overestimate luck in anyone's career, because the... a book called Cry, The Beloved Country had just come out about six months before from South Africa, and had done – it was a sensation – because at that time it was believed here that the whole of Southern Africa was full of happy darkies singing and dancing and being grateful for their lot under the white man, and this book gave the lie to that. You know, the... the relevant line which is still quoted, ‘By the time we have come to loving, they will have come to hating'. I'm sorry, the other way around, ‘By the time they have come to loving, we will have come to hating'... that was this refrain running through this book Cry, The Beloved Country – Alan Paton. Now... so everyone was softened up for my book; it was not... it would have been just a... of no particular interest if that hadn't happened. So as I say, it was luck. And then suddenly there were other books about Southern Africa – there was a whole spate of them – and Southern Africa was suddenly on the map, which it wasn't before.
Now, Southern Rhodesia, because it was British, was seen as a – much better of course than South Africa, which it wasn't – it was just the same, really... so, you see, I had this, that was my phase of being a black... a black African writer. You see, because I go through phases – that was my phase of being described as being a writer about black Africa.

In those days we didn't have any money, and it never occurred to us that we should have money; we sort of pottered along somehow. I mean, all the people I met when I came to England, they were writers and artists and all commies – everyone was either a communist or had stopped being a communist; it was either one or the other. So you were in that atmosphere all the time of violent debate about the Soviet Union and communism generally.
And so there we all were, as I say, we didn't have a penny, any of us, and never thought about it particularly, if you can imagine that. I mean, now I look back, it's not that we were hungry or doing without anything, it's just that we didn't have... we didn't need things somehow... we didn't have them. So... and it took me 20 years – no, not... 10 years, it took me 10 years – to have reached the point where I earned as much as the... what the average labourer earned, which I've now forgotten, because somebody said to me, ‘Have you ever worked out what you actually earn?' So they... a chap... did this for me and said, ‘You're earning what the average labourer earns now, which was 10 years later'. And I'd been working very hard all that time.
And at that point we all seemed to get much better off, and I look back with amazement – what happened was that England was so grim and poor and unpainted, which was the thing that I minded so much. Nothing had been painted for that entire time of the war, and, oh God, it really was... And then suddenly there were window boxes with flowers in them! I'll never forget it – it was just such a miracle. And suddenly there were coffee bars, thanks to the Italians, which were then regarded as extremely seditious, and young people were not supposed to be in them because they were so wicked – I don't know why, just the police liked to think of anything as wicked. And the food began to be better, courtesy of the Indians, because everyone who ate, ate out, we ate... ate Indian because you couldn't afford the... the proper... you see, there were proper restaurants with proper food, but none of us could afford it.
And then they had... the wartime restaurants were still going, which people have forgotten – the wartime subsidised restaurants which we ate in because they were so cheap, had this menu – the menu was beef... roast beef, a stew, batter pudding, unspeakably awful vegetables cooked in water, and the most wonderful puddings you can imagine, an English pudding, all going for – what's... what's the equivalent now? – a couple of quid. This is the subsidised wartime restaurant.
Well, so there was that, and then there was a proper restaurant, and then came the Indian restaurants which saved us, and England began to cheer up. And something else happened, which was that the young people – the new generation – didn't want to talk about the war, and... because when I arrived everyone talked about the war, day and night. Either they had been in the Blitz, they had done all that and survived all that bombing, or they had just come back from the various fronts, or they had just opened concentration camps. It was a very grim conversation we used to have, as I recall, most of them.
But then suddenly, around about '56 or so, which coincides with Hungary and all that, there was a new generation who thought the war was very boring. Now, I wasn't at all surprised by that, because I was going back to my father – the First World War – because the old soldiers had this grim joke about the Great Unmentionable. They came out of the trenches, whole or not, and people wouldn't talk about the war. So when this young lot wouldn't talk about the war, I said, well, okay, this has happened before. People can't bear to talk about it. Either they can't bear to talk about it, or they find it happened in... again in some... in the liberation war in Zimbabwe... suddenly I found when I first went out, everyone talked about the war day and night, black and white, all of them. And then suddenly there was this lot of young people who said: ‘We don't care about your war! We don't care what you suffered' – I'm quoting – ‘We don't care about all that, we're going to enjoy ourselves'. So this is what happens, you see. It's no good being upsetting... upset about it, because this is what happens.
So there I was, by then I had moved, and it was time to write The Golden Notebook. No, it wasn't, because I had written Martha Quest in the meantime.

I made a start with an exemplary story. It comes from television – it was when Saul Bellow was being interviewed by an academic – this was quite a long time ago. And he had just had a novel out, and the academic was – as usually happens with academics – was trying to make comparisons between this novel and another novel, and he was saying to Saul Bellow, 'Now, Mr Bellow, what struck me about this novel is that how similar it is to – I don't know – Musil, A Man Without Qualities, or even Proust'. And Saul Bellow was saying, 'No, no, no, it's not like that at all, you know, it's not like that'. 'It's a scene at breakfast', said the academic, 'it could be easily Dostoevsky!' And Saul Bellow, 'No, no, you see, what you have to do, you see, is the sun shining? Perhaps it's snowing... what's it... what's it smell like? Have they made bread in that kitchen? Have they slept together the night before, he and his wife? Do they like each other? Do you see what I'm saying?', says Saul. This is what a writer is thinking about, not about some other book. 'Well', said... says the academic, 'Well, you know, it could easily be Rider Haggard – that bit about the dog, you know'. 'No, no, no', says Saul Bellow, 'not like that'. 
Now, just imagine it: your hero is in the garden with the dog. The dog – now, what does that dog smell like? You know a dog smell – very strong smell, and the feel of the dog's coat on your hand. 'So, you see', says Saul Bellow, 'there you are in the garden and the dog, and it's a very affectionate dog, it leaps and bounds, it's very pleased to be out. And it's a wonderful day', says Saul, 'it's a wonderful day. Everybody's happy, and people...'
And the academic is saying, 'Now, Mr Bellow, look, when I read this book I got irresistible echoes from...' and he reels off Kierkegaard, perhaps, or something. And so this dialogue goes on between Saul Bellow and the academic; never the two shall meet. And this is my experience. They do not understand anything about writing, and how many times in my life have I had a similar conversation myself. So I'm quoting this right at the beginning, because I'm hoping that what I'm saying now might help to heal this absolutely lamentable... lamentable gap between writers and academics. They see different things, and I think it starts right at the beginning. A book appears, and here is a book – look, how elegant! It's so nice, and it's got a nice cover, and it's finished – that is the point, it's finished, you see, it's completed. You look at it, and the comma's in the right place... and the academic is thinking, 'Ah, look, now isn't that nice! Now, what does it remind me of?' Now that... this is how they talk, they can't think of any other way.
So in the meantime, what the writer is thinking – my God, do you think that that picture works? I've made so much effort getting that picture on to the cover, it's so pretty... Oh, says the author... and I'm thinking of months and months and months and months of hard work, maybe years... and there was that time when my parents turned up and I had to look after them for three weeks, I couldn't get to my work at all. And what about the time when I was sick? I had something or other, I didn't get... what an effort! What an effort it all was, and it went on and on. This is what the author is thinking; this is not something... they're looking at a process; this is what the author is thinking. There's a process here, but the academic doesn't see it at all, but this is what the author is seeing. You start with a vague idea somewhere in your mind, and the years go by and you think, well, I will write this one of these times – I will, but when? And then nothing happens.
And then suddenly it is the right time, and the book gets written, and all this history is in this artefact. But I think there are very few moments more surprising to any author that when this thing turns up – you've sent in to the publishers a great heap of whatever, manuscript, or whatever the thing is with a word processor, and what you get back is this – they have nothing in common. What... what you're remembering is the effort of it all. What you're seeing is a wonderful artefact which is the result of the work of large numbers of people in the publishing house, which has very little to do with how the book was written.

Now I'm going to talk about the history of one book and how it ended up, because I can illustrate a lot about this kind of difference doing that. And there is another misunderstanding which is very common, and it's this – it's a letter which you get from a fan: 'I too am wanting to be a writer, Mrs Lessing. Tell me, how do you get your plots? Where do you get your ideas from? Where do you get your inspiration?' And you write back and say, 'Well, you see, it's not really something that happens once, it might take years'. And you know quite well that this person who is wanting some information from you... where do you get...? Or you might write and say, well, you see a face on a bus, you hear something on the Underground, and it sets up a whole string of memories, and you think, my God, that's a short story!
Now, this is how books and stories get written. It's not a sort of inspiration like a butterfly suddenly arriving on your head... so you say, my God, that's an inspiration! Oh, good! This is how the outsiders might see it, or hopeful neophytes might see it, but in actual fact it's probably years of memory and ideas of... and a lot of thought ... that's it, a lot of thought goes into this.
Now, I'm going to start off with The Fifth Child, which is a book... one of my books that's got a kind of life of its own.  Not all books do, but this does, and it's always coming to life again and being reprinted and so on, and I get a lot of letters... a lot of letters about it.
What I wanted to write, and did want for many, many years, was to write about that folk story about the fairies, or the little people. They leave one of their children in a human cradle, and this child grows up as a human and never knows it's one of the little people, or a goblin or a dwarf or anything like that. But the little people know it, and this story, as... as it is told in folklore, is the interaction between the little people watching the growth of their child in a human cradle in a human house, and the humans not knowing it. And as a story it has infinite variations – it's in every culture – it's in Africa... various places in Africa. Anywhere you go, you say, 'Do you have this story?' and they do have it in one form or another.

Now, what interested me was the little people: who were these little people who leave their offspring in a human cradle? It is... are they... are they fairies, or gnomes? Are they dwarfs – who? Because again, these figures, these fairies and gnomes and dwarfs are in every culture – there are stories about them. Now, I thought for a very, very long time that they existed. Why should they not exist? We have people of all sizes – why should there not have been fairies and gnomes and dwarfs and so on, and so on?
Can I... can I remind you that in the Bible it says about – just thrown away, of course – that there were giants in those days. Well, maybe there were giants, we don't know that there weren't. We have occasionally come on... come on large skeletons, but is this what is meant? I don't know. But what they have recently come on – in Indonesia last year – they came on the skeletons of little people, that is, not human, but near human. Us, but small. Now, I thought, ah, there we go, you see. Now, needless to say, it... the academics, the scientists, are now arguing about it. They are saying, no, no, it's impossible, and the others say, no, it's not... it is possible, and here is the skeleton. And it's... it's in the papers, and it's a very interesting debate, this one. I think they're called the Flores... the Flores People... the Little Humans.
Now, a long time ago – does anybody here know the name Charles Fort... Forte [sic] the man who was always writing books about impossible events. What he would do – this is... we're going back to the 50s now – he would go through newspapers and any kind of magazine, and take out any improbable story and event and print it. It didn't matter what it was, it didn't matter whether it was true, possible, impossible, it was printed.
One of the stories he printed was of little people... little skeletons in the Alleghenies in America. And I thought, aha, there we are – he says it was years ago; I thought, there we are, it's there! And from time to time... and I believe in South Africa they've found little humans, and of course they debated were they really humans, were they...? I don't know what they were, but little skeletons. So there we are, you see – I start off with the idea that there were little people of some kind, we don't know what – they are in our folklore and our stories, but we don't know anything about them until we come on skeletons as the Flores People in Indonesia. And then we can say they were... they had brains as good as ours, apparently, these people, they were just as intelligent as we are, but they were smaller in scale. And there it rests at the moment.
Now, if you look at the world now, never mind about Charles Fort and 50 years ago in the Alleghenies or Indonesia... if you contrast the pygmies in Central Africa who might never get taller than three foot, three-and-a-half feet or four feet, with the people over on the East Coast who might easily be seven feet, seven-and-a-half feet, and where do you see them now? You see them in America as doormen in hotels, these enormously tall elegant men. Most men, as they come into the lobbies, they look up at these creatures – they are giants, according to our ideas, and they are... there they are over in the coast of East Africa; and you contrast them with the pygmies, and what do you have? We have giants and we have pygmies now.

Okay, so there's Loren Eiseley, who was once a very famous writer, now for some reason he's dropped out of sight, and he describes how he is on a seashore in the dusk on a track – a rough track – and he's going slowly up into the village, and in front of him he saw a Neanderthal girl. And as I say it, I feel my back going cold; as I read it, my back went cold and my hair stood up on the back of my neck. She turned her head and looked at him, and he said this girl had the eyebrow ridges and the back to her head, and she could have been a Neanderthal. And he said – now we turning to reality – he said, well, this is a remote place from any town, this girl could have grown up and no one would have said anything more than, oh, Alice does have a funny head, doesn't she? They wouldn't have even have noticed, probably. But for him, an anthropologist, she was a Neanderthal.
So I thought, hang on a minute – you know, suddenly it starts... it starts to work. I was reading around about then articles about the Neanderthals... do we have their genes, or don't we? And then I've noticed that it's back in the papers again – people are saying that we do have their characteristics. One of these people said... one of these scientists said, in America... if she... he stands in a crowd and looks around, and he says, yes, that one, that one, that one, that one; he says he can see the characteristics in a crowd. I'm not saying he did or he didn't, but that is what he said. And by now I'm getting really excited because of what I'm thinking – if Neanderthals, why not dwarfs and gnomes or whatever else? Why not?
Now, this is where it really started. I'm in a dentist's waiting room, and I'm reading – you know, you do in a dentist's waiting room – the letters to Auntie Gertrude, and the letter goes like this. The letter says: I have to write to you, I have to talk to somebody. I'm not expecting you to solve my problems or do anything like that, but I just have to tell someone. I have four children, and my fifth child was born a little devil. Now, please note, this is religious language she's using throughout. She obviously didn't think it was religious. My fifth child was born a little devil. Before she came, our home was happy and harmonious, it was a little heaven. And then she arrived, and everything became devilish – the other children suffered. Sometimes, says she, I go into her room at night and I see that lovely little face on the pillow, and I long to put my arms around her and pick her up. But I know what would come up into my arms would be a hissing, spitting little devil.
Now, this one got to me, as they say, and I thought, now look, now I have to write it.

Now, there are certain problems about writing non-realistic fiction, the chief one being that it must not be... it cannot be wild. You cannot write a non-realistic story and it's already wild before you start – you have to choose something very normal. You know, you have to start off with: Fred sat in the kitchen drinking a cup of Typhoo tea and he really was wanting to go to the football game but, etc. This is how you start off sci-fi – you do not say: my God, the owls were shrieking and the ghosts were chanting, etc.
So okay, I had to have a very ordinary family, ordinary middle-class with nothing extraordinary about them, because it's no good putting... an exotic child into a family that is already exotic – there's no contrast. So I start off with this very, very ordinary family – middle-class. And there are four children already, very normal children, and this is a family who want a normal family, normal children, etc. And then... there is this child born. Immediately in the womb he shows how extraordinary he is because he is very strong, and this woman... this poor woman had a terrible pregnancy with this violence of this child in the womb.
And where I got that idea from was thinking about animals who are impregnated with different species – they have a different feeling in their wombs, wouldn't they? I mean, just imagine, I don't know, they once impregnated a... a dog and a cat in California – I'm glad to say this foetus didn't work. But just imagine the dog, or the cat, with a different creature in its womb; it's quite horrifying when you think about it. Or when they put different kinds of monkey together – oh, a baboon or something; it's a horrible, horrible thought. What we do when we do this kind of thing.
So I have my heroine, my poor woman with a very difficult pregnancy, and a... a baby which right from the very start is different, and it is different from that time on. 

Where do I introduce the right voice in this story The Fifth Child? You have to at some point indicate – this is before this poor woman is having this difficult pregnancy – the two are in a house which they are thinking of buying, and it's a story which has... I mean, the house has a strong atmosphere, and they're in what will be the bedroom, and they have to make love. Behind them is a shadowy vista which... with something different about it, as if they were in a forest. So they give birth to a child which I suggest has a different beginning. So that is where the voice came in, when I said that the... the parents were making love with a feeling of strangeness.
And now I'm really going to go off at a tangent, and any writer will know what I am saying and understand. Just before I wrote The Fifth Child I was off with a group of people looking at the refugees from the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and it was an extremely frustrating experience because you couldn't get anyone to write about what the Russians were doing in Afghanistan. There was a kind of a... a ‘No' still hanging over from the communist era... when people, communists... you do not criticise the Soviet Union. So the people in Pakistan, they would say: you cannot get any story out of here, it's no good writing it, they won't print it. And I found when I came out... I mean, the most amazing newspapers wouldn't ... I'm terribly sorry, but they will never print this... like Newsweek, they will never print a story criticising the Soviet Union. I was so angry, I was so frustrated, I was... this is... these are our beautiful newspapers where I learnt just how venal they are. I was in a rage. That rage got into The Fifth Child.
Now, most writers will recognise that a very strong emotion that has nothing to do with a book, can be in that book and take it over, and it can be the charge, it can be the energy. My energy for writing The Fifth Child was fury, absolute rage and shame at what our newspapers are really like, because that's when I learnt...
So if I say to a writer, ‘That book that you wrote, there's a feeling about it – what was the impulse behind it?' And they'll say, ‘Oh, yes - of course it's got nothing to do with the actual book', they'll say, ‘I fell in love, and it's all in the book'. Or, ‘I was very sad because my best friend died', it's in the book. And this... this... no one will ever know this, but of course the writer; the readers will never know, the readers will not know...

Now... like The Golden Notebook. The Golden Notebook  is a book which has a kind of a life of its own, a very lively life of its own, and it's because at the time I wrote it, it was a time of such contradictions, of such impossibilities. This was when all the comrades were finding out about how awful the Soviet Union was. It was full of disappointments, sadness, anger; it was... that was in The Golden Notebook, and that's the charge of The Golden Notebook. I know it, other people will know it, but the people who read it now... they are funny... they're reprinting The Golden Notebook, what a funny... after all these years. Well, I know why. That book has all these emotions in it. As I say, you tell this to any writer, and they will understand it exactly.

So, now I've talked about what went into The Fifth Child, which includes emotions that have nothing whatsoever to do with The Fifth Child, and it's why it has this life. But when it came out, something quite different happened. I got letters by the shoal, and I still get letters by the shoal from people who have had defective children, autistic children, children with something wrong with them. They will say, you have written my experience. Now, you cannot write when you get the tragic letter like this back... you cannot write back and say, 'No, no, this is a goblin from the past; this is... this has got nothing to do with now, this is a throwback to the distant past'. You cannot do that when people... So you write letters saying, I'm terribly sorry that you have an autistic child or Asperger's syndrome or whatever – what a terrible thing, I really am so sorry. So you write these letters that have got... once again, you're off on the side, it's got nothing to do with the book, what you wrote. But I had a letter last week from a woman saying that she'd had two autistic children, one after the other, and reading my book she understood what the mother went through because she had this totally alien child – and a fifth child – and she had to bring it up as if it was normal, and she couldn't do it.
Now, the interesting thing about... just to return briefly... when I wrote the first version of The Fifth Child, it was interesting that I didn't write about the siblings much. I finished this book and I read it and I thought, my God, are you mad? Who would suffer from this child would be the brothers and sisters – they would suffer. The parents might have a bad time, but nothing to what the poor old siblings were having, so I had to rewrite it.  So what it really is about now in its form is just as much about the mother and the child as the brothers and sisters and this child because they have to accommodate him in some way or another.
And I can't remember ever doing that –writing a book where I completely ignore the central theme. It just wasn't in my mind; I was so absorbed with the woman's experience with this child, that... because no one of course understood what was happening. Her husband didn't understand, nobody wanted to know what was going on. The doctors didn't want to know what was going on. She couldn't... what she really thought couldn't be said – that this is an alien child.

This book, as I discovered much to my surprise, is liked very much by adolescents. As I'll go to a school and I'll find a teacher saying, 'You know, the kids like this book very much'. I used to be surprised, and now I'm not. And I get letters from Germany and France, etc, saying, 'I teach The Fifth Child. It's always a great success, the children don't know what to think'. This has this quality. So I am... I never understood it... Ben is a very clumsy, awkward, unlikeable creature – if you take him as a member of a middle-class family. If you see him as someone who would be perfectly at home in a cave on a hillside 50,000 years ago, he's not peculiar at all; he's just in the wrong place. And when people said that Ben was evil, I've never understood it; he just was... he didn't belong, that's all. And we can't tolerate people who don't belong. We don't like them at all.
Well, so there I am in a North London school not very far from here... and what was interesting was that the pupils were all black and brown and Asian. There were about three white. Now this... if you're not used to this idea, it's quite... you have to get used to the idea – I was quite shocked. I thought, then what must this place be like to live in, where you have different cultures side by side? So there was a class – a literature class – and a teacher who said, 'The kids love The Fifth Child'.  So there I am with the kids and they say they love The Fifth Child. And there is an extremely beautiful girl – and a plum-blossom fairy, I tell you, a most beautiful girl, who says, 'I love The Fifth Child – Ben is me! Ben is myself!' And I said, 'Now come on – Ben is not a beautiful girl, you know'. And she said, 'I am Ben!' And I thought, well, what are adolescents? They're clumsy, they're awkward, they can't get along. They know that they're... that they'll never, never grow up, they don't fit into anything, so they identify with Ben. And that is why, at last, I discovered why kids like Ben.

Finding out, and I've got a note here which I could talk about for years, I think, but it's what you find out when you write a book, because this is what, I think, most writers would agree: you start on a book and it's what you find out while you're writing it which is the most rewarding thing that happens, and you don't know what you're going to find out. If you... I'm not just talking about a book... a novel, but anything, a piece of work, research, anything at all. Tea-planters in Ceylon.  From the moment that you have this... theme, from all sources will come information about tea-planters in Ceylon. You'll find it in the library, in newspapers, people will start talking about it, and it's as if you've plugged into a wavelength: tea-planters in Ceylon. And you find out the most astonishing things. And this is what I... certainly I... like about writing a novel. I just love what I find out, about not only the theme of the book, but associated themes, too. Now, this is a very strange subject actually, which I'm rather tossing away. Why does it happen? What is this wavelength that you plug into – because there's no doubt you do. You can try it... just try it for... for fun. Get interested in something and in no time at all people are going to start talking about it. You'll be enormously, enormously informed about tea-planters in Ceylon. But what is it?

To me, I think the most important thing I can say, as a writer... but maybe... well, I think so, at any rate. It's about the use of dreams when you write. Now, to some writers you say, 'Do you use dreams?' And they say, 'Oh, no, no, I never dream'. But other writers, 'Oh, yes!' And then it gets interesting.
Now, it's not just writers. If we remember, there was a scientist who discovered the structure of the atom because he dreamed it; this was a scientist who discovered the structure of the atom... he dreamed the structure. So there is, in effect, a whole technique which you can use about anything – it doesn't matter what it is. You have a problem, you don't know what to do. The technique is, you are thinking about this anyway because you have a problem. But if you think before you go to sleep, delay your going to sleep, lie awake and think about this... problem, you'll almost certainly get some kind of response when you're asleep, and you'll wake up with the information in the morning. A lot of people do this, you know: I'm going to sleep on it – that's where that came from – I'm going to sleep on it. And you sleep on it, you have the information. Now, I have had a great deal of help in my books using this. Sometimes earlier on I didn't know what I was doing, I just did it blindly, but the more you do it, the more it works well. Now, I'm going to quote... a time when... a book... where it worked supremely well, and it doesn't always work as well as this.
A book I wrote – it's a sequel to Mara and Dann – it's called General Dann, Mara's Daughter, Griot and the Snow Dog – it's a long title. I had this novel all planned out in my mind, it was all there, beautifully planned, everything in balance, fantastic – then I started to write. And what happened? Very seldom happens to me. In came a character that I hadn't planned for... griot. Now, this griot is a North African word which could be French or English, for a storyteller or song – the praise-singer for the king... or it edges on the very verge of the shaman, or a magic man – he's just there on the edge. He came into this story strongly, not as something magical and extraordinary, but as a very practical solid man who... without many... much imagination... but there he was. The whole book was upset. It all went out... astray, it didn't have a balance, I didn't know what to do. I was about to throw the whole thing away. It certainly didn't have a voice.
Then I thought, now hang on a minute – we will try with this one. So I am thinking about the problem of this unbalanced book, and what to do to put it right. So I dream – almost the first night I put the problem into my unconscious – comes up this dream. I dream that whoever is standing on the edge of a pool or marsh, and in the pool or marsh are three drowned creatures, which you then discover are the snow dogs. But one of them is alive, and Dann fishes the one that is just alive out, and this dog becomes a... a major character in the story with a motivation of his own. He plays a part in the plot, you know, not just... he's not just decoration. So my dream gave me in one night what I needed.
Now, I'm afraid it doesn't always happen like that, but it can happen like that. So I'm saying it, because it can happen, that people should try and trust their unconscious more because it's amazing what it can come up with. 

Now I'm going back to... Mara and Dann, which is the book before General Dann. It's an adventure story. Once again – I'd had this in my mind for many, many years – I'd wanted to write an adventure story, the classical adventure story. Immediately there is a problem. The problem is that if you write an adventure story set now it instantly turns into an affair of fast cars and helicopters and weapons and drugs and God only knows what, sort of like, you know, this... gone out of my head ... you know this series of... this... sorry, hold it! This is what happens... it's gone out of my mind. What is the...? It doesn't matter. Anyway, that is what an adventure set in our culture becomes: it becomes something that bores me profoundly, and I'm going to go off on another tangent to say I think this is a... a sex thing, it's a gender thing. And I'm now going on a third tangent – where did I discover this profoundly – it was the beginning of the war between Saddam and Kuwait, and I'm in Heathrow in the business class, and they have a vast screen up, with the progress of the war.
And we're all sitting around, all the men are in front of the screen; they are fascinated. They are fascinated by the bloody tanks! The women are sitting around knitting and sleeping. The men are looking at all the hardware – this is what they're interested in. And I thought, you know... this is, it's almost like a lesson in why men and women are unlike. We sat there for two hours, the plane was late leaving, and the men were there, riveted.

If I were to write a book all about helicopters and drugs and... and guns, I would bore myself silly, and I guess I would bore every woman that read it also, but the men would like it. So I thought I would simply get rid of our civilisation at all... I'd just get rid of it, by... I did that by making an ice age, sitting on top of Europe, which... became quite interesting in itself. So... the people living, knowing that the ice age was coming, built replicas of the... our great cities, in North Africa... which... on which then became the permafrost, right? This is where for... for us to know how wonderful we are, right? We... this wonderful civilisation of ours. So there are these cities, and... Mara and Dann, which is where I'm coming to in a long loop...
I had a brother whom I didn't get on with at all, but when he was little I adored him, and simply because I didn't get on with him when we were older, I tended to forget just how much I adored him when he was little. I have a brother... a sister and a brother – Mara and Dann – and Mara is very sisterly with her brother, and looks after him. And that entire period of writing, at least a third of Mara and Dann, I dreamt every night what I was going to write the next day. It was like an unfolding... it was running in my head – the brother and the sister. It was as if I wasn't writing it, my unconscious was writing it.
Now, this can happen, of course it can happen quite differently from literature – it can happen about anything. But this was an extraordinary experience because it was of course transmuted into a sort of semi-savage background because I wanted to get rid of our civilisation. And for me it was quite painful because I remembered how much I did love this child, which I've decided not to remember. So you see this... also happen: you can invite memories you don't particularly want. 
Now, when I talk about dreams, this is a culture which on the whole is not sympathetic to this idea. You can say to some people, 'Oh, I never dream'. There's always a note there of... of superiority... 'Oh, I never dream'. Or, if the people say, 'Oh yes, I always dream, and it's so helpful', and so on. There is a note there of... it's a very funny note, it's not superiority, it's as if they've got hold of something and they don't want it to be taken away from them, because this culture is extremely unhelpful to this kind of idea. Hang on a minute...
Yes, there is a... a society over – once again, in South-East Asia – where they use dreams for the bringing up of their children. The children are told in the morning to come to the adults: 'What did you dream?' And... built on what they dreamed, their... what they are, what sort of feelings they have... is revealed, and the children are all the time taught to do what they dream. I think probably the world being as it is now, my feeling is this is probably already gone, this culture, because all kinds of cultures that were going until quite recently go because of our kind of idea, but that... until recently, this was a culture that used dreams consciously, and what we used to call the Red Indians used dreams consciously for each other and their children.

I wanted to talk about something that has recently gone... teaching children through stories and songs, because in Africa they were using it until quite recently. There is a novel by a woman called Marian Lebor, a woman who has died unfortunately. In the course of this novel she describes how a girl is sent to her grandmother to be finished off... her education, as you know, we used to send girls to Switzerland, or somewhere. Now, the grandmother taught this girl by means of stories and songs, taught her the history of her clan, the way you behaved and how you behaved to elders, how you behaved to children – it was a whole education, and it was all in stories. I haven't been told this... but I'm prepared to bet that our civilisation is not really very helpful to this idea. Now, I used the idea in a short story or short novel – in four short novels – it's called The Reason For It. I created a culture – it only lasted for four generations – where the best ruler... the people were taught through stories and songs, which of course has been done in the past, before we were literate.
And this came to nothing, not because there was anything wrong with this method of teaching but because there became a very stupid ruler who didn't see the point of it, so the whole thing just went. But there were four centuries, and one century or two centuries was a brilliant culture, all through stories and songs, and I'm wondering when this idea is going to come back. It'll come back, you know, because it's so useful. 

Now, there are various... key ideas, sort of, so deep in our unconscious that you've only got to say it and you respond. Cities under water: can you remember Lyonesse down at the end of Cornwall? Or the city off the edge of Norfolk? But what really gets to you is that the bells ring when the tide is running, so you have the bells ringing from under the sea. I tell you, it's just... I can't bear it, it's so marvellous.
So you might remember that Ballard... he writes about cities under the water – this... probably also remembering our history, where when the seas rise, cities and coasts go under water, and when the seas go down they emerge again. Cities under water is now very much in our minds because of global warming; you know, you have films about New York under water, and there's something about that that... well, I don't know, it's... it's so frightening, but it could happen very easily. That is one, the cities under water. Now, whenever I come up with one of these ideas I never ever reject it, saying this is an old idea. Never, because they've... they've got such a... a resonance in our unconscious, they have got something about them that pulls people in. One is vanishing walls, which you will find again and again in stories of all kinds... fairy stories – the walls that disappear, the walls that you can walk through, the walls that are there, and... and then again, are not. This is one of the great ideas, transparent walls.
Another one is the twins. Can you... I'll remind you of The Memoirs of a Justified City... sorry, that's interesting... The Memoirs of a Justified Sinner – twins, the good twin and the bad twin, which... the doppelganger, which has got this resonance, it always grabs you, grabs you down, and that's another one...
And now I come to something which I left to the end because there's no explanation. I wrote a story called The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five, in a series called Canopus in Argos. The idea behind this is that there is a... a star up there... a good star. This is a very, very advanced civilisation, and it has archives... and I wrote a book called Shikasta because somebody I knew, not from our culture, said that the three sacred books that have influenced our culture so much are the... the Bible – that is the Old Testament and the Apocrypha, which is... lumped them all together – the Koran. These great sacred books nobody said he ever read them one after another. They have become so hostile to each other, those religions, that they will... they will read the Jewish Bible, the... the New Testament, the Apocrypha, and the Koran, but they will never read them all because they... don't like each other.
But if, in fact, you read these books right through end to end, you will see that this is one religion in different stages. They've got the same ideas, characters, stories – you know the stories, our stories... our stories... are in the Koran, and so on. The Mary and Jesus are shared by all of them ... no, they're not... not in the Jewish one... but all these ideas are similar. And so when I read this... these books, I was quite astounded. It had never occurred to me to read them one after the other, but having done it, I began to see what was meant. And I thought, taking some ideas that are common to all of them, I wrote Shikasta. 

Now, that story had an amazing history, because it was seen as a kind of... a cosmology, a new religion... and actually I started a religion in America by accident. There was a whole group of people in... the middle of America set up a... Shikasta, commune waiting for the boss... God to turn up, and... and it was no good my writing to them and saying, look, you know, it's a story, I didn't mean it to create a religion. No, no, we understand you, you are just testing us. But I'm glad to hear that it has now dissolved. So that is what happened to Shikasta – it got... it had all the energy of these three great sacred religions behind it.
And then, having done that, you see, the other interesting thing was that I was then accused by the science fiction writers of writing sci-fi, and I quote, 'She is muscling in on our act'. It had never occurred to me that I was writing science fiction, but there we are. So what was I to do with this book? Now, this is what is interesting. The mere idea of the archives which could take anything, if you come to think of it, the archives were superior star culture can  take anything from all the inferior star cultures, so that I instantly was able to write something that I'd been trying to write for years.
You know, it's like The Fifth Child – I had wanted for years to write this story of completely different – whatever you want, it turned out to be zones when I wrote it – and how they affected each other, how they influenced each other.

So I wrote Marriages [Between Zones Three, Four and Five], which I personally think is one of my best books, and it... it's also got a life of its own. It then became a... opera with Philip Glass which was done in Germany and then in Chicago, and then nothing has happened – these things go in waves, nothing has happened to this book... this opera, since.
But this particular... it's completely unlike the other books in that series – the series is called... what is it called? It's ridiculous, it's... anyway, it's the Archives... of... Canopus... Canopus in Argos: Archives is the series. And so Marriages fitted into that as if I'd meant to do it, but I hadn't. But what happened was that a key had been turned somewhere in my unconscious or where... my over-conscious, my side-conscious... a key had been turned. Something that had been impossible for me to write for 10 years or more was perfectly easy; I just wrote it... in... just like that, and I adored writing it – which I must say something about that in a minute – I adored writing that book, and I... I still think it's one of my best books.
But why, you see... now we come to the explanation. Why did this happen? Why did this idea of the series set off a total of five books? Why did it? I don't know. We don't know about a lot of things. We don't know what goes on inside us, you know. That is the point, and we should remember it because it's all a great mystery, really... which brings me, at a somewhat surprising leap, to The Good Terrorist.

The Marriages was hanging around for 10 years – The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five, for 10 years at least, with me simply not being able to do it. The opposite happened with The Good Terrorist. A friend of ours, a friend of... a friend... we were talking on the telephone... People do not remember now the Harrods bombing which was... it was quite an event when it happened. There was an extremely messy incompetent bombing at Harrods. Now, we had known for many years a... a girl who had become from the moment she grew up as a kind of... she became Alice in The Good Terrorist; that is, she was simultaneously saying things like, 'Well, come the revolution, we're going to have to kill 40 million people. Or, come the revolution, we've got to...' this kind of talk... the revolutionary talk when while looking after cats, dogs, old people, whales, and anything else, this... which seems to me an absolute... the essence of revolutionary movements. They have this double thing going – one thing, they are bumping off 30,000 of the bourgeoisie without... with no more than a shrug of the shoulders, when with the other thing, what they're doing is looking after stray cats.
And... now this girl, whom we've known for many years, she was currently at that time looking after a squat of, in quotes, revolutionaries somewhere or other. And she was always feeding them, looking after them, earning money for them, nursing them, etc, etc, while of course being ready to bump off 10 million people, come the revolution. So we were laughing about the Harrods bombing, my friend and I, and we said, 'Who on earth could have done such a stupid bloody thing?' It was a lot of blood and mess... killing for nothing. Now, the IRA at that time were very happy to claim responsibility for anything like that, and they instantly said, 'No, it wasn't us', with the superior intimation that they would never be responsible for anything as messy as that. I mean, if they were going to do a Harrods bombing, they would do it properly. So anyways, we said, 'I'll tell you who did it – Alice did it. Alice! Of course! Who else? Who else would do anything as stupid and incompetent and messy as that?'
And I put the phone down and I thought, my God, if there was ever a story, it's this one. So I started. Now, whereas I'd hung around for Marriage... Marriages for 10 years, or for The Fifth Child for God knows how long, I simply went to my typewriter and started to write The Good Terrorist with no interval at all. Why? I don't know why. It's just a very strange business, the whole thing ... the time a book takes, how long you have to think about a book, the depth about which you have to think about this book, how... what kind of level are you thinking about this book. I would say that Marriages goes as deep as I'm capable of going as a writer. The Good Terrorist I would say is fairly surface – I have to think about ... I was a communist at one point, I know all about communist groups, left-wing groups, all of that. The language is very similar to terrorist groups, which... I think I'm going to mention something rather interesting about The Good Terrorist.

I had an enormous number of letters about The Good Terrorist as soon as it was published. The first was from the Red Brigades in Italy. I don't know if people remember the Red Brigade? They were a terrorist group or movement. They were very, very violent and very bloody and ruthless. And the letter I got said, 'I was a member of the Red Brigade' – but he left for some reason. He said, 'Everybody I was working with is dead or in prison, and I would be one or the other by now'. He said, 'I don't know if you realise this', said this man, 'but in The Good Terrorist what you described was what the Red Brigades were like before they became serious. They were just like that, they were messy and silly and amateur, and then they became...' And then he said this, 'The language took them over' – and I've never forgotten that – he said, 'The language took them over, and then they became the hard-line killers that they were'. Now, the language as... it's in a thousand books – it's all this stuff about, come the revolution we're going to kill a million people, this kind of thing, and the language took them over.
But now, you see, if you think about it, many different clubs or groups or classes have their own language. I mean, you know, the upper class, for example, are always to create a... a language that no one else can copy, and other groups like the... the groups in East London now, for example, they create languages. Or certain groups of young people create languages which no one else is supposed to understand. And then of course you have to ask, or at least I certainly do, what effect does this language have on them? Because some of these languages are extremely crude and brutal – it can't be that they have no effect at all, is my question... what kind of effect?
Another letter I got... oh, a series of letters from Ireland about The Good Terrorist... because at that time, you see, there were this kind of group, the house full of revolutionaries, America, various parts of Europe and here, and Ireland. In Ireland there would be IRA. This man said to me, 'Have you thought that if you are wearing the right uniform' – which of course was jeans or something – 'and using the right vocabulary, you can be in any one of these houses and you are a revolutionary? You never ever have to do another political act'. He said, 'There are people living in these houses in Ireland who have never been to anything more than a mild demonstration, but they're revolutionaries. And the point is that they have a status: if you're a revolutionary, you're not just a bank clerk or working in a shop, you are a revolutionary, and you never do anything to earn it except talk the language'. So that was some of the letters I got from The Good Terrorist.
And then I got a really funny one from... there was a time in Sri Lanka they had a – and I think they're still going – the rebels in Sri Lanka... she was captured by them. This woman wrote to me. She said she'd been captured by the rebels in Sri Lanka, and she said, 'They're all just as stupid as you say they are – with good wishes'. And oh, my God, no... I would love to have talked to her, but she didn't put her address on. So this was a missed opportunity, if there ever was one, because I would have loved to have known... six weeks is a long time to be captured by a terrorist group.
