dorothy.hodgkin

British pioneer of X-ray crystallography, Dorothy Hodgkin (1910-1994), is best known for her ground-breaking discovery of the structures of penicillin, insulin and vitamin B12. At age 18, she started studying chemistry at Somerville College, Oxford, then one of the University of Oxford colleges for women only. She also studied at the University of Cambridge under John Desmond Bernal, where she became aware of the potential of X-ray crystallography to determine the structure of proteins. Together with Sydney Brenner, Jack Dunitz, Leslie Orgel, and Beryl Oughton, she was one of the first people in April 1953 to see the model of the structure of DNA, constructed by Francis Crick and James Watson. She was awarded the 1964 Nobel Prize in Chemistry and is also known for her peace work with organisations such as Science for Peace and the Medical Aid Committee for Vietnam.     All recorded material copyright of The Biochemical Society.

Well, I really started chemistry, of course in a little class in England, in the course where the children were introduced to chemistry... to one science a term and chemistry was the first one, and it began with a session in which we grew crystals, and I just liked doing this ever afterwards. The... our kind of operations followed from that, where I set up a lab at home where I could grow crystals in, just with a certain amount of glass apparatus and crystals bought from the chemist, who didn't seem to have any particular rules about what he shouldn't spend... allow 10-year-old children to have. And, and from this time forward in Sudan, our parents were working... my father actually was the Director of Education at the time, so I went there and started the medical school amongst other projects. We had the 12 first students to tea on the lawn in our house, and we children carried round cakes for them, and one of them asked me, why were his fingers so yellow, but I hadn't unfortunately done the organic chemistry which would have told me the correct answer, at that stage so I had to be told that. The... that class was a very distinguished class, one member of whom became the first Minister for Health when they set up the independent country of the Sudan.
[Q] Was your father interested in chemistry or science particularly?
No, not at all, not at all. He thought it rather a pity that I wanted to do it. My mother was more sympathetic and more actually interested. She was a really good botanist herself, and... and a lot of the time, our time in Sudan, I used to go around with her, helping her collect flowers, and then she would spend days drawing them very carefully to illustrate the flora of the Sudan.


One day she took us to see the Wellcome Laboratories, which we started talking about a moment ago, and these were at that time just housed in a few of the rooms of the Gordon College; they had built a lab of their own. And at the time we went in, the morning we went in, there were two expeditions coming in from the country. One was a medical one dealing with sleeping sickness, and they had a terrible number of photographs of the condition of the people there, which was very heartbreaking. The other expedition was a geological one, and they had amongst other finds, three or four little pellets of gold which had been got from this expanse of streams, and then they showed us how it had been found by taking their three or four little pellets, and throwing them into a basin full of sand, and then moving it...
[Q] Rinsing the water away?
Rinsing the water off. So they... gradually the gold appeared, I'm glad to say. We were very excited by this operation, that we went back to look at the stream in our back garden, and could see that it had a sort of black colour sediment. So then we borrowed a basin from the kitchen and filled it with water, and a lot of the sediment, and, and shook it in the appropriate way until we had isolated a good lot of the sediment, which looked like shiny, crystalline material. And I thought that we'd better find out what it was, so the natural thing to do was to take it over to the Wellcome lab and asked to try... I thought just preliminary tests would probably show - I guessed it might be manganese dioxide, but it wasn't, and in fact, AF Joseph had to help me find it, because it contained a metal which was not...
[Q] He had a...
Was not in our school chemistry books. It was ilmenite, a mix, oxide of iron and titanium, much later found on the surface of the moon, which gave me a lot of pleasure.


My family had been distributed over a part of north of East Anglia from the early times mainly farming. And my father-in-law, who was an historian, who said he had come across a Danish Viking called Crowfoot, or nicknamed Crowfoot, whom he thought must have been the origin of our distribution.
[Q] Right.
But when my father and mother had three children, they thought it, they wouldn't want all the time to bring them up in Sudan; they would bring them up in their own homeland, and my father said, as he was in the education business and had to devise courses for children, he thought they should go to the schools at Beccles countryside, which was then Sir John Leman School, a small country... I don't think it was classified as a grammar school, because it didn't in fact do Latin and Greek or anything like that, but it did introduce chemistry. It should have taught two science subjects, but a cut occurred just as I went there. We only had one term of physics before we lost physics for our whole, our whole world... but we had very good chemistry from our one science teacher, Christine Deeley.
[Q] Did that science teacher have an influence, presumably?
She had a great influence, especially on, on girls, because, in school, the general plan was that, was that the girls would all study domestic science and physiology, while the boys were studying pure science and chemistry. But if a girl was going to a university, or hoped to go to a university, she could do chemistry, and I think that I know several girls who were persuaded by Christine Deeley to do chemistry.
[Q] Take that course?
Yes. My year, there were two of us who did chemistry with the boys, and one other girl who was very good, Norah Putey, and myself, and we, we enjoyed ourselves well enough.

 

My father and mother came back after the end of the war and looked for a house that we could call our own. And we found...
[Q] This was 1918 / 1919?
It was 1918.
[Q] 1918.
And they found a very nice house called the Old House Geldeston in a village three miles across Waveney from Beccles and they also found a good local secondary school there, the Sir John Leman school. It was founded partly taking over an old foundation which it used to give itself a name. And you could bicycle to school quite easily from our home to Beccles. Now they were still a bit torn because my mother liked very much living with my father in Sudan and was very much interested in various Sudanese customs and textiles that they made and so she didn’t want to be looking after four children in Beccles the whole time. So... but still, we managed. Usually she would come for most of the year to live with us in Geldeston and then perhaps one term she would let us lodge with friends in Beccles, we had some family of cousins there, and come back the rest of the year. So we had a rather rackety childhood in a way.
 

I meant...
[Q] You really meant to go to Chemistry?
I meant to, to study chemistry, and it was really intended by my family that, whatever happened, I should go to Oxford, which was where my father had been before me, because sadly he had no boys, so I was the best he could do... to manage.
[Q] Now, where there any difficulties in getting into Oxford from that school, I can imagine some?
Yes, then we decided to... after I'd taken school certificate and got exemption from London, matriculation for the subjects we took, we went over to Oxford, to the staff at Somerville, to ask what I had to do to do chemistry, and we found I wasn't qualified to come to Oxford at all, because, at that time, I had to have done Latin, which I had not done, and a second science, which I had not done; so I spent a year getting these extra qualifications before I tried the college scholarship exam.
[Q] But that went all right?
That went, that went all right. As, as my very, very old science tutor at Somerville said, my knowledge of the second science was a bit weak.
[Q] That was presumably physics, was it?
No, it wasn't. That was the awful thing. It should have been physics, according to the fine print of the register for the examination regulations. It was in fact botany, because botany I could get a certain amount of help with from a friend of my mother's who lived near us. So there it was.
 

He was supposed to retire from Sudan in 1926 which was rather early it seems, but this was because it was deemed an unsatisfactory kind of climate for Brits to stay too long in, so he came home in '26 and then he really wanted a job still, and he cast around. The job he got... that he got offered was the director of the British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem, and this pleased him a great deal because he had had a scholarship when young to work in the Middle East on Byzantine churches and then, in 1926, it was obvious he could take up that work that happened long ago again. The British school had one disadvantage which was that it was a very poor institution so that, if one wanted to do serious work, one had to join or get help from some more wealthy institution. And he was very lucky because it so happened that Yale University Department of Divinity had a professor, Professor Bacon, who had the idea that it would be very useful for the education of theological students that they should spend some time in Palestine, and perhaps doing work there on Byzantine archaeology, which was what he was most concerned at would be worthwhile in relation to their work later as Christian priests. So they gave a sum to my father to run a small expedition in Jerash, which is a very beautiful ruined town in trans-Jordan, in which most of the architecture is Hellenic, but had quite a lot of early Byzantine churches as well. And the year that I went with them to trans-Jordan our main finds were the floor plans of a number of 6th to 9th century Byzantine churches, some of which had very beautiful mosaic pavements. I was sent to record these mosaic pavements as the so far free of all obligations individual on the expedition. And I did paintings of them and I sort of... rough kind of drawing in which I made the tesserae about 1 centimetres square so they were roughly to scale, and this method had been used by quite a number of people before, but it’s rather like the scientific story: it’s faded out now because people are so much better at colour photography, you don’t need to have a hard working hack drawing things out.
[Q] This is your drawing here I think?
Yes. The drawings I made to record what the expedition had been involved in are... two of them are left at Yale University because of the outlay of funds on this expedition. So when I first went to America, I went to Yale to look secretly at what they’d done with my drawings. I found that in fact they were put away in a drawer not seen by anybody at the moment, but that’s only too often the case.
 
 

My husband was Thomas Hodgkin who belongs to the same family as Alan Hodgkin. They are both grandsons of Thomas Hodgkin, the Quaker historian who wrote on Italy and her invaders. Thomas’s father was Robin Hodgkin who went to Oxford University and became a historian of the Anglo-Saxons so he wrote a long book on the history of the early Anglo-Saxons. Alan’s father was George Hodgkin who, after the First World War, wanted to go and do relief work in the East and he unfortunately died of... of typhoid I think in Beirut, in Baghdad, at the end of the First World War, leaving his mother with three little children to bring up.
 

[Q] So tell us about Margery Fry.
Margery Fry was principal of Somerville College when I was an undergraduate, and so I got to know her well then. But by the end of the 1930s, she had retired from Somerville and was working mostly at Problems of Prisoners in her home in London. She threw out an invitation to me, as she did to rather many of her past Somervillians, to stay in London if ever I wanted time there with her. And so, when I got an offer from WH Bragg to photograph insulin crystals on the big x-ray tube with the Royal Institution, I made a little plan to go up and photograph them for about a fortnight with the help of people in the Royal Institution at that time, and I stayed with Margery.
Of course, not only myself was staying with Margery but two other people. One was Pamela Nicholson, who was the daughter of Dorothy Wrinch, and this was because her mother had gone to conferences in Austria and school had just finished and Margery was looking after her for the vacation. And so, I could help in with that operation.
And then the other one was Thomas Hodgkin who had had a job in Palestine in the British administration there which he liked very much. But then there came the trouble with the Jewish immigration, the Arab uprising, and he started visiting prisons in Jerusalem where, of course, there were both Jewish and Arab prisoners, and generally getting very much against what the government was doing, which was the usual thing of burning down houses of people involved in rioting and so on. So he resigned from his job and was thrown out of the country and... into Syria and went on an exciting journey across Lebanon to Beirut and there stayed with the - in great comfort - with the British consul there who was one of his father’s own pupils.
[Q] This would have been about 1920?
This was in 1936.
[Q] 1936.
And so I found him in 1937 when he moved from Lebanon to Margery in London and his family all around were concerned with getting him another job. At the time that I was with him at Margery’s, he was trying to be a school master and doing practice teaching at Marylebone Grammar School, which he hated because he had no... he was no good at disciplining the children and they just ran rings around him all the time. So... but later on, in the same year, he was... AD Lindsay, Master of Balliol where he had been at Oxford, suggested that he should try adult education and this he found much more to his liking. He got a job with the Friend’s Social Service council in West Cumberland lecturing to unemployed miners, and I just got to know him while we were both staying with Margery.  And then I went up to see him in West Cumberland and he came down to Oxford to lecture at summer schools, and so we very rapidly decided we liked... we would marry while... and we spent that summer visiting his parents and my parents and being properly introduced and planned to have the wedding in December directly after the scholarship exams had finished, which was the time most Oxford dons tended to choose, or many did. His father and mother had been married in December, I don’t know which year, so we were married on December 16, 1937.
 

I have three children. The first was born in December 1938. That was Luke. Then the usual way, we thought we ought to have another one and the war, as you know, at that moment was not doing anything, it was being very quiet, so we sort of quickly put in for another child which was, who was Elizabeth, born in 1941. And then we stopped for the time being until the end of the war when we gave ourselves our third child in 1946, Toby.
[Q] Now during much of your research, Dorothy, you've actually had a family and you had to fit bringing up a family with your research, and the thinking and the experimental demands that it can make. Thinking back, were there particular problems? 
 Well, there were, but they were partly by not being at all well after the birth of Luke and ending up with getting rheumatoid arthritis which I have to this day. But the work wasn't so bad. In fact, I was in rather a good state by then because I already had research students so that I could just tell them what to do and know that they were going on nicely in the lab, till I could come in and look at it again.


About mid-way through my school career, when I was about 14, my distant cousin, Bobby Harrington as we called him in those days, isolated thyroxine and got into the newspapers. So my mother said, 'Would you like to study something like biochemistry?' So I said 'Oh, yes'. And she wrote and asked Bobby Harrington what I should do in this case, and he advised the reading of this nice, small textbook, Fundamentals of Biochemistry by DS Parsons, which was published about 1921, and this is the second edition.
 

Here there's a description of the isolation of insulin is given.
[Q] It's actually in the book, is it?
Yes, it's in the book. Here, 'lastly, and most important of all, we have what is called pancreatic diabetes'. And this goes on... isolation of a hormone.
[Q] So that book had a definite influence on you?
Yes.
[Q] So did you meet... you called him Bobby Harrington... that meant that you must have met him and known him?
Oh, that was just what his family name was. Later on, when I met him, he was already Sir Charles Harrington, and very distinguished, but in these days he wasn't.
[Q] Did he have any other influence on you?
Yes, he did, because later he worked on insulin himself and...
[Q] He did.
And I went to consult him when I became interested in working on insulin. Actually, he said, 'Why work on insulin? It isn't really a proper protein. It hasn't got any... sugar attached to it at all'. In that sense it's true, but he regarded that as necessary for the...
[Q] Definition?
Protein activity. He suggested instead that we try to work on lactoglobulin, which he had some in his lab, which Dr Kekwick was working on. So he gave some to me to take back to Oxford, and Dennis Riley, who was working with me at the time as my first research student, took very beautiful photographs.
 

These were the Christmas lectures he gave for children, in, I think, about 1924 or 1925, and, again, it's my mother's influence; she thought they sounded interesting and bought them for me for a Christmas present. So I was, I was very much interested in that. When I got to Oxford, I found that I couldn't, in fact, start to go to courses by  the x-ray crystallography because there was no crystallography, x-ray crystallography taught, and nor could I go to biochemistry, because the biochemistry lab was just being built. It was a gift from the Rockefeller Foundation, and was looked after by Sir Archibald Garrod, who was the just-retiring Regis Professor of Medicine. And he was a friend of my father's, rather luckily, because his daughter was a pre-historian, an archaeologist and dug caves in Palestine, and so they suggested that I should go around and see Archibald Garrod, and so I had a lovely morning being shown over the new, not-yet-used, biochemistry lab, and told stories of what Archibald Garrod himself had worked on. And this, of course, is a fascinating subject, which is well known now, on inborn errors of metabolism. When I went to Cambridge later, to which he retired, I borrowed his book and read it, and I, I still remember some of it, which features the discovery of pink teeth in a certain family he met in the course of his medical work. And this was through the metabolism of the porphyrins having gone astray, and the one... the isomer was deposited in the teeth, was one in which the side-chains were differently arranged from all of the rest.
[Q] And it coloured the teeth?
It happened... it happened with haemoglobin. And actually, it happened again. I'd come across this fact from Robinson's lectures. Robinson had come to us as a new, very famous inorganic chemistry professor at Oxford during the time I was an undergraduate, and I remember his lectures on the porphyrins, particularly on the discovery of the structure of haematoporphyrin being the apex of the five-membered rings of acetyl, propionyl, residues alternately sort of long-short, long-short, long-short, long-short, is one, and then the different varieties of the permutations of these spaces: long-short, long-short, long-short, short-long, which is the haemoglobin one. And Robinson had amused himself giving the orders of these residues and saying why this odd one had occurred in pink teeth, but leaving the haemoglobin, the actual one, until the last. So one was waiting all the time to know what haemoglobin was like.

Oxford University had, like many universities in that period, a crystallography department, which was part of the mineralogy department, and was really only concerned with the external form of crystals. It, I can't say it was very flourishing as a department. I know it best from reading the history of the period, it was after the women's colleges were beginning, when Henry Miers was a student of the classics, as many scientists were at that time, and, but also wanted to read, study crystal, crystal growth and become very much interested in it, and he used to go to the professor of crystallography's lectures, which happened on Saturday morning,  because the professor of crystallography was Story-Maskelyne, who doubled, or perhaps one should say tripled, his occupations with being a Liberal Member of Parliament for Luton and head of the mineral collection in the South Kensington Museum, and on Saturday mornings, his lectures were attended by, by only Henry Miers and by, I think his name was Henry Swiss, who was a tutor in mathematics at Baliol at the time, was also interested in the subject. And... but they were, they really had very interesting discussions.
Soon after the time that the theory of space groups had been developed by three different authors, they discussed these and then had a discussion on it at the British Association afterwards. Well, I was caught up in this because one of Henry Miers's best pupils was called - I'm being slightly held up at the moment - Barker - I remember his name - and he, he went to... was sent by Henry Miers to Russia, to work with Federov, who was one of those who had found the space groups. And Barker gave a course of lectures in Oxford at the time I was an undergraduate, and I, of course, set out bravely to go to them in my first term. Barker was a very nice individual by all accounts, and was, in fact, bursar of Somerville and curator of the university chest at the same time. But he wrote a little letter to me advising me not to take his course in my first year, but to get through the preliminaries that I had to first, and then to take it as an extra later on. And he died in my... at about the middle of this time, so I was always really very glad that I had taken even a little bit in my first year.
But he had a particular research assistant who had in fact been picked up by Henry Miers with a girl called Polly Porter, whose parents did a lot of travelling abroad, and she had spent some time in Russia, and then Rome, and she came to Oxford with her little collection of marbles that she had picked up in Rome, and to identify them by the mineral specimens in the museum, and Henry Miers saw her and said, wouldn't you like to come and grow some crystals yourself? And she said, oh, yes. So he took her in and he explained, they hadn't really money for doing this research, but he just encouraged anybody who felt they wanted to do some, and made it possible for them to do a little. And Polly, by the time I was there, had a proper grant, which was really organised by Barker, who by that time was the head of the [unclear] crystallography, because Henry Miers himself had gone to Manchester as vice-chancellor. And Manchester, I'm glad to say, made him professor of crystallography as well.
 

I really thought of... what should I do for research? And it was suggested that I should go and work with somebody like the Braggs in London. But Freddie Brewer, who was my tutor, said, you don't need to go to another university, we've just decided to set up a department here. And this decision was with the old professor who had succeeded Miers, would himself make an x-ray tube. And they had appointed a young man, too, who had just taken a good degree and was interested to work with the X-ray tube and begin to do some X-ray crystallography. And this young man was Tiny, Tim Powell. And so I could go and be Tiny's first student. And so I thought, well why not, so I did that.
[Q] That was a thallium compound?
It was thallium dimethyl halides was the subject we worked on, which was really very interesting.
[Q] It's a metal-carbon polymer, wasn't it? Very unexpected.
Yes, yes.
[Q] That was an interesting... it must have given you quite a thrill to get into that work?
Yes. I grew quite beautiful crystals of this thallium compound, and drew them accurately and...
[Q] Took X-ray photographs?
Gave X-ray photographs, which weren't very good X-ray photographs, because we only had a rather horrible cylindrical camera devised by Hilgers.
[Q] Oh, really?
Yes. And Tiny didn't somehow know anything about oscillation photographs, which as I discovered next year when I moved over to Cambridge it was really just absolutely necessary.
 

I came to the conclusion, I spent so much time making the X-ray tube at Oxford work, it would be better to go  somewhere else where they had all the apparatus and knew more what to do than Tiny and Professor Bowman at that moment, and so I reverted to these advisers who suggested WH Bragg, and there was one other who was Lowry, Professor of Physical Chemistry in Cambridge, who said, we have a very good young man here, Bernal, who we've just appointed to start X-ray analysis going in Cambridge; why not send her here? And, the moment this idea floated round, it somehow took, because Bernal at that moment published the first notes of his measurements of the sterols, on a group of sterols, and they were very revolutionary, and obviously a biochemical subject of great interest, which...
[Q] Yes. It's also chemically very difficult?
Yes. So, so I went to Cambridge, and took photographs for Bernal on all the different things that came in, which were really all the things that the serious chemists, the organic chemists, were working on at the moment, such as the different derivatives of the sterols, and the sex hormones, testosterone, oestrone, and vitamin B1, hypochlorite, and I took the X-ray photographs and measured the densities of the crystals and determined the molecular weights. And, but all that I was thinking, really, was to settle down and work on one of these compounds, but I never did get round to doing it in Cambridge. But when I got offered an appointment at Oxford, at Somerville College, to do teaching and some research, I thought I will take some of Bernal's crystals with me, and work on one of them. It was a lucky moment in history, because, just at that moment, Patterson had discovered the Patterson [map] and published it, so there was a way to begin to look at crystals and find out something about them which hadn't been possible before. And I, I took cholesterol iodide with me in one bottle, and cholesterol bromide and chloride, because, well, the... it seemed desirable to have a heavy atom somewhere in the crystal to provide guidance to the phase constance of the structure factors.
 

Of course, the most exciting things were the most difficult to work on. And halfway through my expected time at Cambridge, a specimen of pepsin came in, pepsin crystals, very beautiful crystals, from Uppsala in Sweden. They had been made by John Philpot, who was an Oxford chemist-cum-biochemist, that is to say, he wanted to read biology - poor young man - when he came up to the university, but Balliol had a very powerful chemistry tutor, who was Harold Hartley, who insisted he would, it was necessary for him to read chemistry first. But then he did get an appointment in the biochemistry lab, and could begin biochemistry, and he began by going to Scandinavia, and learning how to purify proteins with Tilselius. Well, what came out of this was pepsin, which was seen by another Cambridge friend of Bernal's, on his holiday journeys, one summer these beautiful crystals that John had made were... John was just taking out of the fridge after a holiday during which he had left them growing, and then Glenn Millikan said, well, I know a man in Cambridge who would give his eyes for those crystals. And John said, really friendly-like, well, have a tubeful, and so he put them in his shirt pocket and took them back...
[Q] And they survived?
And they survived in their mother liquor, which is the important part, scientifically, of the story.
[Q] And Bernal looked at those crystals?
He looked at those crystals, and, of course, he immediately wanted to take an X-ray photograph of them, so he raked one out of the tube with a needle onto the glass slide, and then set about mounting it on a glass fibre, which was his usual technique for arranging crystals for X-ray photography. He was a bit worried by it looking a bit shrivelled as it lay there, but he just tried the experiment of passing X-rays through it, and got almost nothing. He decided something must be wrong, and something almost had certainly... the water surrounding, the crystal had no longer water surrounding it, so he had working in the, amongst his research students, one research student, Helen Megaw, who was working on heavy water, and she was, put heavy water in lindemann glass tubes and grow a crystal inside by freezing it, and then photograph it, surrounded by the glass tube. So he borrowed some of her tubes and picked a crystal from the preparation he brought with... he got from John Philpot in its mother liquor into the glass, into the lindemann glass tube, and then sealed it up, and when he took the next photograph, it was full of reflections, rather large, blotchy reflections. I can remember it quite well, which is perhaps something, because it unfortunately seems to have disappeared since.
 

I had been working on some papers to do with my life, and I came upon the papers that... the letter which said what was the matter with me. I had been suffering from rheumatism, sort of rheumaticky pains lately, and my parents, who had just come back from the Sudan, wanted me to see a doctor friend of theirs in London, and they made an appointment for me to do it.
There follows a little letter I wrote to... after I came back, of course, I took the next photographs, after the first one, because I was generally employed taking photographs for Bernal, but there was a little letter which I have got... which Bernal had kept, and which was passed on to me. At his death, one has the right to destroy one's own letters, but I've kept it just saying that Byam thinks I should take a month off work, but, of course, I'm not going to do that. I'll certainly stay with pepsin for the next few weeks, and then we'll have a month off in the summer holidays proper. So I know, so I know what happened to him, and that was the beginning of pepsin.
 

Bernal had been... had moved from Cambridge to being professor at Birkbeck in London and he had been called up by the... I can't remember which ministry it was, anyway it was Anderson, to advise about air raid precautions at Amersham quite near Oxford. And after a time he had called up his research student, Harry, whom he had given to me in the interval, to work on air raid precautions too. Harry worked on sterols which had to begin with on cholesterol iodide and then before the research was finished or his DPhil completed, he went to work with Bernal on the air raid precautions problem and he did the remaining calculations of cholesterol iodide in the train from... using just log books and so on that he carried with him.
 

At the time that Harry was called up, the general plan was in order, that there were, there was a department which decided how to dispose of the scientific force in the country so they... I got a letter from, what was it called, I forget, anyway...
[Q] Ministry of Defence... Ministry of War... War Department?
Yes, offering me a job useful in war which from what I sort of saw of it, guessed that it was probably dealing with defence against chemical warfare. Mercifully we hadn't any chemical warfare. I shouldn't have really done anything useful if I'd done that, but in fact I didn't much like the idea of going away from Oxford and what should I do with Lukey and so on. So I went around to Hinshelwood who was the formal head of my department in the museum at that moment and asked his advice and he said, oh no I shouldn't take that if I were you, I think you're probably better working here. And he knew I was working on penicillin so I felt quite okay.
 

The amusing thing about insulin was, I went to Oxford because I had been given an actual college appointment involving organising chemistry teaching in the college in term-time until the beginning of October. I meant to arrange... I would have a number of pupils to take care of, and so on, and I thought I would have to put off doing much research at all, but I would just be able to do a little, and I would perhaps begin working on one of the cells and see if I could find out more in detail about the molecule.
But, before I really got going, Robinson, who was very much interested in the whole project of X-ray analysis, offered me a little tube of insulin crystals that he had been given by Boots Pure Drug Company, the first to be made by a new method of crystallisation of insulin that DA Scott had discovered in Canada. And, of course, I couldn't resist them. They, this was adding zinc to them, and... it, he gave me, he had 10 mg in his tube, so I decided what I should have to do. First, was to grow them rather larger, because his crystals were really microcrystalline. And I didn't get any really good ones to try X-ray photography on until the new year, with one thing and another happening during the term.
 

Of course Bernal's views of crystals that he first photographed was that the molecular structure must be long and thin, and...
[Q] And this he deduced simply from the character of the crystal cell?
Yes, the character of the crystal cell, and the optics, the direction of the optic axes. Who from that point the chemists, particularly Rosenheim and King, who had been interested in his work, took a new look at all the chemical evidence, and they particularly were working on the hydrogenation of the sterols to give hydrocarbons, of which... amongst which one was chrysene, and he thought there might be sterol skeletons and might really be something like chrysene with a long chain attached to it. That wasn't right, but it was along the right idea. We could find that, eventually when we worked on cholesterol... iodines, is it?
[Q] This is it here.
But the sterol rings are similar to pycene ring systems. They're shown by this model and we could see, get a projection of the structure down this short axis easily from the reflections we measured. And then, with considerable difficulty, the three-dimensional electron density by calculations done at right angles, selected lines through the apparent atomic positions. And this work was really done by Bernal's research students at Birkbeck. Harry Carlyle, when he came to Oxford to work with me, Bernal himself was called away to work on air raid precautions the moment the war began, and he sent more apparatus, two X-ray tubes, and our apparatus to Oxford, together with research students. Harry Carlyle, who was an 1851 scholar from India, from Lucknow in India, and Katie Dornberger, who had already taken her doctor's degree in Vienna, but had just begun to work with Goldschmidt, a very well-known German X-ray crystallographer, who was Jewish, and they were just warned to escape from their lab, so Goldschmidt went to Norway, to Oslo, where he also held a  professorship, and Katie came straight across to Bernal's lab, and she worked for some time on a small research job, and then she came over and did calculations with me on insulin. So she was very useful to me.
 

The work on penicillin was really quite widely known about in Oxford, that Florey and Chain had the idea of working on antibiotic substances, and one of them was penicillin, and this looked very promising. I... I did go to one lecture, I think by Professor Gardner, in the very early stages of the attempt to isolate penicillin. This was given to the  [unclear] and that in turn lead to the isolation of a barium salt which wouldn't crystallise, but which had penicillin activity.
I was very lucky that I came into it really through meeting Ernst Chain in the... outside the path lab in South Parks Road in a very excited state just after the morning when they had done some most successful animal experiment in which they gave a streptococcal infection to eight mice, and four of these mice they gave penicillin, and four not, and all the ones who were given penicillin lived, and the others died. Norman Heatley stayed up that night with them, with the mice, looking after them so he may have told you this story from a closer observer.
Well, Ernst just said, 'We've found something really important that does really cure people' and he also said, 'And we'll... we'll soon be able to get it out, of course, and when we do, there'll... there'll be some crystals for you', because he knew that what I was very keen on having at the moment was the crystal to work on, about which I knew nothing, and so that I could see how far I could push the method, but not anything too complicated because that would take too long and the calculations took in any case rather longer than we at that moment hoped that... I joined in in their research, which was the ordinary organic chemist's kind of trying to break the molecule into pieces which were more easily recognisable, and the next research student that I had was Barbara Low.
One of my Somerville students helped with the practical work required taking X-ray photographs, and measuring the density and the unit cell sizes of the molecules present in the different breakdown products. We first examined penicillamine, which was the first of them, and then went on to various others, and one that was most helpful was penicillaminic acid. This one gave very nice beautiful crystals including a copper salt, and took measurements of it in the copper salt. And I tried, as usual, to make up a formula for it, and discovered very rapidly that I couldn't do it, because it appeared to have too many oxygen atoms to be attached to the crystals in a skeleton there. I went over to the DP, and I said to Norman Baker... Wilson Baker, as I was giving him the results, 'I suppose you know you can't write a structural formula for this compound?' He said, 'Oh no, can't you? No, I have been suspecting this for quite a time'. And the answer was that it contained sulphur instead of two of the oxygens, and this had been missed in the combustion analysis, which is an old phenomenon which happens from time to time - it happened to cystine, for example, in its early history. So then, penicillin, from that moment, had a sulphur in the formula, and became more and more understandable.
 

I started working in, with the, with Ernst and Norman Heatley, and Edward Abraham and the rest of them as soon as they began.
[Q] Right.
Of course, they were at that time only working on trying to degrade the molecule and get bits out of it that they could think how they should be put together in, sort of, the usual chemists' way, and we were just helping them find what these bits were by just making cell dimension measurements and... and density measurements and finally, essentially, the molecular weights. And the important point was reached somewhere, I think, in '43, about, where we knew, essentially, what both halves of the molecule were - the penicillamine half with the amino acid, penicillamine, and the sulphur atom then attached, and the... making the thiazolidine ring system, and then the other half, which, effectively, was aldehyde. But they're drawn out there, two halves of them, if you wanted, you know. And, once you had these two halves of the molecule, you just could make up chemical structures for the whole of penicillin.
[Q] And this is on page 310?  
And the two most obvious ones in my memory is that they were drawn out in our lab the same day, but I don't know who of the chemists regards themselves as most important for each, though I know that Robinson had the idea of the thiazolidine oxazolone, and once he got this idea, he never could think of the other idea, which was the beta-lactam idea. The beta-lactam was, in fact, drawn up by one of them. My memory was that it was probably Wilson Baker, but Edward Abraham's memory is that it was himself. And we just kept them both in mind, and the group here at Imperial College and around Heilbron drew up more complicated ones, which were called a trisactic one, and... and there was another, similar one because of the particular derivatives that had been obtained, it had three rings in them to begin with.
 

The next immediate thing was the actual crystallisation of penicillin itself, which made it unnecessary to try and work out the detailed structure of the separate...
[Q] Exercise?
And the, this was, the sodium salts were crystallised in the Squibb Institute, and I rang up Edward Abraham and said, make me some sodium salt quickly, and he said, oh, you don't need to make it, we've got buckets of it. We keep it in a desiccator. So we took the sodium salt, their sodium salt, out of the desiccator, and put a lump of it on a slide which I was taking up to the look at under the microscope. And it immediately took up water from the air and crystallised on the slide with the water of crystallisation. Well, that was, in fact, two-pentenyl penicillin, and it had a slightly complicated molecular molecule. The weight suggested there were two molecules in each cell and a certain amount of water. And I think, from observations since, made by our people in other labs, that, in fact, if it had been crystallised from acetone, it might have been as simple as benzylpenicillin. But at least we knew that the benzylpenicillin was a new molecule, equals two molecules that we could use, and obviously much better for us. So I asked Henry Dale whether he'd get... I think he offered to get some for me from, from America and he did in fact get about 10 mg from Merck, and this... Kathleen Lonsdale brought over from London by hand, and I remember, sort of immediately, it came in a little tube. I took some out of it to crystallise, to try to recrystallise, because the crystals were quite small. And I had a telegramme from them in America saying, ‘Dissolve in minimum - emphasise the minimum...’ and I think, I forget what it was actually in, but it's in the book, and then add dropwise until crystals start to grow. So I carried out this process of dissolving it in two drops of ethyl acetate and having the precipitant. And Kathleen and I were just walking at the bottom of the little... talking at the bottom of the little ladder in the X-ray room, while I had this up top on the shelf above, so we left this there while we were talking, and then we saw that the crystals grew quite nicely in layers. And after a time they didn't grow any more, so I then took out the largest that I could see, and put it on the X-ray tube, and we took the first photographs. And they looked to us perfectly good enough to work on. So, in fact, I worked on those crystals, and particularly on the one I had first picked out. I just took the whole set of Wiessenberg photographs of it for the three-dimensional data, and that... the whole of the structure practically came out of that one crystal.


I mean, the thing we were wanting to do was to jump to the actual structure straight away from the crystal. And we were, when we had finished photographing this crystal, of course we had all the data that there was, but later on the same year, I think, this photography of the first sodium salt took place in February and I think it was somewhere about April that the potassium and rubidium salts were made for us by ICI, and sent also. And we photographed the whole of them also, and we built three-dimensional data from scratch.
[Q] And the significance of those, if they were going to help solve the phase problem and give you the electron density calculations in an interpretable distribution?
Yes, yes. In fact, of course, the three salts were not isomorphous. The potassium and rubidium salts were, and then the sodium salt was monoclinic, with a smaller unicell. And that determined a different course of action in its solution, but the obvious thing was to do Patterson's on all three, which we could calculate ourselves if we just did the two-dimensional ones, and place the heavy atoms, which we did for the potassium and rubidium, but not for the sodium ones from... I know... actually, if we'd held it all in our hands all the time, we probably should have, because the later potassium and rubidium salt positions. But, in fact, wanting to go faster to an actual analysis, I decided it would be good to use the X-ray microscope, and Charles Bunn had built one in his spare time in Alkali Division, Northwich.
And we took the children to a farm in the country, in the Easter vacation, so that I could go over to Charles and work with him in the evenings, and look after the family for the rest of the day. It was a quite serious moment of the war, we used to sort of look out at... every night. On the one side it was Manchester and towns over that side were being bombed and going up in flames from time to another, while the other side would be Stoke doing the same. And Thomas would go out lecturing every now and again to one part or the other, and he was officially fire-watching for Stoke, the other side. Once I went in with him to his lectures, and a bomb fell very near us, and everyone in his lecture class just dived under the table for the next few minutes, then we rather sheepishly got out again when we were obviously safe. And I was always sorry we hadn't actually gone down and helped those who were digging for people out of where the bomb had come down, because it had come down on Bob Stross, a friend of Thomas's, and he was half buried in debris.
 

I mean, what we were working on at that moment was just putting the... getting the system working. I mean, the... one had to have something representing atoms, so he [Charles Bunn] had, in fact, circles of different size, and... which he photographed through the fly's eye spread of pinholes. And he had to check up what size corresponded to what kind of atom. But he managed, he did most, all of that, and I just... standing near really at that particular time, and seeing the first trials go on, testing out the distribution of atoms with the... through the pinholes array to get an array of intensities which should correspond to the projection down the B-axis of the structure as a whole.
I didn't get very... we didn't get very far with it then, and I went back to Oxford for the next term, and he always supposed he shouldn't really work at it, because he was working at whatever ICI had told him to do during his working hours, and he would just work at penicillin in the evening, until, mercifully... what was his name?  The head of ICI altogether? Lord... I don't remember.
[Q] The head of ICI?
Wasn't Sir Robert Vantage it was his brother, wasn't it? Came in Monday, and he noticed some papers lying about with penicillin written on them, and said to Charles, the others being about in the room, listening, 'Oh, I am glad you are working on this'. And after that, when I came back, I found that penicillin was properly stamped on all the bits of relevant paper. Job number whatever-it-was, I forget.
[Q] So how long did it take to get to the final solution?
Well, there was a long hold-up during the summer, where nothing much was really reached or done, and I went, unfortunately, into this stupid situation, I became pregnant and had a miscarriage, and didn't work then, longer.
When I got back to Oxford, I found a letter from Charles asking, for a little more information about my first observations, and particularly the optics of the sodium salt, so I sent him these. And after that, he made a whole plan of what the molecule was like, and... and started moving it about over the area, and getting more different pinhole effects, until he found one that seemed quite good. And we in the meantime had done, essentially, the same for the potassium and sodium salts... the potassium and rubidium salts. We had found the heavy atom positions, calculated the sign contribution, which didn't give us signs for all the array, but about half of it. Then we calculated the electron density maps of the potassium and rubidium salts, which we knew must be imperfect, because there were some terms left out.
Then Charles sent me the electron density map, which he had reached by his trial and error operation, and I drew it out to the same scale as the other ones, and... well, I meant to bring it with me, but couldn't find, couldn't find it in time, the two sheets: you just put together, put one on top of the other and move them one over one another to find which bits hang together, because the arrangement of the molecules are different. That's quite quickly done, I used to make people do it in, through an afternoon visiting the lab. And then you immediately can see, from the sort of group that fits together and constitutes one molecule, where the phenyl group must be, and where the thiazolidine group must be, and in between, presumably the oxazolone ring or the beta-lactam ring. So at first we postulated an oxazolone ring and calculated the next highest intensities and found their signs. Mostly, what we did was, after not much in the way of calculations, we had these structure factor graphs drawn out, and we just put the map of the atomic positions over the top, and calculated extremely roughly 20, 10, so on, what we thought the contribution to the three of the new terms, and so we found how the signs were changing. Then we calculated a new map with perhaps just five extra terms in it, and immediately we began to see that the atoms which were given the oxazolone position moved the ring, broke open, and the atoms moved into the beta-lactam position.
 

When we had reached this position, we believed the solution, and we went... I went up to London to a meeting with, it occurred, I think it occurred on the same day as the election, because Robinson said to me just before the meeting, 'Oh, of course, you'll be needed at the election, won't you? You won't be at that meeting in London?' I said, 'Oh no, I can vote before the first train goes to London', and after that he was quite pleased and went around telling everybody that, of course, they must come to the penicillin meeting, because the first train... you could vote before the first train left Oxford.
This was because we had these organisations to correlate the work done on penicillin. As soon as the first work started in Oxford, we were organised by the Ministry of Supplies. So all the observations we made were written up briefly and circulated to each other. And when Americans came in, and wanted of course to be an important part of the work, then a wider organisation was set up, pulling in the big America pharmaceutical companies, Merck and Squibb and the rest of it, and the same circulation of information took place all the time. And those things that were written then are really what were used to write up the...
[Q] Different papers?
Different papers, yes.
 

One of the important stages in penicillin, which was during that year, took place during the X-ray analysis group meeting. When we decided to let Charles Bunn work on the sodium salt with us, and brought him into the collaboration. But we also were very anxious to arrange for better computing, particularly of the three-dimensional data, because we thought from a three-dimensional Patterson we might be able to get the structure straight away. And Charles... this somewhat odd character, Comrie, who had a computing firm, came through, and he discussed what we needed, because he said, of course, if we had suggested we only needed to calculate certain lines in the density to get what we knew, but he said, if you had the whole three-dimensional map, it would, of course, be much easier to calculate that. So I said, 'Well, we'd much rather have the whole three-dimensional map'. So then they got £1000 from the MRC [Medical Research Council], which they always thought was much too expensive, to get the punch cards made to enable the three-dimensional series to be calculated.
[Q] Now, when was that, Dorothy? 
That was now getting on, when the X-ray analysis group was somewhere about April or thereabouts.
[Q] In '40...?
 '45
[Q] '45. Right.
Yes. So Comrie went ahead with his organisation making the punch cards necessary. So we thought that if we finish the structure by ordinary criteria, I mean, put in enough hours and the rest of it, by May 1945 when we had the three projections. And Charles, of course, separately refined the sodium salts, so he had comparable...
[Q] Detail?
... details agreeing with ours. Well, then we didn't, we really felt we knew the structure before the three-dimensional cards came into our hands at all, but it seemed a pity not to use them, so we thought the obvious thing was to calculate the three-dimensional electron density, and it would enable us to refine the structure a little, and also check it. So, if we wanted to, we did this by having two calculations carried out, and that's what I think you're remembering. If we had one calculation we believed in, in which the...
[Q] All the atoms were put in?
... all the atoms were put in, as we thought they were, and then a second calculation, in which the beta-lactam atoms were moved into positions more corresponding to the oxyacetylene ring. And from the results there was no doubt at all that it was the thiazolidine and beta-lactam ring. But we generally had the molecules, the structure, from the moment we had the three projections. But, on the other hand, the setting up of the three-dimensional model on glass plates, is also historic. Because, although people don't now always make these models of their simple molecules, they make them of their complicated ones.
 
 

Of course, there was awful difficulty and trouble about the writing up of penicillin, and partly because there was a good deal of disbelief about what was the structure of penicillin. But Robinson wrote... Robinson wrote the final paper on the structure, and Robinson does agree with the structure, although he never quite gave up the idea that it was really the oxazolone, and what one saw wasn't quite what he thought one should...
But after that, I was invited over to America - the war had ended - and the Rockerfeller Foundation paid for a fellowship for me to travel to different labs in America, because he thought it good for my education that I should know how far people had got in other places, and also, I could tell people how far I'd got. And it was, I sort of believed in my model more than anything else in the world, pretty well, so I packed it in my suitcase - it took up about half of it, as you can see what it looks like now at Oxford in the Ashmolean. And when I was passing through customs, the officer said, 'Have you got only personal belongings in this suitcase, clothes and so on, I suppose?' and then I said, 'Actually, there are sort of scientific models'. So then he made me show him, you see, so I explained to him what it was, and he thought for a long time over it and then said, 'Well, it may seem very funny to you, but if we just write this down as scientific model, worth less than one dollar, we should get through all right'. So that's what we did.
And the first thing that happened to me, when I got back to Hans Clarke's house, was we met du Vigneaud there, sitting on the sofa. Now du Vigneaud had, as you probably know, worked up this preparation of the oxazolone structure, and shown that the product of this was a penicillin compound with the right activity and all the rest of it. So the first thing he said when he saw me was, 'Are you quite sure you know the structure of penicillin?' And it was quite sort of funny being met by this degree of disbelief at this moment.
 

I think I went to... to the States in '47, and in '47 I went to all the labs that mattered and that's when I went first straight to see Patterson.
[Q] Yes, of course.
And I found Patterson, not having a marvellous lab and a large research group, as you might expect, but all on his own... having a tutorial with two girls from Bryn Mawr College in the afternoon. He sent these two girls away while he said that he could talk for the afternoon with me, and I went through the whole analysis with him, and he was extremely pleased. But America was very mixed you see like that, to have their best crystallographer not really funded at all.
And I went on next to Harvard, and I lectured to, in a lecture room at MIT to pretty well everybody, it seemed, and Bob Woodward was there, and I went and had lunch with Bob Woodward afterwards. And Bob quite approved, because of course, beta-lactam was the structure that he had deduced from spectroscopic measurements, which we didn't necessarily believe in, that the spectroscopic measurements meant that, because our spectroscopist, Tommy Thomson, believed just opposite. But you probably might get a different picture of this part of the story from Rex Richards, because Rex was Tommy's research student at the time.
 
 

In the spring, there was to be a biochemical meeting in Oxford, and Lester Smith brought to this meeting his first preparation of crystalline B12 which had been published... crystallisation of it and so on... had been published, about a fortnight before, by Merck, who had named it B12.
[Q] It was called, also, the anti-pernicious factor?
Yes, that was the first thing, before it was actually isolated.
[Q] And you struck up a collaboration with Lester?
With Lester Smith, yes. He then encouraged me to take X-ray photographs of it, but that's not what he'd come over. He'd come over to get Spiller to measure the refractive indices because these were the only characteristics which Merck had given their crystals, which they could use for comparative purpose.
 

Lester Smith was also in contact with Alex Todd. I imagine Alex Todd was a consultant advising them what they should do. Lester Smith at that time used to collect all the evidence that anyone else had collected who was working on B12 from our labs, whether they were working together or separately, and send them all to a small Glaxo group, which included Todd and myself.
[Q] Who did the crystallisation of that, Dorothy that led to the X-ray work being done? Was that you, or Lester Smith?
Lester Smith did, really, because he crystallised it from water, and just crystallised by evaporation, just like that.
[Q] Very simple.
And when he brought this preparation in, I just took a few crystals out of it that weren't good enough really to photograph, and put them in a drop of water, and then very beautiful, small crystals came out at the edge of the drop. And from these, you could see that it was extremely pleochroic. And I said, I can't understand Merck not saying in this letter to Nature that this compound was pleochroic. I expect the truth was they hadn't, they didn't use a mineralogist's microscope, so they didn't have crossed nicols or anything like that.
[Q] They couldn't have avoided it, could they?
Yes. It's really very beautiful. And I thought that would mean there was something like porphyrin ring in the molecule.
[Q] Was it known to contain cobalt then?
No, we had learned about the cobalt about a fortnight afterwards. Dr McCray, who was a researcher at Glaxo rang me up during lunchtime at home, and I was very lucky because I wasn't always at home for lunch - that day I was taking [unclear] home to lunch - and he rang us up and told us there was cobalt in the vitamin. And he said quite straight out, 'There's a heavy atom for you - you can work on this'. And, well, we knew the molecular weight about then, and it seemed to us cobalt was not really heavy enough in relation to the structure, but we tried nevertheless. And that was our first and earliest trouble.
 

Those first maps were quick to get, because we used the punch card machine, and we got Comrie's best assistant, Betty Gissen, who was working in some statistics lab, in on calculating the map for us. First, was the Patterson, and that gave us the heavy atom co-ordinates, of course, and quite a lot else.
[Q] Yes.
And then, once you had the cobalt co-ordinates, you could calculate the phases from the cobalt positions alone, and those were the maps we spent most time trying to understand, because they were partly right and partly wrong.
 

The second crystal we tried to work on was selenium cyanide of vitamin B12, which Lester Smith prepared at our request, which had very beautiful sort of green/red pleochroism, and... but unfortunately the selenium atom, contrary to the expectations of the chemists, was directly attached to the cobalt and lay too close to it on a line of x = nought which meant that it only contributed to part of the structure factors.
However, we got the machine, the old punch card machine, very slowly but in time to calculate a three-dimensional electron density map in which we placed the moved atoms in this part of the structure and then we made it calculate another map with more of the atoms, used in phasing calculation. This was the one that was shown at Paris. Then this one, the chorrin ring itself, appeared and not as a porphyrin but with these two atoms, the ring directly in contact, and while this was happening to the selenium compound it was mostly being worked on by John Robertson. Crystals of the red fragment were got in Cambridge by a young Australian called Cannon, wasn't he?
[Q] Cannon is right.
Yes. And this was obviously the most urgent compound to be examined. We called it the red fragment. It consisted of the whole B12 molecule minus the known part which was the benzimidazole and phosphate intruder group, so that it was a smaller molecule to work on all together. And... but we did the same thing with it and we found the cobalt positions with the Patterson's, calculated three-dimensional maps with just the cobalt phasing and then we placed what atoms we could from this map, which in fact were about 26. Now, at that stage our career was really saved because it would have taken us a long time to calculate the structure factors in three dimensions of the 26 atoms that we thought we knew at that stage and get to the next stage and so on. But at that stage Ken Trueblood walked into the lab...
[Q] Ken Trueblood was from?
... with his mother from UCLA. He had been, when I was visiting America the year or two before, in Pauling's lab and he had calculated a three-dimensional electron density map. Then, with their punched card set up which they had made the year or two before, it was shown off as a particularly beautiful object because they'd coloured the atoms differently according to their chemical nature, oxygen, nitrogen, carbon and so on, and of course they'd done the drawing particularly well. But by this time he'd given up the idea of using punched cards and the methods that had been useful for threonine and made friends with a machine, a new electronic machine which was in the hands of the Department of Agriculture. It was called SWAC, which SWAC stood for South Western Agricultural Computer, and he said if we would like it, he would [unclear] the programmes necessary and he would put some of our calculations on it free and gratis and for nothing and he would just do them and send them to us to look at and that seemed too good an offer to miss.
Actually, we were slightly cagey. We hadn't the B12 calculations quite ready to give over but we had what should have been the final map for calciferol ready and so we gave that to him to do. When he got that perfectly right we thought he was a reliable person to give the B12 to. He had a very good group of young men who were his computing assistants with... whom one of them, Bob Sparks, has gone on being a sort of a major influence in computing and making diffractometers for X-ray analysis ever since. But another of them, whom I was rather fond of, was Dick Prosen, died - I don't really remember what from - towards the end of the analysis.
Anyway, then began a very exciting period in which we would send him a list of the co-ordinates of the atoms that we wanted calculated on, and he would send us back the list of structure factors and then the three-dimensional map. And of course these would just come out on computer tapes so they were not transparent but, but just...
[Q] Sheets of paper?
Yes. And Jenny transferred these to tracing paper and drew them to scale so that they should fit one over the other in this sequence and we had the first of the red fragment three-dimensional maps showing the corrin nucleus absolutely clearly.
 

Again it was quite difficult for everyone to take this different unit with two rings...
[Q] Yes, chemically challenged.
... together.  But we just... with Ken's group in collaboration, then went straight on from there from the 26 atom map. You could see smaller peaks corresponding to the atoms that were left out of the electron density and when we put these in as atoms, they really were practically the whole molecule and the thing was at this stage a rather amusing episode occurred all of which is written up by Ken in my festschrift. That's to say, I first of all just expected him to send this great mass of computing over by sea and it took several weeks, and when I saw what was happening to it I thought, God, how silly to waste all this money just waiting for this to come in by sea, and I sent a telegram saying send everything airmail. And then Ken got a feeling that we were terribly slow at choosing which atoms we should put into the phasing operation and he would just take all of them below that he could see, above a certain level and so he sent a map that was based I think... anyway the numbers are all in the paper, on 60 odd atomic positions. Now we could see that some of these positions were absolutely wrong and hopeless, and one was a peak in the middle of a ring you see and chemically it wouldn't make sense at all, and we only put in 54 atoms which we regarded as all chemically desirable atoms. And then there was a little sort of wrangle about... between us as to which atoms were real and which were just...
[Q] Artifactual.
Yes.
[Q] But the calculations did discriminate quite successfully?
Yes. Quite successfully and so we came through with a complete structure all right.
[Q] Which then in a sense moved into the world of chemistry because they had to decide, chemically, how to attack this problem, if I'm right? They had the question of synthesising that wasn't there?
Ah yes. At that... yes. That's years of work.
[Q] I mean it was an important development it seems to me, because here was a structure which was unanticipated and yet the chemists needed to synthesise and they had to think very hard how to do it?
Oh yes, well this was Bob Woodward's main ploy but it was Bob Woodward's combined with Eschenmoser, and Eschenmoser did the first synthesis of the corrin nucleus. But of course he synthesised it as the nickel corrin and not as cobalt corrin and he hadn't got anything natural to do mixed melting points or anything like that, so how he was sure that he had calculated... that he had really got a corrin in his synthetic preparation was by doing an X-ray analysis of it and...
[Q] Yes. Well at that stage it must have been the most powerful way of working on complex chemistry at that...
Yes, but not even crystallographers realised this you know.
[Q] No, that is true.
Bragg didn't realise that that was what this thing was. He published it in his last little book as the sort of final map of B12 or something like that he had, and I had to write to David Phillips and point out this was not at all the case.
 

[Q] Now what was the big problem, Dorothy, getting into protein structure solution?
It was to find how to solve the phase problem and actually, the... there was only one method known in the 1930s in which the phase problem could be solved which was by isomorphous replacement. And that in fact is if you're being strictly honest, you date back to a paper by Duane in the American Academy in 1925 or '26 which the first electron density maps are calculated by a formula of course proposed by WH Bragg. But in 1915 when nobody had done it until 1926, curiously enough, and they point out having looked at and seeing what was happening with their figures, that in fact... well assuming they knew the structure in their calculation, they didn't need to know it, that all the signs were determined by the heavy atoms, the heaviest atom present, which was the chloride of sodium chloride. And they also pointed out that alternatively, we would have found it by comparing the signs for sodium chloride and potassium chloride but somehow nobody saw that immediately, so Bragg himself did his first electron density maps with signs calculated from the positions he'd already found from the atoms and dioxide and so on. And Henry Lipson says how they suddenly realised that in fact all these signs were determined by the calcium in the structure.
 

The quite interesting thing is of course that Max tried all sorts of ideas for phasing, produced by Bernal and so on, and then suddenly got... saw from some work that was reduced into brief print that the... it was possible to attach a heavy atom like para-chlorobenzoic acid and so he always rather sort of felt as if he discovered the use of heavy atoms in the whole of the protein work. But actually I mean, he established it which was marvellous, I mean he showed that it worked but Bernal had suggested that it would work for insulin. The moment I got the first insulin photograph in a little letter of which I put the text at least in his life time. [Q] Yes.  And he was suggesting the replacement of zinc I think by cadmium? Yes. It was known to happen you see. [Q] And you did some early experiments on that? Yes. The trouble with the first cadmium... insulin that I had, which is mentioned in that letter... but it was clearly very impure and it wouldn't grow large crystals at all. I tried taking powder photographs which weren't really good enough for testing.
 

One of the things that was important was the Bijvoet effect. [Q] Yes, yes. But you picked up on the B12 of course? The last B12 compound that we did was this... I always regard it... particularly marvellous is the fact of 51a. [Q] The 51a. This is the fact that it was discovered quite late in time. Kind of all these operations that from sewage sludge was a compound which had the same kind of order of magnitude as the red fragment, that's to say, in no benzonate sugar phosphate group that just the corrin nucleus and its side chains and end groups... and this gave very nice crystals which showed very prominently the Bijvoet effect, that's to say the... they gave different intensities from the positive reflections from the negative reflections and from that, these very small differences, you could determine the phase angles. And this operation was carried out by Vanketesan, one of the Indians from Bangalore who'd learnt it from Ramaseshan who was an even better Indian from Bangalore.
 

[Q] What was it, Dorothy, that you were looking for in the insulin structure? Just what it was, you know, how the peptide chain... of course it was a very important step for us when [Fred] Sanger found the sequence. We didn't in any sense need to know it for our analysis, but it cheered us up like anything to see our distribution of atoms conforming to that expected from Sanger's sequence. [Q] Now, when the structure came out in 1969, you, I remember very well, Dorothy, and others of us spent two days, I think, interpreting that map, and when the structure was complete we had the details really of a heximer, which I don't know what you thought about at the time, Dorothy, but it was, I think, a very beautiful structure. Yes.[Q] And it... in a sense, one of the first things we did was to think about Svedberg's experiments which were telling us that we had different conditions, heximers and dimers. And do you remember... can you remember looking inside this heximer for the fundamental dimer?Yes. I'm also sort of thinking of the fact that in the... our first letters to Nature I wrote about those early measurements. I measured, of course, the molecular weight of the rhombahedral unit cell and this contained six insulin one molecules and had a molecular weight of about 36 thousand. The first suggestion was that the insulin molecule might have a weight of 36 thousand, and this led to a very irate letter from Freudenberg who was a major chemical worker on insulin at the time, saying insulin was much smaller then this, it's at least not more than 11 thousand and maybe even less, and Svedberg only measures a particle weight in his measurements in the ultra centrifuge and this was all absolutely correct and proved by the final structure analysis.
I replied politely to Freudenberg I think at the time, but I didn't see Freudenberg until really very late when I was elected a member of Leopoldina which was an academy, a very old scientific academy. It's older than the Royal Society and it was essentially an academy for all German-speaking peoples and the... to my surprise when I went to the first meeting, and I went to the Leopoldina I found that it was... there were present East and West Germans and they got away with going on meeting together in the Leopoldina all the way through this episode of the partition of Germany, and the first person I met on the steps of the Leopoldina as I was going in was Freudenberg himself and I had the structure of insulin in my hand.
 

The only thing that I had contact with was the synthesis of insulin because three groups set out to synthesise insulin in much the same time and I knew about the Chinese one first of all because when I was lecturing in my first journey to China in 1959, which is the one in which we took the photograph, I was, of course, lecturing entirely about B12, but a group of young Chinese chemists came up afterwards and said, 'Do you think we are being too adventurous, we mean to synthesise insulin?' So I said, 'No, go right ahead', because it was obvious once you knew the sequence that you should be able to synthesise it. And so when the news came through that Katsoyannis had synthesised insulin, I engineered methods of going to Shanghai and seeing how the Chinese synthesis had gone. I got on quite all right with just about... they were more careful Chinese they insisted on doing the activity on their synthetic product, having these crystallise... [Q] Crystallising it. Yes, and even showing it under the microscope wet and showed that it changed from wet to dry, things like that. But...[Q] Now, there was in China I think, Dorothy, some crystallographic work on insulin as well, wasn't it? It came out of the synthetic work? Yes, well I... when I went to discuss with them their synthesis of insulin I suggested they might use their synthesis to synthesise a heavy atom, and I suggested that it might be iodophenylalanine at the end of the one of the chains so they could try that, but it didn't crystallised - too bad. And we tried it, too, and the... and so did the science school graduates. [Q] Science school, yeah, they did, yes. But nobody got crystals that were any use to the x-ray analysis that way, in fact we had to do our x-ray analysis by luck, by soaking in different heavy atoms in a way that had been done with other proteins.
 

The first three-dimensional maps of insulin in which we were sure that we knew how the molecule itself figured into the electron density, and that it composed this very pretty hexameric group of molecules fitting together. [Q] Is that the zinc in the middle? The quite interesting thing was the zinc in the middle. There were two zincs because there are six molecules, here the molecules are in three groups, two groups of three, one above the other.
Well, I had suggested to the Chinese they might try to make a heavy atom derivative of insulin and not surprisingly they did and they... after they'd given up my ideas about synthesising a heavy atom into it, they found that mercurials would make a heavy atom derivative with the histidine B5 of insulin. These are very much easier to interpret than the cadmium compounds or other compounds which we were working on in Oxford, and Liang Dong Cai who had come over to Oxford to work on proteins in order to set this programme of insulin going so he knew what state we were in, which was not a very good state at the time. [Q] 1967, wasn't it? Yes. And he was given all the facilities he needed by the Gang of Four who were as keen on insulin getting solved as any other person. He had a very large research group. We... I didn't. I heard of this by chance when I was visiting Vietnam and friends of mine visited Peking the same year, and they were expecting me to come there, and at that stage wherever were you, they had all these great models laid out ready for you this summer in Peking.
So I then discovered that they had solved the structure as well and I thought it tremendously important to see how closely our results agreed. So I made a plan to go to China the following year, which was the year we had the international crystallography conference in Japan, and relations with China weren't as good as I was hoping they would be. I was hoping I would get the Chinese to Japan, but I didn't manage to do that. But I did manage to compare completely our 2.8Å map, drawn up here, with their 2.6Å data map, and it was quite an amusing episode because I sent a message ahead of myself saying I will bring our map drawn to the scale of 1cm equal to 1Å, so you draw yours to the same scale and then we can easily see whether they're the same or different. And when I reached Peking Biophysics, I had a tremendously crowded lecture, and they were all obviously aware of the situation and quite critical and asking me detailed questions about what we did at various stages of our analysis and how well everything fitted. And I did the same by them, of course. And when we were sure we both were reliable investigators, we decided to compare the maps directly and we worked out the height at which they should coincide and took out the relevant sheets and put them together and to our horror, for a minute or two, they didn't fit. And then I thought, I mean this is an impossible situation, and I remembered that when the Royal Society had gone to China the year before and brought back photographs of the insulin model, their insulin model, Guy had said they've got the model upside down. Which only meant that they'd started their photography of insulin with the crystal upside down, so I then luckily turned my map which was on tracing paper upside down over theirs and immediately everything fitted quite well.
 
