ernst.mayr

The late German-American biologist Ernst Mayr (1904-2005) was a leading light in the field of evolutionary biology, gaining a PhD at the age of 21. He was also a tropical explorer and ornithologist who undertook an expedition to New Guinea and collected several thousand bird skins. In 1931 he accepted a curatorial position at the American Museum of Natural History. During his time at the museum, aged 37, he published his seminal work 'Systematics and Origin of the Species' which integrated the theories of Darwin and Mendel and is considered one of his greatest works.

I was born in a little town in southern Bavaria, the town of Kempten, on the 5th of July 1904. This means that I'm now more than 93 years old. My father was a judge, and it was customary at that time in Germany he was shifted to another location every six to eight years, so that we moved from Kempten to Würzburg where I began my natural history studies, and then to Munich. And then when my father died at an age when I was only 13 years old, my mother moved us to Dresden where she came from – which is in Saxony in central Germany – and I stayed there until I had to go... until I went to the university. Now, my family is remarkably well described in a book by a sociologist as the 'German mandarins'. And he points out that there was a social stratum in Germany in which everybody had to go to the Humanistisches Gymnasium, and so did I and so had my father and my grandfather, and I had nine years of Latin and seven years of Greek and a great deal of history and other subjects like that. It was a very thorough education and people in that social stratum of the 'mandarins' either went into the civil service, or they became university teachers. Well, in my case, the family was mostly... had a long medical background. My father was a judge, but his younger brother was a doctor, his father was a doctor, his grandfather was a doctor, his great-grandfather was a doctor. And so it was taken for granted in the family that I would become a doctor, even though I was the second son, and I was perfectly happy with that decision. I was interested in medicine and, owing to the early death of my father, I was interested in diagnosis because I felt maybe he could have been saved if his illness had been diagnosed much more recently, much more quickly. And so I was all prepared to take on the medical curriculum.

I had been a very ardent bird-watcher in those days. Every day I was out watching birds and I made all sorts of locally interesting observations. I'd bicycle to nearby lakes, to the streams of... of the Elba and other rivers, to the mountains nearby, watching birds almost every day. Well, after my final examination at the high school, the [Humanistisches] Gymnasium as it was call in Germany, my mother gave me a pair of field glasses and one day I bicycled out to some lakes near Dresden and as I looked across a wall at the ducks on this lake I suddenly saw a pair of ducks the like I had never seen before. The male had a red bill. Well, no German duck had a red bill, I knew that, and I made a very detailed description of this bird – it was a male and a female – in my daily ornithological diary, and then I dashed back on my bicycle to Dresden to get somebody else to confirm my observation because I was quite sure nobody would believe me if somebody else wouldn't see it. But it was unfortunately a weekday and I, of course, not going to school any more could travel on weekdays, but everybody else who knew anything about birds had a job and this person said, 'No, I can't go out there until next Sunday'. Well, by next Sunday, of course, the birds were gone. Well, I finally found out from the books that this bird was the Red-crested Pochard, and so far as I could determine it was... this was 1923, and so far as I could determine, this was the first observation in central Europe since the year 1846. So, the next week I went to the ornithological society of Dresden. Of course nobody believed me because people had gone out the past Sunday and hadn't been able to find it, and I was very much distressed. But by pure chance there was a paediatrician at this meeting who said, 'Oh, I studied with a fellow who is now Germany's leading ornithologist. His name is [Erwin] Stresemann, he is in Berlin. Why don't you get in touch with him? Maybe he will believe you'.

My way to the University of Greifswald where I was going to study medicine required changing trains in Berlin. So, I took this time of changing trains and went Professor [Erwin] Stresemann's office, and he was exceedingly nice to me but he was quite severe. He checked my diaries, he asked me hundreds of questions, he showed me specimens – I had to identify specimens – and after a very long examination he finally said, 'Yes, I believe you and I'm going to publish your observation'. And, of course, I felt absolutely elated: my first publication having made such a, as I felt at the time, important discovery. What was more important was that Stresemann was very much taken by me, my enthusiasm, my knowledge of birds, and he was looking for students for... for other young ornithologists. And so he suggested to me... he said, 'Why don't you in your college vacations come here to the museum as a volunteer?' And I was delighted. It was like somebody offered me the key to heaven, and so surely enough, after my first semester I went to Berlin and I was a volunteer in the department. And after this repeated itself several times and Stresemann... I told... talked to Stresemann about my aims and I talked about the wonderful explorations done by [Charles] Darwin and [Alfred Russel] Wallace and [Henry Walter] Bates and [Alexander von] Humboldt and all the other great explorers, and how I would love to go to the tropics and be an explorer. And one day Stresemann took me aside and he said, 'Now look here, if you become a medical doctor there's no chance that you will ever see the tropics or be on an expedition. Why don't you, after you've finished your first part of the medical training…' – in Germany the pre-clinical and the clinical are sharply separated – 'So... why don't you when you get your Candidate of Medicine Degree after the... finish the pre-clinical training... Why don't you take some time off and acquire an additional Doctor in Zoology and then I can put you on an expedition?' Well, this was just too much of a temptation and I agreed. I finished my pre-clinical studies and to prove that I didn't abandon medicine because I did badly; I got an 'A' in all six subjects, so people couldn't claim that I had to leave medicine because I didn't make it. And then I started to study under Stresemann in Berlin zoology. And he said, 'Well, if you finish...', this was in February 1925 and he said, 'If you finish by the 1st of July 1926 we can even get a job for you at the museum. They open up about once every five years and there will be an opening on that date'. Well, this meant 16 months' time to do all the work for a doctor in zoology, including writing a thesis, and it meant working 16 or 17 hours every day and no such things as Saturdays or Sundays or vacations or going to the movies or going out with girls. I just... it was a total grind for 16 months. But I made it; I got my Doctor's degree on the 24th of June 1926, a few days before my 22nd birthday. In other words, I got it while I was still 21, after having first gotten a Candidate of Medicine Degree. And I got that job at the Berlin Museum.

My father was a great student of the classics and history and philosophy, at the same time he was a friend of nature and this was equally true of my mother. Every weekend we would go out and study nature. In the spring we would look for spring flowers. My father knew where there some limestone quarries where one could find some interesting fossils. He learnt there was a heron colony nearby, so we went to that one day. My mother knew all the mushrooms, so I had a very good all around education in natural history. In fact, I can say that I was a naturalist from the time on that I could walk. And being a naturalist is very important. I can see this all the time in my studies in the history of biology: [Charles] Darwin was a naturalist, in fact he says so in his autobiography: 'I was born a naturalist', he said. His famous friend, TH Huxley, was not a naturalist and it becomes very clear when you read Huxley's writings that whenever it really depended on... on true understanding of nature, Huxley didn't have it because he wasn't trained as a naturalist. And you find it even among more recent authors. For instance, the palaeontologist [George Gaylord] Simpson, with whom I jointly taught a course at Harvard [University] and he was a very good friend of mine.  I very often, sort of, noticed that there was something lacking in his understanding and when I somewhat recently looked at his species definition – his so-called evolutionary species definition – I said to myself, if he were a naturalist, or had been a naturalist, he couldn't have made that definition. And I went to his biography, sure enough I found that he had gone to college as an English Literature major, and only in the... in the senior class in college had he become interested in geology and eventually in palaeontology, and he never had that feeling for species that a naturalist has.

My mentor was Professor Erwin Stresemann, who was at that time clearly the world's leading ornithologist, a man who was not only highly intelligent, but very hard working; he edited two journals, he wrote a big textbook, he supervised students, he sent out expeditions. I never could understand how he could handle all these things, and he greatly influenced me because his thinking in the field of systematics was really absolutely at the foremost frontier. Another colleague there... who was only about four years older than I, another assistant, was Professor [Bernhard] Rensch who very much influenced me because he wrote a book on speciation, on the origin of species. And even though I didn't agree with every detail, it made me think about all the problems involved there and much of what he said influenced me and I followed it. In fact, in some ways he influenced me more than Stresemann had because Stresemann and I didn't talk as much about such matters.

Professor [Bernhard] Rensch influenced me a great deal because I talked with him about these matters and in his book he raised all the problems that would... or at least most of the problems that would occupy my mind in the later years. However, after a while, after I'd gone to America we drifted apart because he developed a number of ideas, as I shall come back to, that were in complete conflict with my own ideas. There were a number of other people at the [Berlin] Museum with whom I had contact and I might emphasise that I was employed as an assistant to the Museum, not an assistant in ornithology. And actually I was assigned to the library and I had to supervise the... all the acquisition of new books and the subscribing to new journals and all this sort of thing. And I was also told to work in another department of the Museum, in this case it was the department of entomology where I was working on beetles in order to learn something about a group of organisms different from the birds that I was up to that time acquainted with. And that occupied me for the next year and a half until I went off on my first expedition.

Finding the right kind of an expedition was not so easy as [Erwin] Stresemann had first told me. He first tried an expedition that was going to Peru, and that after a while didn't work out, they wouldn't want to have me. Then another one to Cameroon in Africa, and that looked more favourable, but ultimately also didn't work out. And then finally, some of my many famous accidents happened: Lord [Walter] Rothschild in England, who was the greatest private collector of birds, had an collector out in New Guinea who worked extremely well, sent lots of material. But he suddenly had a stroke and Rothschild needed a collector in New Guinea. And Professor Stresemann, who was very friendly with Rothschild and his curator of birds, recommended me very highly and it was... I was told to go to the International Zoological Congress in Budapest in September 1927 and meet Lord Rothschild. And I did, and I was presented to Lord Rothschild, and somehow or other he didn't object to my looks and he engaged me as his collector. Now came a very hectic time for me to get prepared for this, get all the equipment, learn how to skin birds, etc, etc. And finally in February 1928 I was ready to leave first for Genoa where I was supposed to take the steamer and from there on all the way east. Well, Stresemann and the whole bird department in Berlin went to the train station at the Anhalter Bahnhof to see me off, and I still remember how they looked at me... with a feeling, 'Well, are we going to see him again, or is this a final goodbye', because at that time there was a high mortality of people who went to New Guinea from diseases, trouble with the natives, etc. Well, I was on my steamer going first to Singapore and then to Java to Jakarta to... the old Batavia, then from there to the colonial museum in Java where I was very much... very warmly received, and they helped me a great deal. They taught me a good deal about what to wear and what equipment I needed in New Guinea, and they even lent me three Javanese assistants who had been on previous expeditions and were very good bird skinners, so that now I could – with a good deal more confidence – get going to New Guinea. And finally after seven weeks of travelling I arrived at the main port of Dutch New Guinea and unloaded my expedition and from there we went with a small fleet of canoes, outrigger canoes, across a wide bay to the... to the beginning where the... where we could start for the mountains. And there was a... a Javanese, or actually a Moluccan government official who sent word up to the mountains that he needed 30 porters. And sure enough two days later the 30 porters appeared and we distributed my belongings to these 30 porters, each one of them supposed to carry about 30 pounds, and off we went into the woods. And there was mostly not even a trail, we walked in the bed of a little mountain brook and finally there was a bit of a trail and after strenuous climbing for about six hours they decided we had done enough and we set up camp in the middle of the forest, and I had a tent but the others were just, sort of, lying on their straw mats. And the next day we reached a peak of the coastal range and descended into the valley behind to a village where I was then stationed for about six weeks sending out my collectors all the time.

The natives were very... they rarely did... they hardly ever saw a white person and when I went later on further in the interior I came to a number of villages where no white person had ever been. And it was really an untouched nature and the flowers were also most overwhelmingly rich and... and astonishing, and the bird life was incredible. The greatest advantage I had is that these people... part of the protein that they had... they had no domestic animals, they had some wild pigs that they collected occasionally, and the other protein they got were birds that they had shot. So they had a name for every species of birds, they knew their birds, they knew where to find them and pretty soon I turned over my little bird guns to the native collectors and I gave them the names of the birds that they should get and I was able in a relatively short time to get together a... a remarkably complete collection.

Now I might add one thing that is quite important as to why [Walter] Rothschild wanted me to go out there and what instructions he had given me. In the years prior to 1924 the most... most flourishing trade of New Guinea was birds-of-paradise skins because the ladies from the 1880s on had always... many of them had bird feathers on their hats, and particularly birds-of-paradise feathers were considered to be the most wonderful hats. And so something like 4000 or 6000 skins of birds-of-paradise arrived in Paris and Rotterdam every year for the – in the so-called plume trade – for the people who made hats. And every once in a while there was some unique specimen among these... these things, some which Lord Rothschild had left orders with these plume dealers that if there was ever such a unique specimen he would pay £100 for it, and then it came to in his hands and then he decided very often that it was a new species and described it as a new species. Now the problem was that since that time any number of expeditions had gone to various parts of New Guinea and had never been able to find the actual home of these rare species of birds-of-paradise. And I was instructed to go to three mountain ranges: the Arfak Mountains, the Wandamen Mountains and the Cyclops Mountains, of which the latter two had never been visited by an ornithologist, and see if I could find there the home of these rare species of birds-of-paradise. Well, in the Arfak Mountains, the first one I went to, I got a fine collection together but not one of the rare species. Then I went to the other two mountain ranges, again got fine collections, several new species of birds, many new subspecies of birds, but still not the home of any of these rare species of birds-of-paradise. This, what you might call, failure of mine resulted in Professor [Erwin] Stresemann saying, 'There must be something funny about these species because otherwise somebody... these... these were about the last places where they could have been, and now that they are eliminated, where... where should they come from?' So he made a very detailed study of these birds and he discovered that all of them were the hybrids between two other different species of birds-of-paradise so that even though I failed to find their home I was instrumental in solving the problem of the rare, unique species of birds-of-paradise.

Well, I had completed my task, I had gotten something like 3000 bird specimens and I also had collected vast plant collections. From my collections, for instance, 38 new species of... of Orchids were described; I think 12 new species of Rhododendrons; and many other things, and so I had really completed my task as far as Dutch New Guinea was concerned. However, the Berlin Museum had given me some funds to make a collection of a relatively unexplored mountain range in the Mandated... Mandated Territory of New Guinea, the former German New Guinea, in eastern New Guinea. And when I tried to find out how I could get from Dutch New Guinea to this other part – they were actually bordering each other – I found that there was no connection. The two governments, the Dutch and the Australian, which was now running the Mandated Territory, they didn't want to have any connection between the two. And I would have had to go from Dutch New Guinea back to Java, from there down to Australia, and then from Australia up to eastern New Guinea. And that trip would have cost more than the money I had available for my whole... expedition to eastern New Guinea. So what should I do? And I finally decided: 'Oh, I am going to take some canoes and I go along the coast into the mandate territory'. And everybody I talked with said, 'That's impossible. You can't do it. First of all, this is a very exposed coast, there is a tremendous surf, you can't land with these canoes. And the people are very nasty, they're famous for being very aggressive and unpleasant and uncooperative'.
The first port in the Mandated Territory was called Attack Harbour because every expedition or people that came there were immediately attacked by the natives. And I in my youthful enthusiasm or ignorance or whatever, ignored it all and I got myself about six canoes together. They were all small outrigger canoes – no, no big transport canoes – and off I went. And I sent my three Javanese, Mantoese, assistants back to Java, and I hired two former bird-of-paradise hunters, local Malays from the Maluccas to be my new assistants. They both knew how to skin birds. So off I went. Well, the first stop was this Attack Harbour, and they were not... they were not friendly, but they weren't really bad, and I was able to send my canoes back to Hollandia, to the Dutch part. And I hired some new canoes to take me to the next village, which was called Laitrae, and when I got to Laitrae – first of all, as we were going through the surf, my canoe capsized but fortunately the natives – they were very clever and very good – they put me sideways out of the canoe so it would not fall on me and I got ashore, of course wet from top to bottom. My equipment that was in that canoe of course was in the water, but they were able by diving down get all of it out and the damage wasn't too great because much of it I had packed waterproof.
But there I sat in Laitrae and they wouldn't give me any more canoes to go on, they wouldn't service my porters and I sat there for about three days and finally I got so exasperated that I jumped up and I grabbed my gun and I said, 'I'm going to shoot you all if you don't do it'. And they saw how utterly mad I was and they probably afraid that I might really in... in my excitement shoot somebody, and by God, they finally produced some canoes and off we went to the next place. Well, I will not tell you the stages but... but it went like this, from place to place, and the last 70 miles I had to walk on the shore, no trail, in the hot sun all day, and I finally got to the first port in the Mandated Territory. This was the most difficult, most dangerous, most unpleasant experience I ever had in my whole life.

I finally arrived at Aitape, the first port in Mandated Territory. When I arrived there, everybody was astonished. Nobody had ever come from Dutch New Guinea by land, and the first person I met was a German missionary, and he didn't... I... I was coming through the... through the woods and I came to his house and I stepped in and I found from the natives that his name was... I think was Father Paul, so I... and he was a German missionary, so I stepped inside. There, a white man suddenly appearing before this man, and I said in German, 'Grüß Gott, Vater Paul' and he was utterly astonished. The funniest part was he came from a little village that I knew quite well on the outskirts of Würzburg where I had been as a boy. Well, he hadn't seen another white person in quite some time. From there I went to Aitape and went to the District Officer and he said, 'Now, how did you get here?' And I said, 'Well, I came from... by land from Dutch New Guinea'. Again he couldn't believe it and then he said, 'You're trying to catch the steamer?' And I said, 'Yes, that's why I was rushing. I... I know that that steamer is supposed to be coming in a day or two'. And then he said, 'Oh, but I'm afraid you can't take that steamer'. And I said, 'Why not?' He said, 'Because our regulations say that there has to be a... anybody coming from any foreign place has to have a three weeks quarantine'. And... and... so finally we argued and he was the one who finally had the brilliant idea and said, 'Oh, we call... we include in the quarantine the three weeks that you... that it took you get from the Dutch border to Aitape', and so I was able to get my... onto the steamer.

I will not give you all the details of my explorations in... in the Mandated Territory. I climbed the highest mountain there, just about a... a few feet below 4000 metres. I had very severe malaria while I was there in that area, and finally went to another mountain range, the Herzog Mountains where I was without my Dutch New Guinea assistants, all alone. And fortunately there was a German missionary who was taking care of me and was very nice, and he said, 'You're very lucky because in this valley', – this was the Snake River valley – 'I'm going to have a big christening one of these days. For three years we have been teaching the natives... the... all... all about... Christendom and they are all prepared now to be baptised. This will take place next week and there's going to be great festivals and all sorts of things. You will be most excited'. Well, the actual teaching Christianity to these people had been done by native missionaries from the coast. They were Melanesians, great big tall fellows with a fuzzy-wuzzy head and only a... a red loin cloth, they didn't wear anything else, and they had taught these mountain Papuans. And so that went through two languages, and finally the day came and they had put up a platform and a great big sort of like a circus tent where the... all the people sat that were to be christened, and I sat on a platform together with the German missionary and the Melanesian missionaries. And they gave big sermons and all that, and all of a sudden the German missionary turns to me and he said, 'Oh, these people all want now a sermon from you'. And I said, 'Well, what can I do?' He said, 'Oh', he said, 'It doesn't matter, just say something in German, I will do the translating. Nobody here knows any German'. So naturally I had to get up and say something that would please the missionary, so I gave a little sermon that I'm sure didn't take more than five minutes, that they should behave like the good Christians now and not fight with each other and not steal and not... and keep a nice clean village and few other proper sentiments. After that the German missionary got up and he translated that into the Melanesian of the coastal people, of the coastal missionaries, and of course he presented it with the proper gestures of a... of a minister... of a preacher, and it lasted at least 10 minutes. And then got up one of these Melanesian coastal missionaries who now translated my sermon into the native language of the valley out there. And he got up and he jumped up and he stamped the platform with his heels and he yelled at them in the loudest tones and the whole thing lasted about 20 minutes, and I would give anything in the world if I had the actual translation of my sermon into that language.

One morning as I was sitting there, skinning, or... it was a late morning, suddenly a black runner came into my... my little hut with a telegram, and the telegram said that – it came from [Erwin] Stresemann – he said that the American Whitney South Sea expedition which had a schooner operating in this area, their leader had become ill – again an accident in my favour – and they desperately needed a... an ornithologist because they had only some Yale [University] college boys on board, but they knew nothing about birds. 'Please', and Stresemann said, 'I know you're... you're ready to come home, but this may be very important for your... for your future, and furthermore the American Museum [of Natural History] has promised to give me some specimens from this area if you join that expedition'. So whether I liked it or not I had to say yes, and I made my way down to the coast and finally took a steamer to a port called Samarai. And this was, I believe... I would think this must have been around the end of June 1929, or early July. And at Samarai the boat of the Whitney South Sea expedition – the name of the boat was "France", it came originally from French Polynesia – met me and the leader, Hannibal Hamlin, even though he was only a... a Yale senior, was a very capable fellow. Later on he came back to the States, took a medical degree and became a well known brain surgeon who operated at Mass[achusetts] General Hospital and his major practice in Rhode Island and he was a very close friend of mine for the rest of his life, but he died some years ago. Well, Hamlin, who really didn't know much about birds, had just collected in parts of New Guinea and he was totally amazed that I came in there and I could give the name of every species and say whether it was rare or not and so forth. Well, anyhow, this was the beginning of the next... the next nine months I was on this schooner collecting birds in the Solomon Islands. Well, the schooner... everybody thinks what a wonderful thing being on schooner cruising around in the South Islands, well, this was an... an old copra carrying freight schooner, most uncomfortable. It had no actually working toilet facility. Under deck if you tried to sleep in the bunks it was always much too hot, you couldn't fall asleep so you slept on top of the deck, and, of course, every night a rain shower came sooner or later and drenched you. There was an old canvass over this area, but the canvass was rotten and let the water come through. The food was terrible. We had rice and canned Alaska salmon, that was our normal daily diet. However, looking back after all these years... and then I got Dengue fever which made me very sick, and so on and so forth. It was not a glorious expedition in any sense of the word as most people think who are used to these millionaires cruises that go to the South Sea islands. Well, anyhow, however, ornithologically it was very successful. We collected first on Choiseul Island, or Chóy-sel as it is called out there. Then we collected on San Cristobal where we made some very interesting discoveries because nobody had ever been in the mountains of San Cristobal. And finally went to Malaita where nobody had ever collected because the natives there were so hostile they had killed the District Officer and all of his 12 police attachment three years earlier and most reluctantly the resident in the capital of the Solomon Islands – this was under British control at that time – gave us the permission to go in there. And I still remember, and that's the honest truth, as we were leaving his office, he said, 'Well, I give you a fifty-fifty chance to come out alive'. That was Malaita at that time, and... and you can check in the books and will find that that was the... that's why nobody had ever collected there. Well, we made the first collection.

The redeeming feature in the Solomon Islands, at the lighter side, was that whenever we landed somewhere where there was a coconut plantation the fellow who was running the plantation usually – they were all Australians – was bored to tears with his job, hadn't seen a white person in... in maybe four months, five months, six months, and was just happy as could be to have us aboard. And of course the way in the Solomon Islands you celebrate anything is with lots and lots and lots of whisky. And so, sometimes however, we arrived at one of these plantations and the fellow had already emptied his last shipment of whisky, and then... I remember that we... on San Cristobal we left our liquor with the local fellow there as we went into the mountains, and because it was going to be Christmas we come back and celebrate Christmas with him, and when we came down... down to celebrate Christmas he already had finished all the bottles we had left with him. But that's an aside, but Australians all were the most helpful, most jolly people but they sure loved their whisky. And I must say I... I drank more whisky in those nine months in the Solomon Islands than I have ever since in the rest of my life.

I finally told the American Museum [of Natural History] people that I had to get home. Hannibal Hamlin, the leader, didn't want to let me go. He had gotten so fond of me and... and relied so much on my knowledge of birds that he tried everything to make me... but I said, 'Nothing doing'. So, I went on a... on a French copra steamer that was going to go to Marseilles from the Solomon Islands, seven weeks again, and while I was on this ship things happened in Europe. Lord [Walter] Rothschild's curator of birds, Doctor [Ernst] Hartert, had a bad pneumonia and he was over 70 and decided to retire. So Rothschild had to get a new curator of birds and he got his network busy and he got in touch the American Museum, with the British Museum, with [Erwin] Stresemann. 'Who would be a good young man to take over the bird curatorship at the... at the museum there?' Well, somehow or other, finally they came up with the name of Ernst Mayr. 'He's not very experienced, but he's been very successful on his expeditions, and that he had three expeditions in New Guinea and he's a go-getter and he will... he will do it and if it doesn't work out you can always fire him'. So Rothschild, as his niece writes in her biography of dear Lord Rothschild, decided to hire me to be the curator of birds. But I was on this copra steamer. I knew nothing about it, there was no way of getting in touch with me, and before I got to Marseilles, things had changed in England. Lord Rothschild was being blackmailed by, as Miriam Rothschild calls it, 'a titled lady', and he suddenly discovered he didn't have the money for a curator of birds. So, before I even reached Marseilles, everything was cancelled and everybody was sorry for me having lost this wonderful job that they wouldn't tell me about it. I learned all this only years later.

Finally after seven weeks my steamer arrived in Marseilles and I first went home to see my mother in Dresden and then immediately went off to Berlin to start working on my collections that I had made in the Mandated Territory. And I worked there quite hard but I realised I had to see the material of other museums and I visited the Tring... Lord [Walter] Rothschild's museum in Tring in England. I visited the museums in Paris, in London and in Leiden in Holland. I also on... during this summer, I might give the date when I arrived back in Marseilles, it was around the 1st of May [1930], and in June or July was a great international ornithological congress in Amsterdam. And there I met Doctor [Frank M] Chapman who was the Chairman of the Bird Department of the American Museum [of Natural History], and this was very important to have met him because it is in connection with an offer that came from the Museum later that year. Well, by the time of... of October I had about two thirds finished my report on my collections when a letter arrived from Doctor Chapman asking me whether I would be interested to come to the American Museum in New York for one year to work on the unworked collections of the Whitney South Sea expedition. It was a rather nominal salary and no tenure, of course, it was going to be for one year, not renewable. Well, this was of course, very exciting. I knew what wonderful collections they were, and I said, 'Well, if you can wait until January, by that time I'll have finished my report on the Mandated Territory, and then I'll be glad to come'. Well, Chapman accepted that and on the 19th of January [1931] I arrived in New York where I settled down at the International House, near Columbia University, and then on the 20th of January I appeared at the Museum. Chapman was away in Panama to do studies on tropical birds, but there rest of the staff received me with open arms, particularly [Robert C] Murphy, [James P] Chapin, and [John T] Zimmer, the three other members of the staff.

[Robert C] Murphy was the great specialist on South Sea Island... on oceanic birds and he eventually published a book on the oceanic birds of South America. [James P] Chapin was a specialist on African birds. He was also the only member of the department who had completed zoological training and had a doctor's degree in biology. He was a specialist in African birds and his book on the birds of the Congo, the first volume of that, is the first good treatment of the biology of tropical birds. And the third one, John T Zimmer, was a specialist in Peruvian birds, and concentrated on describing all the unworked material from South America that the American Museum [of Natural History] had, and they had large collections. [Frank M] Chapman actually had hired him to write a report on the biogeography and ecology of Peruvian birds, but Zimmer was so busy with describing the new material he never wrote that report that Chapman had expected.

I took a collection from an island called Rennell Island which had never been collected before and I knew from [Hannibal] Hamlin, who had been there collecting, that it had all sorts of exciting things. And I worked on that collection and I described several new species and it was a most exciting island because it got... had gotten its fauna partly from the Solomons, and partly from... politically it belonged to the Solomons, but it was way off a little coral atoll, and the other part it had gotten from the south, from the New Hebrides. Well, by the time I finished that collection, [Frank M] Chapman had returned from Panama and I went to him and I said, 'Doctor Chapman, here I am. Now, what do you want me to work on?' And he looked at me with a sort of a puzzled look and he said, 'Why should I tell you? We hired you as a specialist on the birds of this region. You ought to know what to work on'. Well, he was the boss, and having had the German background where the boss always told everybody below him what to do and what not to do, I was astonished and delighted with this freedom of the American Museum [of Natural History], and that was typical for everything I did at the American Museum. It was a place where... where really everybody was tolerant of everybody else and a great deal of freedom and a great deal of pleasant interchange among us colleagues. The one person from whom I learnt the most was undoubtedly [James P] Chapin, the one that had a doctor's degree from Columbia University, because he was the only one who understood modern genetics and who was a confirmed Darwinian. And I at that time still had a good many Lamarckian inclinations and Chapin was the one who talked me out of them. And so by about 1933 I too was a confirmed Darwinian, and I have been ever since. Well, there I worked very hard on all these collections and at the end of the year I think I had published seven or eight papers, which was for them quite a record. And there were still huge unworked collections and at the beginning of the year 1932 the American Museum decided they would give... they would gather... they would be able to raise the money to hire me for a second year.

The 'titled lady' in England also had been active and busy, and she had been blackmailing Lord [Walter] Rothschild even worse, and he had gone into debt and he hadn't paid his taxes and the government threatened to jail him, and he got panicky and he finally decided, 'Well, the only way out is, I have to sell my collection'. So, this was 1932, the bottom year of the Depression and, of course, you would think nobody had the money to buy it. But somehow or other the trustee of the American Museum [of Natural History], Doctor Leonard C Sanford, of whom I will say more in a minute, went to his rich friends in Park Avenue and managed to raise the necessary money, and the American Museum bought the 280,000 specimens of birds that Lord Rothschild had gathered in the course of his life. So that this came this huge collection and it's great strength was in Australia, South Sea Islands, Indonesia, all these were areas that American Museum had nothing and no... nobody on the staff there had any knowledge of this area. So, lo and behold, all of a sudden, the American Museum was forced to hire me as a curator and in the second year of the non-renewable contract I was appointed associate curator of the Rothschild-Whitney collections. So that... so that the 'titled lady' first deprived me of the becoming the curate of the Rothschild collection, and then a step further, she was responsible for me ultimately to become the curator of the Rothschild collection.

One of the key people in my life was Dr Leonard C Sanford. He was a wealthy trustee of the American Museum [of Natural History]. He was a medical doctor and he was the personal physician of I don't know how many multimillionaires. He was a sportsman; he was... loved shooting and salmon fishing and trout fishing; he had originally had his own private collection which he eventually gave to the Museum. But the most important thing is he was a friend of so many multimillionaires, he was a splendid tennis player, and a... a fascinating raconteur. Everybody loved him and he eventually had become very much interested in the Museum, in the bird collection, in the growth of these collections. And one fact that contributed was that he was competing with the director of the Museum of Comparative Zoology [MCZ] at Harvard [University], Tom Barber, and the question was which museum would eventually have the better collection, the MCZ or the American Museum. Well, that spurred Sanford to ultimate efforts and in no time at all did he build up a collection that vastly outranked the Tom Barber's collection at the Museum of Comparative Zoology. And of course he relied on me to always tell him where to get another collection and where there was an area when an expedition should be sent, and he was most anxious to have the collections worked out and so he was very pleased with me for producing so many papers. And eventually he took me on as if I was another son of his, and he was absolutely marvellous to me. And it was after I was at the Museum in New York for two or three years - it was diagnosed actually by myself, originally - that I had a tumor in my left kidney and that my kidney had to be taken out, and Dr Sanford just took care of me all along. He didn't do the operating or anything like this, but after the operation he invited me to his home in New Haven for convalescence and then he sent me to his trout fishing club in the Catskills for another couple of weeks of convalescence. And it was really absolutely marvellous how he... he... really I can say how he loved me and looked out after me. Well, in a way, this could have been a problem for me, because as we found out later on, when I moved to Harvard, of course I went to his competing institution, and I couldn't have accepted the job in Harvard if Sanford had still been alive. But – I hate to use the word – fortunately he had died a couple years before in 1950 and I was... I no longer had to have qualms... problems accepting the job in Harvard.

I think it's about time I say a few things about the collections. Now, to begin with I have mentioned the Whitney South Sea expedition without saying anything further. Well, the Whitney South Sea expedition started as early as about 1922 or 1923 in Outer Polynesia. And Rollo H Beck was the leader of the expedition, and he went from island to island collecting birds, and gradually coming closer and closer to the New Guinea area, going over to the Tonga Islands and then from the... first Samoa and then the Tonga Islands, then Fiji, and then the New Hebrides, Santa Cruz Islands, until he finally reached the Solomon Islands. By that time he had visited literally hundreds – and that figure is not exaggerated – literally hundreds of islands that nobody had ever collected on. He had gotten comparative material for... for comparing the faunas of the different islands and seeing how things evolve in the spreading of the species from island to island, and it was an unbelievably rich and important and valuable collection. The Whitney South Sea expedition perhaps has been one of the world's most important scientific expeditions, and unfortunately it is virtually unknown among the general public and among historians and so forth. Now the same in a... in a very different way can be said about the Rothschild collection. It was the richest collection, well balanced, and it included a famous collection of Australian birds – the so-called Matthews Collection – something like, I don't know what, 40,000 or 50,000 bird skins with a great many types of new species and new subspecies.

The big problem for the American Museum [of Natural History] was in 1932, 1933 - what... how to bring together the Whitney collection, the Rothschild collection, the old collections of the American Museum and put them into a new place. The old location of the bird department at the American Museum was totally insufficient. It was very crowded even before all these big collections arrived, so the... Doctor Sanford again persuaded one of his wealthy friends to give the money to build a new wing, and the new wing, originally before the Rothschild collection was acquired, was to have a great many floors for public exhibits. But when the Rothschild collection was purchased, immediately the plans had to be changed and the third and the fourth floor that originally were supposed to have exhibits were now changed over to locate the Rothschild collection. And the problem now came... there were these huge packing cases – I think there were 84 of them, in which these 280,000 birds were in – and they had to be now stored away in collection cases and in the right, proper order. And how is one to decide in what case should go the birds-of-paradise and how many collection cases this will need for the birds-of-paradise, and where should the birds-of-paradise be in the line of other families? Well, this task was given to me and I spent three or four months measuring the size of the specimens in the different families of birds, how many specimens there were in the Rothschild collection, how many specimens we already had in our collections. And then deciding that this family requires four collection cases, this family requires only one, this requires eight, and have them all on a map so that the complete collection fitted in to all the compete cases of... of these floors. And I was quite sure that I would make all sorts of mistakes and we would get empty cases and we would... big jam ups in other areas, but lo and behold, it all worked out beautifully except for one exception; and that was I had not taken into consideration the size of the Siberian eagle owls. Siberian eagle owls are monsters, they're great big things and... only a few of them go in one collection case and I had not allowed enough, and so we had to do a lot of adjusting this thing; but that was the only exception, otherwise everything got in properly. But, what I must emphasise, getting... transferring the collection on the old wing, and fitting in the Whitney collections and distributing the Rothschild collection, all that took an awful lot of my time. If people think that I devoted all my time all the time only to research, they're very much mistaken. These housekeeping activities in a museum collection which were mostly assigned to me, as it is usually the case that the youngest person in the department has to do all the dirty work – and that was I – it took a lot of my time. And then the collections had to be catalogued and I was in charge of the cataloguing and I had three cataloguers, but I had to prepare every family and the trays for the cataloguer so that he could catalogue them. And that took... took another 10 or 15 years, so there is a lot of administrative technical work in addition to research work in a museum.

I arrived as a bachelor in New York and I lived in the International House where there was... [sic] there were groups of all the different nations including a German group. And since I was at that time a German, of course I joined the German group, so I met quite a few nice young fellows, some of them studying at Columbia [University], some at NYU [New York University], some of them just living there and actually working for businesses down in Wall Street. Well, I finally got together with two other fellows and we left the International House, moved nearby, took ourselves an apartment, 55 Timan Place, and we had a lot more freedom there, and I lived there until I got married in 1935.

I had met my wife also in International House, because she was an exchange student at Wheaton College, and we continued our courtship by correspondence and I finally married her in May 1935 in Freiberg, Germany, which was her home town. And then we moved into Upper Manhattan, a small apartment where our first child was born, and then we decided that the children – and we would hope to have another child – the children should grow up somewhere in a suburb and not on Manhattan. And we got ourselves a house in Tenafly, New Jersey, and getting that house was really quite funny because the real estate agent asked, 'Now, how much money have you saved up for the down payment? And what is your salary? How much can you pay per month and in... for the mortgage?' and so forth. And after he got all that information he said, 'Well, then we have to go to the part of Tenafly where the $8000 houses are'. And so we went to the part of Tenafly with the $8000 houses and there was indeed another college professor - a professor of psychology in NYU [New York University] who became one of our closest friends; but the other neighbours were all people that could afford an $8000 house. One was an... an electrician, fine mechanic working for Bell Telephone, another one was a... on... paper salesman, another was a plumbing salesman, and so on and so forth.

The natural surroundings were very attractive because we… our house was in an old apple orchard and we had an old apple tree in the… in the orchard, in… in our garden where a pair of flickers nested. There were barred white quails in the back yard. It was real nature, and furthermore, I had to drive only 10 minutes or 15 minutes by car to get into a big… to get to a big swamp, and other interesting areas and I could do a great deal of field work, ornithological field work, satisfying my instincts as a naturalist. And I… I… in these years that I was there in Tenafly raising my family I… I really had a wonderful time with one exception: every morning I had to spend one hour to get from there to the American Museum [of Natural History], and every evening I had to spend one hour getting home again. So this… 17 years of commuting was something that I considered very much wasted time, which of course it also was. And when finally my time at the American Museum was beginning to get near the end, we said, ‘Well, as soon as the children are out of high school we move back to New York somewhere right next to the Museum so that no more… commuting is necessary’.

While I was at the American Museum [of Natural History] I was interested not only in bird taxonomy, but also in other aspects of birds. For instance, I discovered that there was a geographic variation of degree of sexual dimorphism in several species of these island birds, so that on one island both male and female looked… had the highly-colored plumage of a male. And another island the male was highly-colored, the female had a drab protective coloration and a third island, the same species… both male and female had the drab color of the female. So obviously… I don’t want to get technical now, this could not not be due to the sex hormones as was at that time believed by everybody, it had to have another meaning. So I got in touch with people working on the… the genetic determination of colour in chickens at Storrs, Connecticut, and they in turn got me in connection… in contact with Professor LC Dunn at Columbia University, a geneticist who was interested in such questions. And Dunn invited me to come to seminars, to Columbia University, which I did, and as I was going… and I… and I became more and more friendly with the department there. And then Professor Dobzhansky arrived from California, from Pasadena… who worked in TH Morgan’s laboratory to give the Jesup Lectures in 1936. And I invited him to come to the Museum and study my wonderful cases of geographic speciation of birds and he was quite excited about this, and I was excited about his lectures, and we became very good friends.

In 1937, he published a pioneering book called Genetics and the Origin of Species which was the book that started the so-called evolutionary synthesis. And I, myself, was invited to contribute one volume to that series in which Dobzhansky published his volume, and I published a volume on Systematics and the Origin of Species. And I always tell a little story about how… Columbia University when Professor Dunn was the chairman of that series… got the idea that I might be a suitable person to write this volume. There was a meeting in Columbus, Ohio, in 1939, at the Great Congress of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, their annual meeting, and there was a symposium organized by Dobzhansky on speciation, and the person who talked before me was a famous geneticist with the name of Sewall Wright who was famous for being a terrible speaker. And there we were let into this huge auditorium, the biggest one that Ohio State had, and the platform was huge because they had… their orchestras played there and the audience seated 3000 people. And in front of that platform was a lectern with a fixed microphone. And Sewall Wright was the speaker just before me. He went to this microphone and he talked to it… into it a little bit, but then after a very short time he left his place, he went to the other end, the back of the… big platform where a series of blackboards were, because he’s a mathematician and he had to put mathematical formula there. Nobody understood a word he said, and he talked to this blackboard all the time. Every once in a while he would go sort of halfway back to the… lectern and talk to the audience. They still didn’t hear him because he wasn’t anywhere near the microphone. Then he overstayed his time. Anyhow… it was about as bad a lecture as you can imagine, and however the people had heard the famous Sewall Wright and most of them left after that lecture, but those that stayed heard me. And I was glued to the lectern and the microphone, I had beautiful slide – this was in the days before Kodachromes, but we had a… an… an artist at the American Museum [of Natural History] who was very good at coloring glass slides, and he colored these beautiful glass slides of geographic variation in my South Sea Island birds. And I talked for only 25 minutes instead of, like Sewall Wright, about 45 minutes, and after Sewall Wright’s lecture, my lecture seemed to be a marvellous lecture. And a very short time afterwards Professor Dunn came up to me and said, would I be willing to give some of the famous Jesup Lectures at Columbia University? And that was another one of these lucky accidents of my life, that Sewall Wright had spoken just before me. Well, to go back to the Jesup Lectures… we were asked to talk about speciation. There were two people involved. I, to give two lectures on speciation in animals, and a botanist with the name of Edgar Anderson who gave two lectures on speciation in plants. And everything went fine except that Edgar Anderson was manic depressive and he got into a depressive state and didn’t deliver his manuscript. So Columbia University Press came to me and they said, could I expand my two lectures into a whole book, and well, I said, yes I would, and I did, and that is how my book Systematics and the Origin of Species originated.

Now this book, published in 1942, became one of the foundation publications of the evolutional synthesis because I, even more than Dobzhansky, brought in the whole subject of species and speciation and their relation to evolution. This book is still considered a classic and still being published. At first it was slow but every new printing – I always printed a thousand copies – every new printing sold out more quickly than the preceding one because Columbia University Press never did it… never advertised it, but the book advertised itself, so to speak. Now let me say a few things about the contents of the book. I was, after all, a taxonomist who wrote that book, and… when I look back at it now, many people consider it a book on evolution and indeed it was also a book of evolution, but it was at the same time very much a book on the principles and methods of systematics. And, in fact, it was the first pronouncement… the first real… certainly in the English language… presentation of the so-called new systematics, that’s the species level systematics. And I introduced a lot of new concepts which were certainly new to the American audience, even though some of them were things that I had learned from [Erwin] Stresemann and from Rensch and other European authors. And as a matter of fact, there was simultaneously a similar development in the systematics in… in Russia, and there are some historians working on it now. But at any rate, as far as America was concerned, this was mostly to everybody something very new. And the other half, of course, was that I used this new knowledge of species and speciation to show how this contributes to an understanding of one of the two great areas of evolutionary biology. Evolutionary biology has two great areas: the one is the origin of adaptation which is explained by the changes within a population, within a gene pool owing to natural selection, and the other great area is the explanation of the origin of… organic diversity, of biodiversity and that includes the whole thing of species, speciation and a connection between that and macro-evolution, that means the evolution of higher categories, of higher types, of evolutionary novelties of… all the things that go over long periods of time and that, for instance, also interest the palaeontologists. And in the part in which I tried to prove that geographic variation leads to speciation, I employed among other things, what I thought was a new technique and in a way, in that connection, it was a new technique. And that is… you cannot… speciation takes time, thousands of millions of years… so you cannot follow it by experiment or anything like this, you have to infer it by an indirect method, and the method that I used was exactly the same method the cytologists had used in the 19th century to explain cell division. They just took lots and lots of pictures of dividing cells and finally put them in sequence so that they had a complete picture now from the very beginning of a dividing cell to the very end of a dividing cell. And so I did… by showing cases where populations that had been isolated were just partly and very slightly different from each other to cases where they were more different with each other, ever more, until finally cases where they were so different that you could say they’re already new species, or they’re very near being new species. This same process as putting together, different pictures of a dividing cell, I put together, so to speak, different maps of dividing an isolated and diverging populations. That book had a… I think I can rightly say… a… a very considerable impact because this area of evolutional biology had been totally ignored and neglected by the geneticists, and you go to the writings of the great population geneticists: Fisher, Haldane, Sewall Wright. Sewall Wright, incidentally, in that lecture in Columbus, Ohio, talked about evolutionary change within a lineage, but not about how species multiply, which was my problem.

I have been asked in later years quite often how I could have, in such a short time, write [sic] this book that is so rich in information and detail. Well, to begin with I, at that time, was a person of… with an extraordinary memory, I also was a voracious reader of the literature. The American Museum [of Natural History] had a wonderful system that on Tuesday afternoon, every week, all the issues of the new journals that had come during the preceding week were laid out on a table and the staff could look at it and could put in a bid for getting that issue at the next week or week following. So I knew not only the literature on birds, but all the other vertebrates, I read the insect literature, I read the literature on marine invertebrates, I read geology, I read [unclear]… I had an enormous knowledge and I, apparently, more or less wrote the book off the top of my head with all that knowledge. And… the… remarkable thing was that, of course, my findings fitted perfectly well what the people worked on butterflies had found, what the people working on snails had found… it didn’t work so well on some… some other groups, but it was a… a spur to start working along new directions which people hadn’t done up to that time. Even in my own field in ornithology, most of the American ornithologists were still what we referred to as typologists; they described species as such entities and if there was a little difference among species they made it a new genus. And in my book, for instance, I make a list of 37 genera of American birds that were recognized as good genera in the official list of North American birds, published by the American Ornithologists’ Union. Well, the official committee paid no attention to that at all, but in the course of time, now, so far as I know, all these 37 names that I said were not really valid, they all have been sunk into the synonymy, and a much more natural system has been adopted.

Birds are such a good stepping stone to do researches in general biology because there is no other group of organisms that is as well known as… as are birds. Literally all the 9500 or 10,000 – depending how you split them – species that are… at present, exist, have been discovered, have been carefully described, their geographic variation is known, and so on and so forth. And so it is, birds are a marvellous stepping stone in three directions: toward evolution, toward systematics, and toward biogeography.

My interest in biogeography is documented by papers I wrote from my PhD thesis on… which was on biogeography; it was on the spread of the serin finch across Europe, right up to a major book which is right now in press, dealing with the birds of northern Melanesia. In 1974, I published a collection of essays called Evolution and the Diversity of Life and in this volume are reprinted nine of my major papers dealing with the field of biogeography, and I’ll deal… I will explain some of the subjects with which I dealt. For instance, it is always claimed that the… establishment of plate tectonics in the mid-1960s completely changed everything in biogeography. By contrast, I showed that as far as birds are concerned, plate tectonics required only one single change in our interpretations and that has to do with a connection across the north Atlantic from North America across Greenland to Norway and northern England. All other aspects… all other connections that plate tectonics established are irrelevant as far as birds are concerned because they deal with much earlier periods.

There seemed to be a real conflict between the interpretations of the ornithologist and the claims of the geologist, and that deals with the fauna of Australia. According to the geologists, Australia having been a part of that Mesozoic Gondwana continent that extended from South America across the south… across Antarctic to Australia, the bird fauna of Australia should have a strong Gondwana element. But in reality at best 3% only of the Australian birds are Gondwana elements, and the biogeographers just simply couldn’t believe it. But now the latest geological investigations show that actually during the break up of Gondwanaland a major fringe of the Australian plate separated from Australia, moved northward and established contact with Asia, with so-called Laurasia. And this series of islands, these small broken up plates served as stepping stones for colonists coming down from Asia, so here the… so a geographer had discovered something or had demonstrated something that the geologists only later were able to discover.

A major theme right since… oh, since the last century, in fact since Darwin’s time, was whether discontinuous faunas had been in contact at one time, or whether the discontinuity had been established by a colonization across, let us say, a water gap or some other barrier. And many authors, right up to modern times, believed that such colonization across water couldn’t happen, and so whenever they found an isolated fauna somewhere on an island they built land bridges to the nearest continent. And I, together with George Gaylord Simpson, was one of the most rigorous opponents to this land bridge building. And here is, for instance, a place where I disagreed with my friend and mentor in many ways, Professor Rensch in Berlin, who explained all the distributions in Indonesia in, as he called it, the Sundaland, by land bridges. And I wrote a special paper in 1944 in which I showed that by all methods of influence one could show that land bridges could not have been involved, and of course the geologists since that time have completely substantiated this. And the same was true for island region in other areas.

A particularly important thing, which I was not the first to point out but the one who pointed it out most vigorously, is the fact that during most of the Tertiary there were two tropical American faunas, one north of the Panama gap, and the other one south of it. Usually it is forgotten that there was this northern gap, and so, in reality there are quite a number of families of North American birds that were basically of tropical origin and at one time had their major centre of distribution in this tropical North America, while nowadays people always think anything tropical is South American. Now, my boss in… in New York, Dr Chapman, was one of those people who had also pointed this out. To go back once more to the more easterly region, there is a famous line, so-called Wallace’s Line, that was first described by Wallace who said that if one went from the island of Bali, which is the island just east of Java, to the next island in that chain, the island of Lombok, one went from an Asiatic or Indian fauna to an Australian fauna. And he called that… line which in the north continues between Borneo and Sulawesi, Celebes, and then further north between Asia and the Philippines, this line was – since Wallace had discovered it – called Wallace’s Line. But the argument arose very soon, what was the meaning of Wallace’s Line, and there were two schools. The one said this was indeed as Wallace had said, the border between an Australian and an Asian fauna. And I, together with one or two others, showed that it was actually the edge of the Asiatic shelf, the so-called Sunda Shelf, and that still east of this line, for instance, the island of Celebes, and all the Lesser Sunda Islands… the Lesser Sunda Islands, yes, and the Philippines, basically had a much more Asiatic fauna than Australian one, and that the real border line between the Australian and the Indonesian or Indo-Malayan fauna went east of… Celebes, and east of the Lesser Sunda Islands, between the Moluccas and New Guinea on the one hand, and Celebes and the Lesser Sundas on the other hand. And since the paper in which I pointed this out was published, the vigorous battle that had been raging for many years about the meaning of Wallace’s Line has virtually died down except that a few people said, let’s still accept the Wallace’s Line and a line near New Guinea, and call this area in between Malaysia and make that a new faunal region. I, personally… this is [sic] particular was done by students of mammals who… the mammals are known that they are poor… poor in crossing water gaps, and so actually between the Sunda Shelf and the Australian Shelf, there is… there are very few mammal species and to make a special zoogeographic region for that mixture of elements that colonized from both sides always has seemed to me as something that was not advisable.

In 1939 I participated in a pan-Pacific science congress in California, and I presented there, for the first time in detail, the findings that I had made in my studies on the island faunas of the Western Pacific. And I showed a number of things. For instance, that there’s a constant turnover on each island so that you can… recognize the oldest elements and ever more recent elements until finally a certain percentage of the fauna consists of things that had just colonized it and had not yet changed from their taxonomic status in the source area. I also showed, of course, that the larger an island the… larger the number of species. I also showed that the percentage of endemic species on an island rose in a straight line… graph with the size of the area. All these are findings that eventually were used by McArthur and Wilson in their so-called theory of island biogeography.

I think I can rightly claim that the basic findings were all in this early paper of mine which was published in 1941, except I didn’t express it in mathematical form which was done by McArthur and Wilson. The interesting or amusing thing is that when one really applies these formulae, these mathematical formulae of… of Wilson’s, you get to results that are very often contradicted by the facts. This was particularly true for the Hawaiian islands where the studies of Olson and… others shown that there was a large fauna that was… bird fauna… that was exterminated by the Polynesians when they occupied the Hawaiian islands, and this is not predicted at all by Wilson’s formulae, and the result was that… Storrs Olson published a paper in which he said that these findings completely refute the theory of island biogeography. Well, I don’t agree with that. It just refutes the mathematical formulae of McArthur and Wilson, while the purely descriptive aspect of this island biogeography of my 1930… 1941 paper – the turnover, the mixture of very old and ever more recent elements, the relation between island size and… and number of species, the relation between island size and percentage of endemics – all these basic facts are not refuted by the findings of Storrs Olson on the fossil birds of Hawaii, only the mathematical aspects of the McArthur and Wilson thing. Now, there was one other case, yes. There’s the famous island of Krakatoa which in 1883, so to speak, exploded as a volcano and exterminated the entire fauna and flora of the islands, that there were only ash piles left. And this island has, since 1883, now more than a hundred years, been re-occupied again… re-colonized first by plants and eventually by various animals, and finally by birds, and a final steady state size of the number of species on Krakatoa has now been established. McArthur and Wilson, on the basis of their mathematics, calculated what this ultimate size would be, and I calculated it on the basis of looking at other islands and… and various… without any… using any mathematics, how many species one would expect on an island of that size. And the final sum found by… by the latest reviewer found that my prediction is almost precisely correct, while the prediction based on mathematical formulae was way off.

Every fauna, every… the animal life of a given area is always a mixture of things that have immigrated from various sites. Now, I did an analysis of the birds of North America for instance, and showed which ones had come in at an early time from Asia, at a later time from Asia. I didn't point out… because that's the one thing… the plate tectonics has changed our thinking… I didn't point out that there was a colonization across the North Atlantic, but I also analyzed how much of a colonization there had been from South America and vice versa, how much of a colonization of South America had taken place from North America. And then later on I followed this up once more and did it by families and established for each family where it had come from, whether from the tropical or the temperate zone part of North America, or had come all the way from Asia, and I think the basic analysis that I did in these two papers has never been questioned or changed.

Every kind of bird has its own capacity to colonize other areas. Some are very poor colonizers, some are fantastically good colonizers. For instance, when you take New Guinea. New Guinea has something like 64 families of birds, but then when you got into Polynesia, which was… was colonized from New Guinea, only 16 of the 64 families have contributed species and genera to the Polynesian fauna, and the same you find in other areas of the world. In the Caribbean, for instance, of the mainland families and genera and species, a certain percentage gets over to the Caribbean, to the… Caribbean islands, while others are unable to do so. And Jared Diamond found, for New Guinea, that there are about 30% of the New Guinea species, and I'm talking now only about lowland species, that do not settle on any island around New Guinea that is more than one mile away from the mainland coast. In other words, dispersal facility is a very important characteristic of bird species and bird genera.

In these many years beginning, I would say, right after my PhD thesis where I did, at [Erwin] Stresemann's suggestion, an analysis of the so-called snowfinches… that was 1926, ‘27. From there until my very most recent ornithological papers I constantly worked with birds and made discoveries one after the other. Now the… one of the most basic contributions that I made was when working up the material of the Whitney and Rothschild collections, I took one genus after the other of birds and revised it. I established how many species there were, how many subspecies could be recognized, what was the distribution, what names are not valid, are synonyms or others, and I did this for many… for many groups. This was the first time this had been done since the 1880s or 1890s, and… I don't whether I should be happy about this or unhappy, but in most cases my analysis was so definitive that nobody has worked on these genera since, and… and nobody has ever claimed that… that what I had done was wrong… and it might have been wrong, how do I know? In the course of these studies I discovered 25 new species of birds and over 400 new subspecies. And… I… made the… I was the first one to clearly state that various groups of birds like the Australian flycatchers, warblers, shrikes, nuthatches, creepers, which are… have… have always been associated with the Asiatic or European birds with the same vernacular name, were not all related to them, but were endemic Australian elements. At the time I had no way of determining to which other Australian birds they might be most closely related. This is something that later on Charles Sibley established by using molecular methods, but I don't think he ever mentions that I… a good many years before him, had already established that these were not northern elements but… autonomous Australian elements.

One of my major… purely ornithological achievement was that I was the first to prepare a definitive catalogue of the birds of New Guinea. My list of New Guinea birds, published in 1941, has been the basis of all the many books that have been published on New Guinea ever since and my findings were so sound that people have on the whole accepted everything I said without much question. Now, I did an extremely thorough job there. I looked at just about every single type of New Guinea birds; I studied all the literature that had ever been published on New Guinea in whatever language, including Italian and… where quite a bit was published, and of course French and Dutch and whatnot. And so it was a job that required an immense amount of time and sometimes people have told me that, well, you just wasted too much time on those lists of New Guinea, but… birds… but first of all it has been such a solid basis for future work, but also doing it I learned a great deal. I learned a great deal also on taxonomic method, so I don't really feel sorry about the time that I have spent on this… this… project. I mentioned already, I think in passing, that I discovered this geographic variation of sexual dimorphism and discovered that it couldn't have a hormonal basis but had to have some other basis, and this has not actually been properly followed up after my publication. I discovered some minor things of… of interest. For instance, I… following my friend Rensch, when I was collecting in New Guinea, I established the weight of every bird I collected. I had a… a very fine scale for the small birds and a larger scale for the larger birds, and I discovered, occasionally, some interesting things. For instance, there was a group of genera that I usually placed near the flowerpeckers, but probably not related to them, where I found, and I think it was totally unknown, that the females were very much larger than the males, they weighed sometimes almost twice as much as the males. And that again is the finding of mine that has never been followed up; nobody has ever made study of their life histories to find an explanation for this unexpected discrepancy in weight. Well, these are just some of the findings that I made in the course of my ornithological investigations.

When I looked at the classification of the ducks, I was horrified because it was based on purely superficial things like… ducks that would dive and ducks that would not dive, ducks that would eat fish and so… ducks that would not eat fish, and it was a totally artificial classification. And I knew the work of two European ornithologists who had studied the habits and displays of ducks and had come to very different conclusions. One was Heinroth, the director of the zoological… of the aquarium and the zoological garden in Berlin, and the other one was the well-known Konrad Lorenz, and so I decided to produce a… for American readers who were not familiar with this literature, a modern classification of ducks. And, fortunately, by that time, the French ornithologist, Jean Delacour, had arrived at the museum, and Delacour, who was a wealthy fancier of birds, had had practically all the species of ducks of the world bred at his… in his animal park in France, and so I got him to help. And between the two of us we wrote a paper on the classification of ducks which was probably the most widely printed paper of mine, because not only was it reprinted several times in ornithological literature, but in the literature of the hunting… clan, hunting papers, sports papers, animal breeders, bird breeders, and so in… in lots of these journals this paper was reprinted. Now, the findings that Delacour and I made… were not always correct, but it was the basis and the… the changes were rather… rather minimal. But later on when molecular data were added and some other things it turned out that a few of our decisions were incorrect. But it certainly started an absolutely new era in the study of ducks, even though based on a… a lot of the European literature.

I saw that some swallows were classified on basis… primarily I guess their color. If they were dull-colored they were put together and the glossy ones were put in another group, and I discovered or I knew that among the dull-colored one were some that built mud nests, just like the barn swallow does and like the… the cliff swallows and things that. And so I reorganized the swallows on this basis and I got the help of a worker on American birds, and South America in particular, James Bond – incidentally, he gave the name to the famous James Bond – and between James Bond and myself we worked out a classification of the swallows primarily based on the nesting habits, but also on some other things. And this classification based on behavior has now been almost completely confirmed. There's only one species which they change by the molecular people, and that has always been something that I've been rather pleased with, that behavior has, in this case, been such an important clue to relationship.

I wasn't very long at the American Museum [of Natural History] when one of the wealthy donors of the Museum proposed a sailing trip through Polynesia and all the way to New Guinea and invited me to join him. And so I had to go to the head of the… the chairman of the department, Dr Chapman, and I said, ‘Here, Dr Chapman, I have this wonderful invitation. Can I take four months off in order to participate in this?’ Or whatever it was. And he looked at me and he said, ‘Well, I'm sorry to disappoint you, young man, but the money that was given to us to keep you going is strictly to work out these collections and you cannot just take time off. You are not here regular staff member, and you're here for the specific objective of working up the collections’. Well, I had to say no to this wealthy gentleman who wanted me to come with him to the… on his sailing ship and continue work on the collections. And, of course, Chapman had been entirely right. I mean, I'm not even questioning that, and furthermore I even admit that going out on this sailing trip probably would not have added very much to my knowledge and understanding of birds and evolutional systematics, while in the time that I was chained to my desk working very hard on these collections I probably learned a great deal more. And… I have never, since I came back from New Guinea, been out on another expedition and I don't think, as I have just said, that I thereby lost a great deal. I lost a great deal of fun, but I didn't lose very much scientifically, is at least my feeling.

The decision, of course, in many ways was not rational at all. It was simply giving in to a youthful dream and of course it was an… to be out on an expedition and all that, even though it was dangerous and there still was a considerable percentage of those people going on expeditions that lost their lives either from tropical diseases or from other accidents or from native attacks, so it was a dangerous thing too. But at the same time, it… I think it… it added, certainly in my case, an immense amount to my education, to the development of my character, to the development of all sorts of insights into both human nature and the workings of our society that I wouldn't have had if… I had not gone on these expeditions. Now the… reaction of my family: my father died when… had died long before, and my mother was a very capable woman. She raised us – I have two brothers – she raised us three boys from teenage through the universities. She lived on a… just on a widow’s pension and we worked our way through college and so she… she was a very practical person. And yet when this… my… when I… it was… on the way of making my decision and I talked with her, she simply asked me, she said, ‘Is it really something you want?’ And I said, ‘Yes’, and then she said, ‘Then go right ahead and go’.

I, of course, been thought… thinking of that. I was not the guy to be a… the ordinary, normal practitioner. Now, to begin with when I was a pre-clinical student in Greifswald, the professor of anatomy there, Professor Karl Peter, he was so taken by my enthusiasm for my work – I dissected… I did 11 different dissections on the human body – he tried to persuade me I should shift to anatomy, believe it or not, and he said as soon as you've got your degree I'll employ you as my first assistant, so you have a… a career all laid out for you. But of course it didn't appeal to me at all. Now, my own feeling was this was a combination of several things. First of all, I’m quite sure I would have gone into a university career and into research and I was particularly interested in diagnosis. I had the… as it… in hindsight I know quite wrong idea, that my father probably wouldn't have died if he had been diagnosed early enough and so forth. So I was very much obsessed with the idea that diagnosis had to be improved, and that's the direction in which I would have gone. It would have been internal medicine.

Germany wasn't big enough to have both [Erwin] Stresemann and me, and Stresemann was there first. He occupied the territory, and I'm quite sure that in due time I would have had to… shift into something very different which I could have possibly done, or get into continuous fighting with Stresemann. Now Stresemann was… in one respect he differed from me and I've just been discussing this with a man who's working on a Stresemann biography. Stresemann was outstanding, I have nothing but admiration for Stresemann, but he always was… he… he applied everything to birds, he never stepped outside; I always had interests outside of birds. In the course of my life I have worked on groups of insects, I have worked on marine invertebrates, I have worked even on plants and so forth. That never would have happened in Stresemann and I'm quite sure that if I had stayed in Germany I probably would in… in… very soon shifted to some other group of organisms.

I had a number of ideas on bird migration and when I did, at that time, I was still a Lamarckian, let's remember that. And when I read this paper now I am just a little bit, shall we say, embarrassed. However, I had a number of ideas. At that time there was a good fight going on: why do birds migrate? And is the winter quarter the original home of the species from which they have expanded northward into their breeding territory? And so forth. And… I analyzed all these factors and wrote this paper, but when it wasn't quite finished yet I went to New Guinea and my good friend Wilhelm Meise, two years older than I, also a… a PhD candidate with [Erwin] Stresemann, finished it up and I might happily say that Meise is now just above 95 and he is still alive and still apparently in good shape. Well, the one thing in particular that I pointed out in this paper and which people didn't pick up until just about 20 years ago, is that there must be some competition between these hoards of northern migrants that settle in tropical areas or subtropical areas, and the resident bird population. And I suggested that this competition be studied by somebody. Well that is now being studied, but I'm quite sure, at least so far as I know the literature, I was the first person to point that out.

Rothschild was on very good terms with the director of the British Museum in London, and the director there was an ichthyologist with the name of [Albert] Günther, of German origin. And so when Rothschild asked… when he established his museum and… and asked for the names of curators, one in birds and one in insects, Günther suggest two Germans: one was [Ernst] Hartert the ornithologist, the other was… was Karl Jordan, the entomologist. Now Hartert was a good ornithologist, but he never wrote any general papers that would go into the history of… of biology. He was very influential in… in teaching [Erwin] Stresemann how to be an ornithologist, and he was a generally nice person. But Karl Jordan, who had actually a PhD which Hartert didn't have, at the University of Marburg or Giessen, some place like that, Jordan wrote a whole series of very important paper. For instance, one in which he showed how unlikely sympatric speciation is, and then Jordan was perhaps the first person to spell out the biological species concept, except he didn't provide a concrete definition, so we can never quote him as the man established the biological species definition. He was a very… experienced evolutionist. He… he was a great believer at a time when very few people were, a great believer in Darwin's natural selection. And I once wrote a lengthy paper in which I pointed out all the achievements of Karl Jordan and his contributions to evolution, to systematics and to general biology. He's the… he was by far the greater mind among those two. Hartert was good work horse, but Jordan was really an outstanding biologist.

Let's begin with Robert Cushman Murphy. He was a very tall, handsome man, except his eyes were a little bit too small, who came from a rather lowly background. In fact, those who didn't like him would say he's the son of a Long Island cracker. And… however, he had married a girl from one of the upper class families who was very class conscious and so Murphy had to play the same game and he talked a great deal to ladies’ clubs and… he was always very conscious of… of society and so on. And there was a very funny thing, the… it's a little anecdote that doesn't really belong here, but I can't… help myself, I must tell it now. There is an… an establishment on Long Island, was at least at that time, the Long Island Hunt, where they were actually, like in Britain, hunting foxes with… with these dogs and… and chasing them on… on horses. And the Master of the Hunt, a Mr Dreyer, was actually a cousin of my wife, and so when his daughter Dorothy married we were invited to be at the wedding reception. And up to that time Murphy and his wife were… we were newly married, this was about two months after our marriage, Murphy and his wife had completely ignored us, but in the wedding reception we were about five or eight couples ahead of the Murphys and so when we reached Mrs Dreyer, the mother of the bride, she threw her arms around my wife and kissed her on the cheeks and… and treated her like a member of the family, which she was. And then we moved on the line, and then the Murphys passed by and the Murphys after that made a beeline for us and invited us for dinner, because it showed that we were now socially acceptable. So Murphy had a beautiful sense of English. He wrote beautiful things and he could give spellbinding speeches, he should have been a politician, he would have gone a long way; he was referred to as ‘the silver tongue of Brooklyn’ before he came to the American Museum [of Natural History]. He had only one disadvantage, he was also quite bright: he was very lazy. It was very hard to make him work and both [Frank] Chapman and eventually Sanford had great trouble getting manuscripts out of Murphy. Well, I shall not follow that line, but Murphy helped me when I… had completed my first papers I gave the manuscript… because Chapman was still in… in Panama, I gave my manuscripts to Murphy and he gave me some very helpful hints as to sentence structure and the use of certain words. So I'm… I'm always grateful to him for that.

[John T] Zimmer, who worked on the Peruvian birds, had originally been in an applied department somewhere in Nebraska having to do with insect control or something like that, and then been sent out on expedition Peru and that way eventually got into Peruvian birds. But he always had, sort of, a very provincial outlook in… in everything he did, and he was very good at the technicalities of describing new subspecies, but he was not a great ornithologist and I don't think I learned very much from him. And then there were… of course, were the younger people. One was Dean Amadon who had come to the museum as a… to take care of the egg collection, but I invited him to join me in working on the Whitney birds and we became very close friends and he did a lot of very nice revisions of various families of… of birds there. And, together with me, prepared a new classification of the songbird families or passerine families which foreshadowed much of the later work, including, as I mentioned earlier, the position of the Australian warblers, flycatchers, shrikes, nuthatches, creepers, etc. And we're still in very good contact. Then there were other young people, there was Tom Gilliard, another young man who was brought into the department by [Frank] Chapman who had never gone to college actually, but was very helpful and very ardent in his expeditions. He went with some American Museum [of Natural History] expeditions to the… these… table mountains and Venezuela and later on he went to New Guinea and explored some mountain ranges in New Guinea that had been previously unexplored. And he picked up some very bad kind of malaria and some other protozoan diseases and was quite ill for several years and finally died of a heart attack which apparently was due to the destruction of his heart by some of these tropical parasites.
Then there was Charles Vaurie who was a dentist who… French dentist who was a friend of Chapin [sic], because Chapin's wife was French, and I guess he was her dentist, and he was interested in birds. But to make a long story short, I took him under my guidance and showed him how to describe birds, and eventually he did a whole series of… of revisions of palaearctic avian genera, and finally wrote a very substantial, very reliable, much used and not yet replaced handbook of the birds of the palaearctic fauna. He later on worked on South American birds and I understand that his work there was not nearly up to what he had done previously.

The [American] Museum [of Natural History], of course, had to raise… to… to get the recognition, get the money from the city and all that… had to have exhibition halls. There was one exhibition hall, the hall of South Sea island birds and that… [Robert] Murphy more or less was in charge. But most of the exhibits actually devoted… were devoted to land birds and so I had to really run them so I was as much the… person who had done that hall as… as was Murphy. But then later on, the museum decided to have a hall on the biology of birds, to be dedicated to Doctor Sanford. And I was placed in charge. That was one of the most thankless jobs that I ever had in my life, because nobody cooperated and I had much too small a budget and I had much too tight a schedule. And everything always went wrong, and less and less money was available and less and less time was available. And finally by hook and crook, on the 25th May, or whatever the date was, of 1948, I opened the hall. And it… it had a lot of very interesting things because I had all sorts of ideas how to demonstrate how birds fly. I had some good model-makers, they… they were working with me, but my colleagues were hopeless. I had a very amusing exhibit. I mounted a skeleton of a hummingbird – very small thing – on the thigh bone of the Madagascar elephant bird, there was this huge big thigh bone of the Madagascar elephant bird and mounted on it a… was the skeleton of a little hummingbird to… showing the range of size within the birds. And there were many other aspects in that biology birds illustrated in this hall, but in a week after that I had – and most people don't know that and don't realise it – I had really what… what was a nervous breakdown and I had trouble with my heart, both tachycardia and arrhythmia. I felt weak and it took several years before I felt reasonably normal again, and I still have difficulties with my heart occasionally, but they all date back to that breakdown. It was the release after this intense stress and so forth, and finally the thing was opened up and I must have let myself go and, and had this… this breakdown. So I always think back with… with, sort of, horror to the time that I was struggling with that hall.

There was this rather strict separation in American science at that time, between the university people and the museum people, and the museum people were always treated as the poor relations. But eventually people began to… give me some credit for my achievements and in due time I got an invitation to go to the University of Minnesota as a visiting professor. And I got… by that time [Frank] Chapman was retired, Murphy was chairman, and most of the material of the Whitney collection had been worked out, so I got this leave of absence… also they didn't have to pay for me during that time… leave of absence to go to Minnesota where a Professor Mennig, sort of, took care of me. Now I had never before given a course anywhere, and I hadn't done an awful lot of lecturing. And… however, I had in the meantime founded a… an evolutionary journal called Evolution and getting a… seen an awful lot of manuscripts of all the recent work on… in evolution, so I was sure I could produce a very interesting and very novel course on evolution because much of the material would be things that weren't even published yet. So, I made myself my notes and… and a series of folders to cover the various lectures that I was going to give and I gave my first lecture. And, of course, I wasn't familiar yet with all the tricks of a lecturer and after I'd talked for about 15 minutes I'd used up all my material in my first folder. And then I went to my second folder and I tried everything in the world to slow me… myself down and so… but I still used up the third folder even before that class was finished. And I was in total panic because I said to myself, ‘Where am I going to get the material to get all these lectures?’ There was still about 18 or 20, or whatnot, lectures to come. And I went to Professor Mennig and he laughed and he said, ‘Well, that seems to be happening to a lot of beginners’, and then he said, ‘Well, there're a lot of little rules that you have to learn. First of all, don't believe that if you said something once that the students have gotten it. You've got to say it two and three times, and that will use up some time’. And then he gave me a lot of other little hints. Then he said, ‘Now I have one last one’. He said, ‘Always have in your folder a tabulation with columns and… and lines and all that, and if you run out of material, you say to the class, well now this principle is best represented and illustrated by a tabulation which I will now put on the blackboard. Then by the time you make your lines and fill all the little squares and the class follows you and fills… you easily use up 10, 15 or 20 minutes and the class never notices that you are just wasting their time’. So, I had to use that only once, but that was my first experience of teaching.

I'd never prepared an exam before, I didn't know how to make exam, I'd never been a teaching fellow or teaching assistant or professor. And so I finally got together a good exam and then the blue books came all back and how should I rate them? And I started from the top down, according to the alphabet, and gave what I thought was the appropriate grade. And then I said, ‘Wait a day’, and then I did it again the next day, except I turned the pile over and started from the bottom and graded all the things. And then I compared the grades of yesterday with the grades of today, and fortunately quite often they were the same but there were quite a few discrepancy and then I had to go back again to the paper and see what… at… the latest analysis I would give. So it was a very painful process for me to learn all these things that a professor has to know, and there was one thing that very much bothered me. I had one student in the class, she was a very beautiful girl. Her name was Miss Eriksson, I still remember it. And she submitted a blue book in which she had… in which she answered all my questions correctly, but it was almost as if she had duplicated what I had said. In the whole thing – and there were several essay questions – there never was an original thought, there never was anything that indicate originality. It was all just regurgitating what I had said in the class. And I said, ‘Now what kind of a grade can I give her?’ She of course will expect an A but without any thought of her own in this thing, how can I give her an A? And I finally gave an A- and I'm quite sure that poor Miss Eriksson was deeply disappointed, she had everything right, how could I give her an A-? And even to the present day I feel just a little bit guilty that I didn't give her a straight A.

After this professorship at [the University of] Minnesota, three years later I had another invitation, this time from the University of Washington in Seattle in the north-west and this was particularly interesting. I was to give a course on evolution and simultaneously another visiting professor was invited, Richard Goldschmidt, a famous German biologist who had been driven out by the Nazis and who was opposed to Darwinian evolution. And I lectured on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, he lectured on Tuesday and Thursday at the same time, and in the front row were the full professors, behind them the associate and assistant professors, and behind them, in the auditorium, the PhD candidates and post-docs and finally the graduate students and finally the undergraduates. Well, naturally he… Goldschmidt and I, we contradicted each other continuously and the professors and all the people really knowing something about the field were immensely amused at… in fact, that was the whole reason why they brought the two of us together at the same time. But the poor undergraduate students couldn't understand it at all: how can two people be distinguished visiting professors and contradict each other? It's quite clear one or the other must be wrong, so why do… why do they invite the one who is wrong? So… I don't think these students ever solved that puzzle and you might even go so far as to say there was a little truth in this question of the students.

The stay in Seattle was quite… it was immensely pleasurable because it's one of the most beautiful parts of the country. And there were some very nice people in the faculty who took my wife and me out every weekend either to the Olympic Peninsula, or to the coastline or to the islands, Friday Harbor Island. Or, whether it was… [sic], and we had a most wonderful time there. And normally it's an area where it rains all the time in the fall, and by some fluke it was a driest summer they have had in something like 50 years; in fact, it was so dry that they had to ration electricity because the reservoirs from which they got a lot of the hydroelectric power were drying up.

One day I got a telephone call from Professor [Alfred] Romer, the Director of the Museum of Comparative Zoology, who said would I accept a professorship at Harvard, a permanent one? What a question! So, naturally I was very much interested and… I went after… after I'd gone back to… to New York of course we, my wife and I, we actually drove down from Seattle through the Redwood Groves, all the way down to southern California, where we visited Max Delbrück and other friends. And… then went back home to New York, and Romer came to New York, he had to pass through New York and we met at the railway station, he gave me all the terms of the appointment which were very acceptable to me. And then I went to the director of the American Museum [of Natural History] to give him the bad news and he tried very hard to keep me there, and… ‘What can I offer you?’ And so forth, ‘Well, I'll… I'll top that, I'll give you a thousand dollars more’, and that style. And finally says, ‘Is there anything else that I could do to… ?’ ‘Yes’, I said, ‘take the Museum out of New York City’. I was so tired of New York City. This will hurt you to say that because Walter is a great friend of New York City. Well, anyhow, in due time I went off to… and started my new position at the… at the American… at the Museum of Comparative Zoology. And it was a position as Alexander Agassiz Professor, starting July 1, 1953.

I have always, somehow or other, been a teacher. I love teaching, I loved… gathering people around me and teach. For instance, when I came to New York first, I went to the ornithological society there which has the rather highfaluting name, the Linnaean Society of New York, and I found that all they did was report on early arrivals and rare birds and so there was no real ornithology, it was all a game of birdwatching. And so I… established what I called an ornithological seminar for those who would like to attend, and this was mostly young people, and what I did at these seminars, report on the current… ornithological literature. Whenever there was an interesting paper coming out, particularly in the foreign literature, for instance in German journals, I presented it there in… in an English translation. And I finally got a whole group together who were very keen on doing ornithological research. And one of them started to watch a brood of barn owls; another one made a census, Joe Hickey made a census of a breeding bird population and… and at that time they always made only censuses in the winter of winter birds. And a third one did a study of the display behaviour of the willet, a shore bird – that was William Vogt. Still another one established a colony of tree swallows - that was Richard Cursey - and studied the fate of the broods, the number of eggs in the nest and correlated with the age of the parents and so forth, a very fine population studies, and so it went. Another one made a census of all the peregrine falcon eyries in the… in New York State and particularly in eastern New York State, and this was just one of my teaching efforts. I mean, I didn't get paid for it, I didn't get any… but I was so taken by the enthusiasm of these young fellows that this was enough of a reward for me. But I did similar things in the Museum [of Comparative Zoology]. Whenever a young man came by and wanted to learn something, and so I devoted some time to him. Of course, Dean Amadon was the first case, I mean he was just a… I invited him to join me and then later on when we... I got him more involved in the whole business of systematics, I started a systematics club at the American Museum [of Natural History] and we had meetings I guess once a month and so… discussing particular problems in the field of systematics, or discussing particular papers. And it was always a matter of… of very vigorous and… and exciting… and excited discussions among these people and many of them have been alive right until recent time. One of the most active one, Karl Koopman, died only a… a couple of weeks ago. So in this informal way I had already been teaching a long time before, and after I'd had the… invitation to go to [the University of] Minnesota, even the… even Columbia University invited me to become an adjunct professor, and I gave a course there. The problem there was that they would not permit me to have students, I only had to… I only was permitted to give these courses, and since they weren't my students… I did get in somewhat closer contact with some of them, but not really, it was not… and then when I got the offer from Harvard, I immediately got a telephone call from Columbia University: would I be willing to stay in New York if they gave me the permission to have students and have a graduate program, and I said, ‘Sorry, too late’.

The Bronx County Bird Club was a… informal gathering of about seven young – originally teenage, later in their early 20s – ornithologists, bird watchers, who… none of them was an academic, but they were having a wonderful time and they loved to get together, and it was called the Bronx County Bird Club, because one of their statutes said you couldn't become a member until you were born… unless you were born in… in the Bronx. And the Bronx had a… interesting reputation around the country and particularly in New York. Now, I was also a member of the Bronx County Bird Club, not having been born in the Bronx, but so I was made an honorary member. And another honorary member was Roger Terry Peterson, and a third honorary member was Bill Vogt; we were the three honorary members. Well, we went together for Christmas censuses and… came together again. It was just a… a somewhat rowdy group of youngsters who were having a wonderful time.

It was a group of bird watchers and ornithologists who certainly needed guidance and needed some professional input. And so I became secretary and then later on took on the editorship and they brought out some very poor publications and I decided to improve the quality, and I… persuaded Margaret Morse Nice, who was doing, at that time, probably the best work, the best field work with birds in the United States and possibly in the whole world. I persuaded her to write up all of her work, and then I would publish it in the Transactions of the Linnean Society and so it was done. Now, she was not very good in… in her style and her calculations were usually wrong by a couple of percentage points and so forth, so I had to put in a lot of work, but finally this work came out and it was a great success and after a while it was sold out and had to be reprinted. It was reprinted by some commercial publisher, I believe, and it made her famous but there was quite a bit of grumbling among the members of the Linnaean Society [of New York] because it wasn't the kind of the publication that they would enjoy, but it certainly gave prestige. And then I got the Dutch behaviorist, Nikolaas Tinbergen to publish some of his observations in a… in a small publication of the Linnaean Society and it had, during the time I was editor, it had sort of a golden period, and then it sank back into… its sleepy existence after I had left. But at the same time it gave me experience as an editor, and the experience that I had gotten there helped me a great deal when I established a journal Evolution because I was… already by that time I knew how to deal with printers, how to do copy editing and all the important things of… of being an editor. So my… my apprenticeship as you may call it as editor of the Linnaean Society of New York was… was quite important for my life.

The American Ornithologists’ Union [AOU]… is the biggest organization of American ornithologists, founded in 1883, so quite distinguished and all that. But when I looked at their journal which has the name [The] Auk I was rather appalled at the low quality, and then I went to their first annual meeting in the fall of 1931 after having come to the… the United States. And at the meeting in Detroit… but the actual lectures and all that were given at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, and after I had sat through two or three or four of these lectures, one more uninteresting than the other, I decided I am wasting my time and I went to the library to read the current journals, or something like that. And there was another lady… there was a lady sitting there, and it turned out that she had been to the meetings and had exactly the same experience and she was just too utterly bored to attend any more, and this is how I met Margaret Morse Nice, that was at that… in a library there, both of whom having been. So, after a couple of years member of the AOU, I was sick and tired of the way it was run. It was run by a clique in Washington DC, they were all federal employees in the Biological Survey or similar institutions and they had finagled the constitution in such a way that they could elect the treasurer and the secretary and the president and… and all the major fellows. And so I studied the constitutional aspects and I found a way to defeat them, so I got together with Joe Hickey and several other people; this has all been written up now, I am told, in a… this forthcoming history of American ornithologists by… what's the name of the fellow? Barlow [sic] or some such name…. Anyhow, and… we… at one of the particular meetings we… I suddenly had all the votes to defeat the Washington people and we certainly did defeat them thoroughly and the society was from that point taken over by the real ornithologists and not by these civil service people in Washington. And the AOU for many years was a… was an important force in ornithology. But in more recent years the best young people usually become active in peripheral societies like the Ecological Society, the Evolution Society, the Behavior Society, and do not have enough money and time to go to several annual meetings, so they go to the meetings of those societies rather than that of the AOU. And the AOU has once again fallen back more or less into the hands of amateurs.

I was very much interested in pair formation in birds because this plays an important role in speciation. And… there was the question which Konrad Lorenz had raised: does a young hatchling – a bird comes out of the egg – know what its parents are like, or does it learn that by… does it even know it… to what species it belongs, so to speak, will it recognize other birds as members of their own species, or do they have to learn that while they're being raised by their parents? And Lorenz showed that the greylag goose certainly learns it by a process he… he called prägung which means imprinting, so that the freshly hatched little greylag gosling follows the first moving object that also makes certain noises, and then adopts that as its… its species figure, first as its parents’ figure and then eventually its species figure. And very often these imprinted birds will not mate with members of their own species because they are imprinted on the human species, if you [sic]… So I decided to take some simple, easily gotten aviary birds, I still did finches and I had three species with which I worked. And I had them in cages at the Museum [of Comparative Zoology] and tried to… arrange in such a way that they wouldn't see that their own species, the hatchlings, when they grew up, and then see whether they would become imprinted or not. Well, to make a long story short, without having a special assistant doing all the… all the actual work of raising them and feeding them and taking care of them, I just couldn't do it, so I abandoned the project. And I told this to [Theodosius] Dobzhansky – my friend Professor Dobzhansky at Columbia University – and he said, ‘Look here, why don't you do that with drosophila? It's much easier’. So, he said I'm going to spend next summer’ – this was the summer of 1943 – ‘I'm going to spend next summer in Cold Spring Harbor and why don't you spend the summer there, too and… and we do… we make this experiment?’ I introduce you… the drosophila technique and you do what you want to do. And so it was done and then my family joined me too. And I spent the summer there and this happened I think for another year, and then Dobzhansky no longer would come in the summer, but my family was so enchanted with Cold Spring Harbor and spending the summer there that we, from that point on until the year 1952, spent every summer in Cold Spring Harbor, I believe.

The great advantage of Cold Spring Harbor was that this was the time when molecular biology was being born and Cold Spring Harbor was one of the major places where it developed. This is where Max Delbrück started his phage courses and where the French molecular biologists [Boris] Ephrussi, [Jacques] Monod, [André] Lwoff, [François] Jacob, Rotergey [sic] would also come some summers, not every summer, and where people came from the Rockefeller Institute and so forth. And every day there were long discussions in the evening, informal ones about all the various problems, and I must say that at that time I probably knew about as much about molecular biology and molecular genetics as anybody did. Jim Watson was there a great deal and so on and so forth, and this experience of learning all about molecular biology in its early stages has helped me through the rest of life because even though many of the modern papers I don't understand, too… too technical, but the basic principles I have learnt at that time and of course I have never forgotten. So my summers in Cold Spring Harbor have been a very important thing. Also in another way because all the people I met there are familiar with me and even though I'm organismic biologist working with whole animals, they've always considered me as somebody who was… who understood molecular biology and was basically friendly toward it, while most organismic biologists were just plain hostile to… or… to molecular biology. And this carried beyond the borders of… of the United States, and led to the following amusing situation: that in France my friends tried for many years to have me elected to the Académie des Sciences, the leading scientific institution. But the nomination has to be made by one of the sections of the Académie and sections relevant in my case was the section of zoology, and the members of the section of zoology at that time – this was in the ’70s and early ’80s – they were mostly Lamarckians, and, of course, they wouldn't nominate a Darwinian like myself. So finally somebody in the section of molecular biology thought this was scandalous and he… this is all… I heard this by hearsay – I can't guarantee for every word I say – he said to the section of molecular biology, how about our section nominating Mayr and then he will surely get elected? So they did in… indeed and I immediately got elected. However, if you go to the membership list of the Académie des Sciences you find that I am listed not under zoology, but I am listed under molecular biology. So I'm now, so to speak, a bona fide member of molecular biology.

The traditional species concept in taxonomy always has been the so-called typological species concept. A species is that which is different from another species and then the word different, of course, always created difficulties but if in doubt call it a species, was sort of the feeling. But for many, many reasons I, and people that preceded me like Karl Jordan, whom I mentioned of the Rothschild Museum, and [Erwin] Stresemann and [Bernhard] Rensch in Germany, and some Russian authors, had rejected the typological species concept for strictly scientific reasons. They said as… or as I put in my more recent papers: if you want to find out what the species is, you have to ask what I call the Darwinian question. The question why? Why are there species? Why… why aren't all organisms able to… if they're at all similar to each other, to mate with each other and have offspring? Why is it all packaged in these separate units, species, and each of these packages is completely separated from the others and doesn't interbreed with it and doesn't mate with it? There must be some biological reason. And of course the reason, if you give it any thought is very obvious: if a individual with one genotype mates with an individual of a very different genotype, then the offspring would be hybrids that are either inviable or sterile or certainly very much inferior, and that particular individual loses offspring. In other words, it is selected against. So the real meaning of the species – that's the way I now put it in my papers – is that it is a protection of well-balanced, harmonious genotypes against being destroyed through mating with others that are very different from it. And that's the basic species concept and that is called the biological species concept, and that this biological species is usually found as a group of populations, of a group of interbreeding populations which is reproductively isolated, used to call it genetically isolated, from other such groups. And… so that is the biological species concept.

How can… such reproductively isolated species originate? I mean, they couldn't originate on one place because what… what would pull them apart at this place? And that is the theory of geographic speciation, these are… new species originate when two populations get geographically isolated and in this isolation either by… by action of the ocean or by… by a vegetational barrier, let's say a… a desert or a savanna, in the case of forest birds… during this period of isolation there is enough genetic turn over in these populations so that eventually these two populations are so different that they react to each other as if they were two different species.

There're two forms of geographic speciation. The classical one is where a continuous range of a species is being interrupted by a newly arising barrier, either a mountain range coming up or arm of the oceans going across or a desert or savanna developing in a forest area, and that is the one that is described in most of the books, at least in the early period from the 1930s on. But as I found in my work on the South Sea island birds, a far more frequent form of speciation is when a species develops a new colony, a founder colony beyond the species range, by some individual crossing over unsuitable terrain on… beyond the species range and establishing this new colony which eventually expands into a large population and, owing to this barrier between it and the mother country and the mother species, eventually develop into a new species, and I called this peripatetic speciation.

What happens during speciation? Well, what happens is that, as [Theodosius] Dobzhansky called it, the so-called isolating mechanisms develop. That means, any kind of characteristics of a species and its individuals that separates them or makes them unwilling to mate with an individual of another species. Now, that in animals very often is a behavioral barrier, that the two individuals of two different species meeting with each other have different displays and therefore break it off because they realize they don't belong together. In plants quite often it is a sterility factor; the pollen is indeed carried to the other plant but no fertile seeds develop because there's the sterility factor. All these properties of the genotype that prevent successful cross-breeding are called isolating mechanisms. Now, Dobzhansky when he first proposed the term got a little confused and he included geographic barriers. Geographic barriers are not isolating mechanisms… isolating mechanisms are all properties of genotypes, properties of individuals.

How did these isolating… mechanisms develop? And that is still not yet entirely clear because as even was said in Darwin's own day, why should something be selected not to mate with the other population when they aren't in contact at all? There shouldn't be any selection… selective advantage to have an isolating mechanism in this species against this one if they are not in any contact whatsoever. Well, there are a number of ways to explain this. I will not go into detail, but in the case of two species developing out of a single population – so-called sympatric speciation – which for a long time we had no good instances that it occurred at all, but there seem to be some instances now in fresh water fishes, it is possible that this barrier developed by mate selection, in other words, by sexual selection. But the details are still obscure, but the important point at this stage is to have an open mind, to see there is a possibility and now this must be analyzed. All these were questions that went around among the naturalists who were interested in species and speciation, and at the very same time the geneticists had no interest in these problems at all. You go to… go to the classical writings of RA Fisher, of Haldane, of Sewall Wright, of HJ Muller, even of DH Morgan, and they discussed how an adaptation was acquired, they've discussed what happened within a given gene pool, but they nowhere discussed the problems of the origin of biological diversity. And this of course set up a considerable tension in the biological community because the geneticists were only interested in the happenings in a population while the naturalists were interested in the business of the biological diversity, the origin of new species, the origin and the development of these species into more different, higher taxa etc. And there was a third group of… of biologists interested in evolution, which dealt with still other problems. And those were the palaeontologists who were told that speciation, from Darwin on, that speciation and evolution was a gradual process, and yet when they looked at the fossil record all they found were just discontinuators. New species seemed to originate very suddenly; they suddenly turned up in the fossil record all of a sudden and so on and so forth. So people were arguing against each other, and there were still a lot of Lamarckians and there… there seemed to be no way in which these differences of opinions could be resolved and solutions could be found that would bring these various feuding kinds of evolutionists together. And this was the situation right up till about 1935. I know a paper in 1935 where somebody said, ‘After I've looked at the literature, there is no question that there will be no consensus in the foreseeable future’. And yet in 1937, a book was published by the Russian geneticist, naturalist, Theodosius Dobzhansky, at that time at Caltech [California Institute of Technology] in California, on the basis of lectures he had given… the Jesup lectures he had given at Columbia University, this book… immediately everybody agreed, well, here is the basis for such a consensus.

As a young man in Russia he was a naturalist, in fact he was a taxonomist of beetles, of ladybird beetles, and worked on their taxonomy, on their population structure, on their geographic variation and all that. And after about… when he had reached the age of about 27 and had for at least 10 years done such studies, he was invited to come to the United States with the help of a… a Rockefeller grant, and he went to Morgan's lab in Pasadena and he now became acquainted with the thinking and the methods of the geneticists. And after he'd done that for about eight years or so, or nine, he suddenly saw how he could put the two things together. And when he gave his lectures, these Jesup lectures in 1936, he provided the basis… then published in 1937 in a book called Genetics and the Origin of Species, he provided the necessary basis, and he showed – and through his publication it became quite clear – that there had been two major areas in evolutionary biology. I mentioned already but I deliberately repeat it once more: the one area, that of adaptation which the geneticists studied, and the other one, the area of organic diversity which the naturalists had studied. But now he showed that there was no conflict between the two areas and that by explaining geographic speciation and all that you could bring the whole stuff together. Much of his account was rather, what shall I say, not skimpy, but… just barely indicating what it was all about, and it was my task in my book Systematics and the Origin of Species to work it out in much greater detail, which I did. Well, Dobzhansky and I, we became very close friends because very soon after that he got a call to come to Columbia University in 1939. And he was in Columbia in 1939 until… I don't know what year, but anyhow, when I left for Harvard  in 1953 he was still a professor in New York City and we only lost a little bit contact with each other after we were geographically widely separated. Now I don't… didn't always go along with Dobzhansky, Dobzhansky was very much influenced by Sewall Wright in emphasizing… non-adaptive evolution, evolution by pure chance. Well, I agree there is quite a bit pure chance in evolution, but the examples that he chose to defend are practically all turned out that in the long run it was selection, after all, that had caused the differences were insincere. And I disagreed on the human blood groups, he said they were neutral and I always said they have some selective significance, and I think the majority of authors now agree with that.

Let me come to [George Gaylord] Simpson. He was the third person in New York interested in evolution. I'm speaking now the time after 1939 when Dobzhansky had come, and he was my colleague at the American Museum [of Natural History]. In fact, when I came in 1931… Simpson was on the staff and we very often ate at the same staff table. We had a staff table where we ate and where I always had very vigorous and interesting and stimulating conversations with other members of the staff. But Simpson never participated. He was very silent and when many, many years later when I was already here in Harvard somebody once asked me and said, ‘Now, you must have had some very interesting conversations with Simpson, both of you sitting at the same staff table for so many years’. And I thought about it, and by God, I couldn't think of single one, and I felt a little uncomfortable about that. So I wrote a letter to Simpson which is in my file somewhere, and I said what about that, is… what… what is your impression? And he wrote back, ‘Yes, you're quite right, we never had any scientific conversations’. Now, Simpson was the kind of person who shunned having scientific discussions and the students would complain about that. In fact, he had very few students, he didn't want to have students. When he came to Harvard we thought well, he… later on he came to Harvard after he had the fall out with the director of the American Museum, we thought he would establish a fine school of students now, but he refused to accept any students, and so he was in Harvard for a number of years without ever having acquired a single student.

Evolution was really very much neglected. I mean, you would have a list of the different fields of biology, and evolution would not be included. There was no society for evolution, there was no journal dealing with evolution, most colleges and universities had no courses dealing with evolution, and those of us who were very much interested in evolution were quite dismayed about it and wondered what to do about it. In particular this was true for the naturalists because the geneticists did have their organizations where evolution at least was discussed quite frequently. And there was first an endeavor to start a society for the study of speciation which from the title alone you can see that… no naturalists were behind this and there were… but the person who was trying to do this was not very energetic and finally the war came also and it fell asleep. And then… there was a… organization established by the National Research Council, a committee on the common problems, primarily was bring… to bring together the palaeontologists with the other evolutionists. And then, again the war broke out and in order to keep some contact on the members I suggested a informal news bulletin going around where people could raise evolutionary questions which somebody else in this group then would try to answer. And I was the editor of this and I brought out, I think, four issues during the war and by the end of that time with Dobzhansky's book out, my book out, and in England Julian Huxley having brought out a book and in Germany [Bernhard] Rensch having brought out a book, it was becoming… and [George Gaylord] Simpson having brought out a book in 1944, it was becoming quite clear that this gap between the different camps of the evolutionists had now been closed, that they really were agreeing with each other, were talking the same language.

The time had come, I felt, and so did some others, to found an evolution society to give a little more prominence to this field. And this has been written up in great detail, the steps by which this was accomplished, by Joe Kane, and by Betty Smocovitis. To make a long story short, we founded the society, I became the first secretary to help bring the people together, the secretary has to do most of the work in such a society. But my next step was to found a journal and I, with the help of [George Gaylord] Simpson, I raised the money for this journal from the American Philosophical Society, $3000 to get the journal going. And we got the journal going. We had a lot of trouble first to get enough manuscripts because this was in 1947, right after the war, and everybody… nobody had done any… done much research during the war. And… however, we got over that and the first membership list had about 350 names, and the question was what should be the edition of the journal? And the council voted it should be printed edition of 500. And I was young and optimistic and idealistic and I-don't-know-what-istic, and I said, ‘500, that's much too few’, and, ‘it doesn't cost very much more to order 1500’. So I… without… well, actually in… in conflict with what the council had ordered, I ordered 1500 copies and everybody thought I was crazy. And about four years later these extra 1000 copies had all been sold, because when the journal finally became well known, better established, all the libraries had to get that journal and they wanted to have these early issues, and a lot of other people, and they even had to reprint the early issues. So the journal now… I had enough trouble getting three issues going in the first year, and now the journal has… publishes about 1400 pages a year. So the founding of the evolution society and the establishing of the journal was a great success and now you will find that many of the old departments of biology or zoology are called biologies of evolutionary and environmental biology, or something like that. So the term evolution and the number of titles with the… the number of books where the word evolution or evolutionary is in the title… it just scores every year. And yet, prior to about 1937 or 1940 evolution was a very much neglected subject. In fact, when I made that petition, that… to the American Philosophical Society to get those $3000 dollars to get the journal started, it went to the grants committee and I had a remarkable spokesman there in the astronomer Harlow Shapley, who was very much interested in evolution. But finally the committee – with one dissent – voted ­to give me the money. And the one dissent was the one biologist on the committee which was [Edwin] Conklin from Princeton University who said, as Shapley later told me, ‘Evolution? Of course everybody accepts evolution, and what else is there to be said about it?’ So, that was sort of the attitude among many biologists, they just think evolution was something very unimportant and doesn't have to be considered, didn't have to be taught, didn't require any society, any journal, any books.

We had a big conference in Princeton, organized by this… again National Research Council committee, and I insisted that they had also an ecologist there, so David Lack from England was invited and participated, and everybody at the meeting agreed with everybody. There were… seemingly were no disagreements anymore. In fact some people wrote to me and said… there are no more disagreements, but to the outside world that's in… indeed the way it looked, but in subsequent years it turned out there was one basic disagreement still there, between the geneticists on one hand and the naturalists on the other hand. For the geneticists the gene was the important thing, and they claimed that the gene was really the object of selection, the target of selection, while the naturalists said no, there's no gene that is ever running around free and can be selected, it's the individual as a whole that's the target of selection. And the geneticists stuck to this gene emphasis until the 1970s, and it disappeared only around 1980. There may be still a few around who… but that was the most conspicuous difference that still existed after the evolutionary synthesis.

The real committee that ran this Princeton conference was [Glen] Jepson, the palaeontologist in Princeton, [George Gaylord] Simpson and [Theodosius] Dobzhansky, and… this is just a funny anecdote, but it is sort of topical: one of Dobzhansky's greatest friends, a co-worker in drosophila, a very distinguished one, was a Professor [John T] Patterson in Texas. And so, when Jepson was preparing the conference, Dobzhansky called him and said, ‘Be sure to invite Patterson’. And Jepson wrote back, ‘Yes, of course I'll invite Patterson’. But there is also a palaeontologist Patterson, Brian Patterson, and when Jepson said, I'll invite Patterson, he thought of the palaeontologist. So, when the Princeton meeting came and – this isn't quite historically correct how I tell it, but it… it sounds better – Dobzhansky came from the railroad station, he came to the building where the… we were to assemble, the first thing he asked is, ‘Where is Patterson?’ Dobzhansky had this kind of a… a way of talking. And Jepson said, ‘Oh, he probably is at the bar, that's where he usually hangs out’. And Dobzhansky was quite puzzled because he didn't think his friend Patterson in Texas was that fond of… of the bar. So he went to the bar and he said, ‘Where's Patterson?’ And somebody says, ‘He stands right here’. Well, it was the Texas Patterson and his Patterson… it was the… it was not the Texan, it was the… the palaeontologist Patterson from Chicago.

Well [Theodosius] Dobzhansky was furious, and he first said he was going to go right back to New York. And finally his friends, including John A Moore, managed that he stayed and attended the whole meeting, but he said he would have nothing to do with that volume. So his name was taken off and my name was substituted, so now the volume is Jepson, Simpson, Mayr, and it would have been – without the Patterson affair – it would have been Jepson, Simpson, Dobzhansky.

The importance of the evolutionary synthesis was not at first realized, and many people didn't even know there had been such a thing. And in the… early 1970s the American Academy of Arts and Sciences here in Boston decided to sponsor symposia on the history of biology. And I discussed it with them and said, ‘How about a symposium on the evolutionary synthesis?’ And they said, 'Well, sounds… sounds wonderful’. So I organised it and I invited all the still living architects of the synthesis. Unfortunately… Julian Huxley was too ill and old to come, [Bernhard] Rensch, who at first said he would come, came down with a case of shingles and couldn't come, [George Gaylord] Simpson, who at that time had become quite - and I used this term deliberately, quite paranoid - refused to come, and so we went without him. We invited a great number of geneticists and as many… but not including Sewall Wright. And I had my very definite reasons for not inviting him because he was always talking too long and very often his memory was very poor. But I was afterwards very much attacked for that and I'm willing to accept these attacks, but I had my very good reasons. We had, I think, 12 geneticists there so Sewall Wright really was not needed, I think he would have only caused confusion. Well, this was a… quite a successful volume, in fact so much so that Harvard Press has just decided to republish it and, because they were out of… it was out of print and there was still enough of a demand, and asked me to write a new foreword for… which I did. And in this foreword I am trying to correct one misconception about the evolutionary synthesis. There was an earlier synthesis in the evolutionary field, and that was the synthesis between genetics and Darwinism. The early geneticists, the… the Mendelians – [William] Bateson, [Hugo] de Vries and Joe Hanson – did not believe in… in natural selection. They said all evolution happens by major mutations, by major saltation, jumps that create something entirely new, and they very much attacked natural selection. Well, that lasted until about 1915, and the period from 1916 to about 1932 or 1935 the geneticists came to terms with Darwinism under the leadership particularly of RA Fisher and [JBS] Haldane. And that period is a… was a sort of a synthesis, but it wasn't the synthesis which took place between 1937, [Theodosius] Dobzhansky's book, and 1947, the Princeton conference which brought together the two big subdivisions of evolutionary biology, the study of adaptedness and the study of the origin of organic diversity.

I discovered in the years after I'd published my Systematics and the Origin of Species that I hadn't said nearly enough on the actual methodology and the basic principles of… of modern systematics, particularly of the new systematics, that I really would need to write a book. There was a book in German by [Bernhard] Rensch which tried to fill that gap, but I didn't think it was particularly good, and so I sat down and wrote a manuscript, and had it pretty much completed, and talked about that with my entomological colleagues at the American Museum [of Natural History]. And one of them wrote this to an entomologist in California, Gorton Linsley. And Gorton Linsley wrote back, 'But my colleague Usinger and I have also just published… just completed such a manuscript'. And Linsley said, 'Well, couldn't we… Mayr and us two get together and make this into one book instead of having two competing books coming out?' And I was only interested in helping the field so I was perfectly willing to combine it with… with the manuscript of the others, and here came a very peculiar… coincidence, or accident is a better word perhaps. Linsley said, ‘I am sending our manuscript to your house in Tenafly, and I am coming indirect, I have to go to a meeting in Florida, and then I come right up and see you’. So, he arrived at my house and he said, ‘Now, how did you like our manuscript?’ And I said there was no such manuscript, nothing reached me. And so we telephoned to his office in… in California and they said, oh that manuscript, just… they had unfortunately addressed it to Linsley at my Tenafly address and the post office had said, ‘Addressee had moved back to California’. Well it turned out that Linsley had been doing… one summer when I was in Cold Spring Harbor, stayed in my house working at the American Museum and the mailman had the… this was more than three years earlier, the mailman had had the memory of an elephant. And he said, ‘Oh yes, that man Linsley, he was here at one time, but he moved back to California’. So, without asking any questions or checking on anything he just immediately sent it back. So we had to, Linsley and I, we had to come to an agreement without me ever seeing their manuscript. And frankly speaking, it was a very difficult job to get these two manuscripts together and they were very much interested in all sorts of technicalities of publishing, what kind of paper to use, how big the print should be, what kind of a… dictionary to… to employ… that's all…. Well, anyhow we… we brought out that book in 1953, it wasn't bad but it wasn't very good either.

It was very obvious to me after about 10 or 15 years that it required a new edition and a lot of things had happened in the meantime anyhow. So I wrote back to the… my Californian friends and said we need a new edition. And [Robert] Usinger, one of the co-authors had lymphoma and was too ill to work on it, and [Gorton] Linsley had become dean and was too busy to work on it, so both of them said you go ahead and make the new edition. And that's when I worked this new edition of 1969 which was really a brand new book, had very little in common with the old ’93 [sic] edition. And then that 1969 book I revised in… again brought out a new edition in 1991 and again I was a little bit unfortunate there. I chose as a co-author somebody with the name of [Peter] Ashlock who was… had written one or two quite sensible papers about cladistics, but in the meantime, unknown to me, he had become very ill and he died eventually and the parts that he was supposed to supply, I never got. And what I had gotten from him was useless, and I had to hire some people to write the chapter on how to use the computer which he was supposed to produce, and so the 1991 edition is not an ideal. It's… it's very good at the species level, but at the level of the higher taxa and the comparison of the traditional, what I call Darwinian classification, and the new Hennigian cladification, that I could have worked out… could now work out much better than I could at that time. But I don't think there will ever be another edition, but I'm not entirely happy with the last third of that 1991 edition. And still is, I think, the most frequently used book because there's no real competition for it.

When Darwin wrote The Origin of Species he devoted a whole chapter – in the first edition it's chapter 13 – to classification. And he said that we normally arrange our grouping of species by similarity; we put the similar species together into a genus, and we put the similar genera together into a family and so on and so forth. However, he said… all these taxa that we thus recognize must… each of these taxa which we recognize must contain all the descendants of the nearest common ancestor, in other word, in addition to similarity, the criteria of genealogy, common descent. Well, in 1950 a German entomologist, Willi Hennig, published a book in which he said, ‘Let's forget about similarity and just put together things that are united by descent’. And so instead of recognizing classes of similar things he… his system – and that's why I call it cladification – consists of branches of the evolutionary tree, which leads to such curiosities we… that he finds that the mammals descended from one particular group of reptiles, and he follows that back to the very earliest ancestral species of that group of reptiles and then everything that descended from that species he puts into one of his clades, which brings together things that have no similarity whatsoever, some very primitive reptiles together with the hairy, warm-blooded, live-bearing, milk-producing, mammals. So, there is a very… now, if you're only interested in phylogeny, the Hennigian ordering system is quite useful, but if you want to classify… and you can look in any dictionary, it says a classification consists of groups of things that are similar and related, and Hennigian cladification does not consist of groups that are similar and related. His… his clades are… very often are highly heterogeneous and the earliest species in such a clade are totally different from the later ones in this same branch, so that it's just a totally different system and the… at the present time undoubtedly Hennig's thing is highly popular, particularly on people who are not basically taxonomists, but it certainly has nothing to do with a real classification in biology, and in any traditional sense, nothing to do with the way a classification should be as described by Darwin.

It so happens that my coming to America, particularly when looked at from much later times like now, seemed to coincide with the political situation in Germany. However, as I've often emphasized I got my offer in October 1930, and I came in January 1931 at a time when the Weimar Republic was still in power in Germany, and my coming had absolutely nothing to do with Hitler or the Nazis. Nor do I have any Jewish ancestors. Quite a few people think, well, he came to America, he's… he's probably part… part Jewish. Well, it so happens, I'm not. Not that I'm particularly proud of that but it simply is a fact. Well, when I got finally this very good offer from the American Museum [of Natural History] to become curator of the Whitney-Rothschild collection, naturally I accepted it. But my wife was German too, and we felt at that time, we still had a lot of the German ideas and ideals and culture and so forth, and we… have a saying that one doesn't change citizenship as one changes a shirt, and I was particularly, in a way, annoyed by all my British friends in the United States, none of whom ever bothered to become an American citizen. They said our British citizenship is good enough. I will stay… British. And I said, well, German citizenship is good enough too. Why should I change? Well, I did take out the first papers, and I said, well, if necessary, in due time I will probably feel American enough and I'll take out the second papers. Then when the situation became politically more difficult, Hitler marching into Poland or whatever it was, or… I applied for citizenship. I said, well, now is the time to become a citizen. Well, while it was being processed, America declared war on Germany and all naturalization proceeding were immediately stopped, so I was an enemy alien… legally, in America. And nothing particular happened for a long time, but one day about half a year later in the summer, a group of FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents came into our house and searched our house for, I guess, subversive literature or God knows what, and all we had as enemy aliens, we had to give away our… my… my bird gun I had to… to give to the police and… and our short wave radio and so forth. But anyhow the FBI came and of course they found… I never, for instance, I never read Hitler's Mein Kampf which they expected that every German would have had read. And, however, they… according to an order by the Attorney General or whatnot, as enemy aliens we had to be fingerprinted, we had to be photographed en face and from the side, and we were formally, I think, arrested and then released again. And if we hadn't had our two American-born daughters who were American citizens that way, I think we probably would have been among the many Germans that were at that time sent to concentration camps. However, we had a lot of trouble all through the war. My wife was not permitted to leave the little town of Tenafly without a permission from the Attorney General in Trenton, New Jersey.

When the war was ended I immediately said again to the naturalization people, ‘Now I want to have my citizenship’, and they delayed it, and… there were several things happened during the time also. For instance, there were two people who were my sponsors. One of the was Professor Schrader, whom you know of course, and… because he lived in the same town of Tenafly, and he asked the agents one… one day, he said, well, why don't you let Mayr… lift all these things, restrictions on him, he's as good an American as any of us? And this agent said, ‘Well, if he was a baker or butcher or some tradesman like that, that's what we would do. But we don't trust these intellectuals’. And then, I say something which is the honest truth and it may be held against me when I say it now: my colleague Robert Cushman Murphy went down to the naturalization office in New York and he complained. This was already ’46 or ’47, several years after the end of the war and said, ‘What is holding it up?’ And that office at that time was entirely staffed to the last man by Jewish agents, and one of them said to Murphy, quote, ‘As long as we are here, no goddamn German is going to be naturalized’. Now, this is an important thing to know because many people in America know that such things happen all over the world, but of course they couldn't happen possibly in America. Well, this has happened in America. I finally had to sue the naturalization service for citizenship and I came to a court case and I had to submit… my wife and I had to submit 50 statements from various American citizens among whom were, I think, 17 Jewish friends of ours, saying that we were perfectly good material for citizenship and there was no reason to hold it up any longer. And finally we got… we got it in 1950, too late to go to the Uppsala Congress and the office – the naturalization office with these particular agents – urged me to go to Uppsala on a German passport, and I said that's all they want in order to stop it again and, see, he's used the German passport to travel. See, how much of a American citizen he is. And so I couldn't go to the Congress because it might have again jeopardised my becoming an American citizen. I'm glad I had an opportunity now to say all this, I have never said this in public before, but all these facts can be checked in official documents, and we… neither my wife nor I… my younger brother for instance, when the Nazis came to power, was immediately dismissed and put in the army; there wasn't anybody in my family who was a Nazi. I had been fighting with Nazis when I was a student, so there was no justification for this treatment.

After the war the American ornithologists were absolutely magnificent in helping starving German ornithologists – German, Austrian, whatever, over there. And they organized shipping packages, they sent thousands and thousands and thousands of packages. I know some people used their entire savings in their savings account buying care packages and sent it over there. My wife played… well, Mrs [Margaret Morse] Nice, for instance, that we mentioned earlier, Joe Hickey that we mentioned earlier, a Mrs [Frances] Hamerstrom was particularly active living in Wisconsin. And clothing, we… we… any… any suits and underwear, anything we didn't really badly need was shipped over there and of course we had to pay also postage. It was a very… but it was also time-consuming. Well, the letters came back from over there, when they were in German my wife always had to translate it because neither Mrs Nice nor Fran Hamerstrom were able to read hand written German letters. And it was one of the most heart-warming experiences of my life; the dedication and the… really the… spirit of all these people helping somebody in a foreign country in trouble. I had one… peculiar thing myself. I had one dark suit, because often for lecturing I thought I should have a dark suit, and I had a letter from Professor [Rudolf] Drost – you know the man in charge of Heligoland – that he was earning a little money by giving lectures on birds, but he needed a dark suit. So my wife said, ‘OK, there goes your dark suit’. So it was wrapped up and sent to Professor Drost. Well, in 1950 when my mentor and dear friend and sponsor [Leonard] Sanford died, I was asked to be one of the honorary pall-bearers and I didn't have a dark suit, and I got the news on Saturday and on Monday would be the funeral up in New Haven, and we went into stores to find some that would fit me and so forth. It was a terrible thing and a tailor had to work on Saturday afternoon and so I finally did get my dark suit and I was able to get to New Haven and be pall-bearer for… for Sanford. That was all… that was sort of the last after-effect of… of sending all these packages to Germany. But it… the behavior of the American ornithologists was simply wonderful.

At the time the Rothschild collection came to America, there was a great deal of complaint in Europe that the… it would now be sitting there as just the… the booty of… of Americans and wouldn't do much good. Well, the truth of the matter was that immediately it was very widely used. Any number of people came to write family revisions, Delacour's entire work after… that's the French ornithologist, after he came to America was on the Rothschild collections. The various family revisions like Vaurie's on the Dicruridae, and myself and Amadon on the Dicaeidae, and there are many, many others, were all based on these collections and I'm quite sure that if they had stayed in England they wouldn't have been used even a third as much. So the coming of these collections to America was actually of enormous benefit to the Rothschild collection because it was much more used than before. And furthermore, later on when the… this is something… we mentioned later, when Peters’ check-list [Check-list of Birds of the World] was… was made, to have these collections available was of tremendous… was a tremendous advantage and greatly helped that particular project.

I wrote a new foreword for the new printing of a book dealing with the workshops I held in 1975 on the evolutionary synthesis. And in this new foreword I point out that many historians had confused what actually amounted to two different syntheses, the one taking place from 1916 to 1932 or ’35, and the other one taking place between 1937 and 1947. Now the first of these syntheses was within the field of genetics. The geneticists who, prior to that, as so-called Mendelians, believed in jumping, saltational evolution, mutationism as it is often called. They thought that by big mutations new species originated. And the next generation of geneticists, beginning with RA Fisher, [JBS] Haldane, Sewall Wright, [Hermann] Muller and many others, agreed that the genetic changes were not as… as big as claimed by the early Mendelians, but could be extremely small changes and leading to a gradual change to a continuous evolution to a gradual evolution, as Darwin had postulated. And furthermore, because this fitted with natural selection, they now accepted Darwinian selection which the Mendelians had not. And this was, in a way, a synthesis of… between Darwinian thinking and the new findings of genetics. However, this particular synthesis of 1916 to 1932 was totally different from the synthesis that began in 1937 which was initiated by the publication of [Theodosius] Dobzhansky's book Genetics and the Origin of Species, in which the synthesis was established between two major fields of evolutionary biology: the field that studies adaptation, which was done mostly by the geneticists, and the field characterised by species and speciation and macro-evolution which was the major interest of the naturalists. And it was Dobzhansky's book which helped to bring together these two fields and their representatives. And both… the representatives of both fields saw that they were right in some things and wrong in others, that they were very knowledgeable about certain things in evolution and quite ignorant about others and by putting the two fields together all the gaps could be filled and all the misunderstandings be eliminated. And that is what happened in that second… in that third period of these three periods, the one from 1937 to 1947, and that was the real so-called evolutionary synthesis that now everybody talks about.

While I was a visiting professor at the University of Washington in Seattle I received a telephone call that changed my whole life. It was a call from Professor Alfred Romer, the Director of the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard, who asked me whether I would be interested in an Alexander Agassiz professorship at Harvard University. Well, the answer was obvious. I had always wanted to do teaching and there is no more distinguished institution in the whole United States, and possibly the whole world, than Harvard University. And to get a call from there is something you couldn't possibly turn down. Well, Professor Romer and I met in the spring of ’53 at the railroad station in Boston to finish up our discussions and the conditions, and on 1st July 1953 I started my professorship at Harvard. Now the American Museum [of Natural History], obviously, wasn't very happy with my leaving and the director [Albert] Parr, I have to give him credit for that, tried everything he could to hold me there. He said anything that Harvard offers we'll… we'll up it, we… if they give you 16,000 a year, we'll give you 17,000 etc. Well, finally he said, now, what other condition would… would you want? And I said well, (I mentioned this already yesterday), ‘Take the museum out of New York, I'd like to be in a smaller university town’. Well anyhow, I went there but I kept… we met… we parted quite amiably and I was appointed an honorary curator of the bird department. And I'm still asked by the bird department every year to submit my annual report to be included in theirs. And in later years I was twice serving at the American Museum as a trustee, but it was a long trip always to go down there for the trustee meetings and I finally resigned.

The Alexander Agassiz professor, any Alexander Agassiz professor, is not tied to any particular department in the Museum of Comparative Zoology and I was definitely not a member of the bird department, even though my office was on the same floor of the Museum. My major occupation, as they expected, was research and writing, but I was also expected to teach, but primarily at the graduate level. I did give, occasionally, undergraduate courses and in particular there was a period of a couple of years where I gave six major lectures in one of the big Harvard courses in anthropology in a course directed by Professor Irvin DeVor. But, otherwise, I gave mostly smaller courses to graduate students. I tried the first year there… oh the… it was in 1954… to give a course in ornithology with the particular emphasis on… on problems and field work, not one of these book courses as they gave in several other places. But for instance, we had four very interesting projects scheduled for April: one was the display of the golden-eyed duck; one was the territory staking out by redwing blackbirds, and I forget what the other two were, but they were all interesting field problems. But we could do this… only this work only on Saturdays and in that particular year, 1954, it snowed every single Saturday in April. And that convinced me that Cambridge was not the ideal place to give a field course, because by… by the time of May the semester was ending. So I never gave another course in ornithology.

I tried a workshop in taxonomy, and that was a very interesting, novel type of a course. What I did was – with the help of curators at the Museum [of Comparative Zoology] – give each student… and the course was restricted to 10 in theory and I think only eight applied for it… each student got a particular group of… of species: one had species of spiders; one had species of snails; one had species of beetles; and I don't know what they all had. And they had to work out the differential… the differences among the different species, to diagnose their characters, work out a key, describe – if there was one – which, according to the literature, was a new species, describe it as a new species, learn all the practical methodological things in taxonomy because in taxonomy one learns things as an apprentice to a master, one cannot learn this kind of taxonomy from a book or from descriptions. Well, this was a very time expensive course. I had to constantly watch what every student was doing, helping him with it. It also was time-consuming on the curators to find the right kind of material, supply the students and so we said, well, we're not going to give it next year, and then the next year we said, well, we're not going to give it this year, maybe next year again. And eventually the course was never again revived.

I concentrated on teaching evolution, and it was more or less always given as a form of a seminar course with me teaching first… the first six or so… occasions where we met, and then the students took over with term papers. And the main idea of the course always was a very active interchange between professor and students. And I had… I was lucky in some years that I would have students that would constantly try to contradict me, and the one who was most lively and I would have loved to have had him every single year was Roger Milkman who is now Professor at the University of Iowa. But eventually I developed a new way of giving that course, not entirely new because I learned about it from a professor of anthropology but I never had heard about it before. It was still the basic idea of a term paper being discussed, but what I did was that the first student that was scheduled for his term paper, I took his paper, had it xeroxed, or in those days, mimeographed, and then… that was a week before he was to perform… then I gave a copy to each member of the class and each member of the class had to submit in writing to me three criticisms of this paper. And then the actual class consisted in the author of the paper just sitting there and defending himself against these criticisms. The result was… not only was the entire class immensely interested in what was going on, also they all had read that… that term paper so they knew about this particular subject, and they learned by arguing with each other a great deal about scientific methodology. And this course was so successful that very soon I had a lot of application from other students, could they sit in, in the back of the room and watch the proceedings, and I said yes and we supplied about 20 chairs or so, but pretty soon this was not enough and we had to move to a larger room. We still… the actual participants in the class sat around a table at one side of the room and then there were rows and rows of chairs where all the other students sat learning how to run such a course. And there were… this included the students that had hoped, or were hoping, to take the course the next year, just to learn the techniques so that they would perform better.

I had, of course, students, graduate students, including Professor Bock who's sitting here. Altogether, I… I think 19 students took their PhD under me, under… with a great variety of subjects, and, interestingly enough, the most common subject chosen by students of mine were papers on behavior, various kinds of behavior. There was at that time… for most of that time… was no member of the faculty in the biology department whose specialty was behavior, except [EO] Wilson for insect behavior. But [Donald] Griffin, who had been teaching behavior, had gone to the Rockefeller [Institute], and so… more students of mine took their PhD in a subject on behavior than any others. But the other students took it on various aspects of systematics or evolutionary biology and so forth. All of them are now teaching, with the exception of one who was… woman student who went into politics or journalism or something like that.

I was not a member of the bird department, however I did take a considerable interest in what was going on in the bird department. And the bird department, at that particular moment, was in considerable difficulties because the year before I came… I came in ’53, and in ’52 the curator of birds James Peters had died. And he had begun a… a mammoth project, namely the production of a so-called Check-list of the Birds of the World. Now, the word ‘check-list’ doesn't spell out just what this all includes. It not only gave the names of all the species and subspecies of birds, but it also gave the synonyms of these names when the same species was repeatedly described under different names. This was properly recorded, it gave the place where it was published, and it gave a detailed description of the geographic range. So there was a… a great deal of work involved and Peters had covered… he had done six volumes plus one volume that he had assigned to a colleague for a particular group of South American families where Peters was not particularly qualified to do that. But there… there still remained to be about eight additional volumes to be done, and the… now curator of birds, James Greenway, was not a trained biologist and he was at a considerable loss as to what to do. And so I agreed to work with him, and in fact more or less took over the project, and the most important task I had was if I could… I realised at once that this couldn't be done by one man and Peters was over ambitious trying to do that. And so we decided that each family of birds that still needed to be dealt with should be done by a particular author, by a different author, and we wrote… I wrote letters to about a dozen or so people and all of them agreed to collaborate except one person who said he was too busy. And this person, interestingly enough, was the least distinguished of all the 12 that I had written to and in the subsequent years – I prefer not to mention his names now – he never produced anything of any significance. But what was more important was that the… the really good ornithologists, the really busy ones all agreed to collaborate and so we turned out volume after volume. I did my share of families and after a good many years the project was finished and the secretary of the curator of birds made an alphabetical index to all the names and now this work is completed and it is the only complete listing of all species, the subspecies of any group of animals or plants in the world and it is of immense value for anybody doing comparative studies, behavior studies, geographical work and so forth. They can always go to this and find the necessary information. And something happened that is really… almost… if you know how scattered the literature is and all that… is almost unbelievable; we did not miss a single species, in all the years since this was published nobody said oh, but you didn't include such and such. It was complete and, of course, new species are being discovered but the original volume, the original monument is there and it is just wonderful.

Going back to Darwin's day, there were so-called codes of nomenclature which said if there's a conflict between… if there are several names available for a particular species, how do we select the correct one? And there was a reasonable agreement among people that if, for instance, a Frenchman and a Russian both described the same species at approximately the same time, the… the one who has published the earlier description, that name should prevail. But this was written into the rules in a very… firm… in… in a manner that… that left no leeway and eventually it was… this was called the Law of Strict Priority. And eventually some unscrupulous authors discovered if they would go to the early literature where names were quite uncertain, the early authors would reject a certain name because there was something wrong with it they thought, even though it was earlier, and the other name confirmed as established in the year 1802 and was valid… the valid name until 1936, then somebody found some odd old name in the literature and said, no, that now has to be the name. And, in fact, according to the rules it had to be the name, and so the nomenclature was totally upset and disturbed and the whole idea of nomenclature was to have a handle for information storage and retrieval, and this Law of Strict Priority was most disturbing.

In the 1940s and ’50s a group of us younger ones decided that something had to be done, this had to be changed, and I was one of the most active in this group. Another one was a Dane with the name of Lenke; another one was an American at the Field Museum [of Natural History] in Chicago, K P Schmidt; and there were two or three others. And we met in Copenhagen and we made considerable progress in loosening up the laws. The secretary of the International Commission was not a biologist at all, he was a lawyer, he was… he was somewhat reasonable but he didn't quite understand the idea that in nomenclature, the main purpose of nomenclature is stability because it has to do with information. And things, however, were shaping up to… to move in the right direction and then unfortunately K… K P Schmidt, who was an herpetologist, was bitten by a poisonous snake and died. And that set us back, and then, at another congress in London, some people… really good biologists, zoologists, including Professor Mertens at the Senckenberg Museum in… in Frankfurt, all of a sudden came up and took with him the whole German delegation, went back to strict priority, while at the Copenhagen delegation the German delegation solidly was for a sensible rule of nomenclature. And so that was another setback. Then came another, then I worked behind the scenes and succeeded with the help of, naturally, numerous other people to have… we had a very incompetent president of the commission. And we succeeded in getting Alden H Miller, an American ornithologist who had very sensible ideas, elected to… to be the president and to preside at the next international congress. And, shortly before the congress, at the age of 59, Miller died of a sudden heart attack. So there was one unfortunate accident after the other. Then came the Washington meeting and… it was nip and tuck which would win, common sense or strict priority. And at that point the very incompetent president and secretary, and the secretary was perhaps even more incompetent, didn't watch that suddenly, just before the voting, there was a big influx of people who had no connection with the congress; they were government entomologists who were being… being incited, were being mobilised by one of the strict priority people to come into the hall and then they adding their votes to the strict priority. Again the strict priority thing won, and that was totally illegal, these people never should have been permitted to vote because it… it said in the bylaws that only members of the congress are entitled to vote. Well, to make a long story short, eventually the younger generation saw that this… this was impossible, but an awful lot of name changing in the meantime had taken place and had disturbed the nomenclature, but there's now a new draft of the rules almost ready to be published, I believe. Professor Bock is a member of the commission and that, I understand, is very sensible and places the main emphasis on stability. I might go one step back; I did one thing at the Copenhagen meeting: I proposed that the rules should have a preamble in which it was clearly stated that stability was the major purpose of the rules and that preamble was adopted. And whenever the strict priority people were pushing too hard I would always say, ‘Well, the preamble says that stability is the major purpose of the rules’.

In New York in the… among the ornithologists and at the [American] Museum [of Natural History], I always had some informal groups that I was organizing for discussions and so… and in the later years in… in Cambridge I organized such a group again, dealing with basic questions in evolutionary theory and in philosophy. And my late wife, Gretel… it was a small group, we were never more than about 12, 10, eight, 10, 12, 15 people. We always selected some particular subject or topic, let's say laws or the nature of selection or something, and my wife provided a marvelous dessert for each of these occasions, and I sometimes wondered whether some of the participants didn't come more for the dessert than for the discussion. But there were quite a few well known philosophers attended these.

I was also quite active for a considerable number of years in national activities. I served for many years on the review panels of the National Science Foundation. Then I served… I was a member of Paul Weiss's Biology Council. That was a division of the National Research Council. We met about once a month and that was a… even though it took time and meant having to travel down to Washington, at the same time this was a group of outstanding representatives of the different areas of biology discussing all sorts of biological problems, including also administrative biological problems. And we always had very stimulating and quite often very delightful conversations. So these Biology Council meetings down in Washington were important because also these were… practically all of them were leaders in their particular respective fields and so I… I learnt to… to know quite a few of the outstanding people in fields outside my own specialties in the field of biology.

In the National Science Foundation, eventually I moved up into the… to become the chairman of the… the divisional committee, I believe it was, and that took more time and having to write reports. Then I was assigned to the so-called Facility Panel, that is when scientific institutions in the United States wanted to build a new wing or a new laboratory or a… a climate chamber or anything that meant building or… or a new facility. And that had to be visited and it was a small committee and we would travel from… usually we… we checked on five or six of these facility applications and that took us through, let's say, St Louis and… and Kentucky and then down to Texas and then to California and so forth. Was quite time-consuming but also very interesting, and the person in charge from the National Science Foundation, Lou Levin, was a superb chairman of this group. He once… he knew institutions and applications and everything so well that, as we started out on a trip, he said, ‘I can predict what the committee will decide for each of these’, and then he wrote it on a piece of paper and sealed it in an envelope and at the end of the trip we opened it up and by God, yes, he had just about everything right. But it was, as I said, time-consuming. And finally there were two more of my… of those national things. One was I was chosen by the President of the National Academy [of Sciences], Phil Handler, to be on a special commission to study the life sciences and report on them. And I was very much an assistant of his in this thing, and we had to write very numerous reports. We had a number of meetings where the preliminary reports were analyzed and discussed and finally a quite a fat report came out. Unfortunately, I don't think, as is usually the case, I don't think the government paid much attention to… the recommendations that were made. And I think it was my work on this commission that impressed Handler so much that he nominated me for the National Medal of Science, far more than for my research, but… because, I got this Medal of Science at a rather early age.

I was chairman of a commission to make a report on the feasibility and the problems connected with a sea level canal across the Isthmus of Panama. And this was a… something dreamed up by the… I guess the oil industry after the Alaska oil fields had been discovered and they had these huge tankers which were very slow getting through the canal, many of them couldn't get through the canal at all and so they thought it would be wonderful to have a sea level canal. And, believe it or not, the first proposal came from some engineers to take the leftover atomic bombs from… that hadn't been dropped on some other country and stick them into the isthmus there and blow them all up and then have the sea level canal. The fact that this was right next to Balboa and Panama cities, cities of around a million people, all of them would be exposed to a rain of radioactive material, that apparently never occurred to these particular engineers. That is just a little side comment. However, even if the canal was built by digging it out and it… it was quite feasible, there was no real problem. However the… at certain tide stages, in fact most of them, the Pacific end of the canal was 15 feet higher than the Atlantic end, so there was a constant flow of water going through. Furthermore, right in front of where the Pacific end ought to have been were some of the most productive shrimp fishery grounds, which is a very important industry in Panama and that undoubtedly would have been… disturbed at least, and probably destroyed by this canal. And there are poisonous sea snakes in the bay of Panama which undoubtedly would have been… gone down into the Pacific, into the… the Caribbean, and what this would have done to the bathing resorts of Jamaica and whatnot, anybody can guess. And, on the other hand, there were some very dangerous coelenterates, jellyfish, that are in the Caribbean, and that might have been carried…. Well, anyhow, our committee met two or three times and discussed it with all the experts and we finally delivered a very negative report, and I don't think it is due to that negative report, but at any how the sea level canal was never built. The oil industry finally decided they would build a pipeline across the isthmus and it was much easier and perhaps, oh yes, I am quite sure, quite a good deal less expensive to pump the oil from one tanker through the oil pipe line to… from the Pacific to the Atlantic, rather than have these big… big ships go across.

I was very unhappy about the state of American ornithology and I was very active in getting the younger people involved and the university people involved in the… in the American Ornithologists’ Union. And it was quite successful on the whole, and eventually I was also… I participated in the 50th anniversary of the American Ornithologists’ Union in New York in 1933. And then again, I was president of the… I forget now, what… what we celebrated when I had the… when I was president. Later on, I was elected President of the International Ornithological Congresses, and as such had to preside over and organize the congress that took place at… at Cornell University in Ithaca in 1962. And… after that, on… on the whole, I became so involved in matters like evolution and other things that I more or less withdrew from active participation in the affairs of the… American ornithologists. And I decided, by that time, I was getting to be in my 60s, let the younger people take over and run the AOU.

I shifted my residence from Tenafly, New Jersey to Cambridge, Massachusetts. At first, having lived in a house for 17 years, my wife and I thought, well, it might be quite interesting for a change to live in an apartment, and so we did for six years, shifting once in that period. And we discovered all sorts of problems, like we thought that now the landlord will take care of all the problems with… plumbing and electricity and heat and whatnot, but the landlords were not doing that. So we finally said we might as well have our own house, then we can take care of these things. So we acquired a house at 11 Chancery Street in 1959 and we lived there for… I lived there for 38 years and I moved from there to Bedford to the… garden… village, only on the 25th of August this year, 1997.

While we were in… still in Tenafly, New Jersey, so to speak, in New York, we always had the dream of having a country place somewhere. But to find an affordable place in the outskirts of New York you had to go out at least a hundred miles or more and then, even then it wouldn't be very ideal. But when we came to Cambridge, to find such a place would be quite… was quite feasible, but the problem was where, and there were two choices: either we could go to the Cape, Cape Cod, which is where, probably, the majority of the Harvard professors had a summer home; or we could go into the hill country toward northern New Hampshire or Vermont. Now, both my wife and I came from southern Germany which is hill country, we were not particularly accustomed to the sea shore, and so we opted for the hill country, particularly because we knew that the travelling to Cape Cod always meant getting into traffic jams, there was tremendous traffic there. And then very often on the Cape, in the summer, it suffered from a lot of fog and so forth, and the places that you could get were always quite small, while what we finally found in New Hampshire was several hundred acres of land, the shore of a private lake, we don't either own the lake but we have use of one third of the shore line, and many other advantages. So… also the place is… was only 59 miles from Cambridge and we often had students there and we had parties there, apple harvesting parties for all the staff of the biology department, and two of my PhD candidates did their PhD work in bird behavior on my place there in New Hampshire. And the place… we still own the place, my daughter has it now… one of my daughters has it now, and there is nothing changed in the neighborhood. The nearest neighbor in one direction is half a mile away; the nearest neighbor in the other direction is two miles away; it is a really largely wild undisturbed country, all of it was farming country. When we acquired the place we had the view of three mountains of the neighborhood. In those 38 years now the trees have grown up so much that we now cannot see any mountain from our house any more. But, it was here that I wrote most of my books. I had a study up there and was undisturbed by students or committees, and I would get up very early in the morning, usually about 04:30 or thereabouts and start working, and then, around 10 o'clock I knocked off and went outdoors and did all the things one has to do in a country place, and go through the woods. And I never used any trail or anything, just like in New Guinea where I also went just with a machete in a hand into the jungle. I have a good sense of direction and also knew how to record to myself what turns I had made, and so I really had… had a wonderful life in the woods of New Hampshire. And it is all woods there, only around the house are about 30 or 40 acres of open meadows.

After I had been at the Museum [of Comparative Zoology] [MCZ] for… from 1953 to 1960 or thereabouts, Professor Romer came to me one day and he said, ‘Well, you're the obvious person to become the next Director’, and I said, ‘Well, I've done a lot of administrative work at the American Museum [of Natural History]. I accepted the Alexander [Agassiz] Professorship as a Research Professorship and I don't want to become Director’. And he said, ‘Well, I'll have to talk with the President’. So he talked with Mr Pusey and after a while it was Mr Pusey who said, ‘We have decided you have to be the next Director’. And again I said no, and after some… back and forth like this, one day Mr Pusey called me up and he said, ‘I herewith’, oh no, he said, ‘We have been totally unable to find anybody suitable for this position, therefore I herewith appoint you Director of the MCZ’. Well, I said, ‘Okay. I… if it can't be helped, but’, I said, ‘I take it for 10 years and not a single year more’.

I realised that the museum was in need of all sorts of things. First of all it was an old building, might be about seventy or eighty years old and there were no - there was no laboratory space and we obviously needed a laboratory wing for all sorts of fields, particular the modern molecular biology and in behaviour studies they needed laboratories, in functional morphology they needed laboratories. So that was my first thing to get a new wing for the museum, for the, for the Museum of Comparative Zoology. The second thing was the field work. Yes, students had been doing field work on my place in New Hampshire and other students had gone up to the - gone out to the Harvard forest which is oh, almost a hundred miles west of, of Cambridge and would require a whole day to go there and back. And I said that that isn't good enough to do field work for, for an active student who has courses to take and all that. We need a place right near to Harvard, as near as possible. So I began to search and was helped by Charles Lehman, one of the people working in the mammal department. We looked over some place south of Boston and it turned out not to be suitable, and then another member of the staff in mammal department, Barbara Lowen said "Well there's a wonderful piece of woodland in Concord, the Esterbrook woods, maybe we could get those." So, so she got me in touch with the head of the, of the conservation department of the town of Concord, and he said "Oh, I've been trying to save this [property] but I never knew how to." And so he persuaded the landowners to sell, I think it was eight parcels of land to Harvard and I managed to get the Ford Foundation to give me the money to buy it and now this wonderful piece of forest, already described by Henry Thoreau in his writings, seven hundred plus acres, is now owned by the Museum of Comparative Zoology.

I tried to get a much closer cooperation with the biology department. There was, sort of… a fight going on between the two of us which at first was not too successful because it was the period when the molecular biologists tried to take over biology at Harvard… as a matter of fact did take over the biology at Harvard. And, for instance, eight positions that became vacated at that time in the biology department, seven were filled with molecular biologists, so that whole fields of biology were no longer represented in the biology department. I shall not give the whole history how this was changed, but at any rate, the students made a petition to the Dean and the President, to restore some biology and after the Dean had looked into the situation he divided the biology department into three parts: organismic evolutionary biology, cellular developmental biology, and molecular biology. And the most important regulation was that all replacements in any of the three could be voted on only by the members of the department. So, the molecular biologists could no longer take away any… any more positions in organismic biology. Now, when after this was done the cooperation with the biology department was… was almost perfect, in fact, people went back and forth as… as if it was one single institution.

We had more graduate students during my directorship than ever before or ever after. I think we… the peak was that at one time we had a total of 58 graduate students working on the different people in the… in the Museum of Comparative Zoology [MCZ]. The sad part of the story is, and I cannot conceal it, that my successor… just about destroyed everything that I had built up and he replaced the curators in… in systematics by functional morphologists, not even particularly good ones; he neglected everything. He once took a sabbatical without appointing even a… an acting director; he never filed a single annual report so… we have annual reports at the MCZ from the days of… of Louis Agassiz in 1859, up to my… retiring as director in 1970, but none since. So the… the… and no more historical records about the place, and this is a very sad story, but there was nothing I could do about it. My retiring coincided with the retiring of Mr Pusey as President who understood the situation, and his replacement by a jurist, Terry Park, who didn't know what it was all about. And I will not go into detail now, but this is a very sore spot and a very great disappointment for me, that… what… we now have, however, the wing, we have the field station, except that the director of the field station is a… is a… metabolic physiologist who works indoors and I think has no interest whatsoever in the field station. They should make an appointment in environmental sciences but, so far, they have failed to do so.

The most important thing that happened in the library… that, after some very dilettante librarians, we finally got some good professionals and they're running the library very well. During the preceding period something very unhappy occurred. The… all the rare books, the best rare books and big works with plates and all that were locked up in one room and, apparently, that's the only way we can explain it, somebody bribed the night watchman to let him get in there and take these things out and suddenly it was discovered that a great part of that rare book collection was gone. And has never been found again, even though internationally all libraries have been notified and now they have some very elaborate… a very elaborate system of protection and it will never happen again.

I was responsible for the fact that Herb Levi was appointed curator of spiders - this was already under Romer but at my advice - and he turned out to be an excellent specialist, and all the current leading younger spider people in the United States were all students of Herb Levi. The second very good appointment of mine was Howard Evans, an entomologist who has been equally good in the systematics of hymenoptera and in describing their behavior. But when he… very soon after Mr Crompton had taken over the directors from me, Evans was so disgusted with Mr Crompton's behavior that he resigned and took a… a position in Colorado.

There were two appointments of mine that didn't work out. One was a curator of invertebrates with the name of Barry Fell. He… invertebrates used to be under Alexander Agassiz, one of the best areas… one of the most outstanding areas of the Museum of Comparative Zoology. But it had greatly deteriorated in… in the… in subsequent times and I said we must build this up again, and I inquired all over the world who are the best invertebrate people. And, finally, the choice narrowed down to two. One was somebody at the British Museum of Natural History [sic], I think his name was Rees, R-E-E-S; and the other one was Barraclough Fell in New Zealand who worked on echinoderms and echinoderms had been the special field of Alexander Agassiz. We had probably the best collection of echinoderms in the world, and Rees also indicated he wasn't going to leave Britain. So I had good friends in New Zealand, particularly the President of the Royal Society of… of New Zealand – Fleming – and I said, ‘What do you know about this man Fell?' And he wrote back… a very praising report, very favorable report. So we hired Fell, and Fell undoubtedly was a very intelligent person, but he went crazy… there's just no other way of putting it. First, he started to write papers on dispersal around the Antarctic continent that were really quite queer, and I worried about him and I said, ‘Well you… you don't mix with anybody, you always sit just in your office. Why don't you mix more?’ And I invited him to lunch with me in the director's office. Well, it didn't do any good and he very soon after that began to develop a new interest in old inscriptions, particular inscriptions that had never been deciphered by anybody, maybe unknown languages or what… including, let's say, on Easter Island or… and then he… he thought… and he founded a society which, I guess, is the Epigraphic Society, that's the name of it, and he published a journal where all these… he had quite a following, but I had a feeling it was all pure invention, and I didn't know what to do about it, to… to pension him was a little difficult. But I think it was finally solved after I had retired and he was pensioned and he went to the West Coast, and he has a great following, this Epigraphic Society of his is very successful and they publish monographs and all that, but as a worker in the field of invertebrates he had been a total loss. The other appointment, and the person is still there and so I will not say very much, but it was a young man who again was highly favored by everybody. I had letters in the files from Sweden and Holland saying you don't have to look for somebody in the rest of the world, you've the best young man right there in… in Harvard. So I appointed him. He does give a reasonably good course, I'm told, but he's been very disappointing to me because he doesn't publish very much and has too many outside interests. He will dabble in Portuguese poetry and things like that. And… so in my appointments I definitely have not been lucky.

My 1942 book Systematics and the Origin of Species continued to sell and I was repeatedly asked to bring out a revised edition. However, I had the feeling that so much had happened since the original publication, and furthermore, by taking out all the material on the methods and principles of systematics and publishing it as a separate volume, it seemed the volume no longer should be republished. And I told Columbia [University Press] to stop printing it and let it go out of print. However, there was, of course, a need for a replacement volume which would be rather different and I worked on it very hard, and I still have in my office, and I don't quite know what to do with it, four versions of this book. Whenever I finished one, I would go back to chapter one, revise that again, chapter two, revise it… by the time I had revised the last chapter I felt there was a great need to revise again chapter one. And I finally said, well, this can go on until Doomsday, and I decided now I publish it. And that was in 1963, and the new book was called Animal Species and Evolution.

This book for about 20 years was the book that was used by most people who gave an evolution course. It had the best… it was animal species, it didn't have anything on plants, but it certainly gave the best summary of the evolutionary literature as the… as it related to animals. And there were many things by which it differed from the 1942 book. For instance, I had barely mentioned in the earlier book that there are so-called sibling species, that is, natural populations that behave toward each other like good species even though there were hardly any differences, any morphological differences between them; while in the new ’63 volume I think it's almost a whole chapter devoted to these sibling species and they are very important, and more and more people realize. For instance, by studying the songs of crickets the number of species of North American crickets was doubled because species that were very similar but had entirely different songs were recognized to be different species. And as I said, about half of the North American species were discovered that way.

I had a long standing argument with the great protozoologist Tracy Sonneborn about Paramecium. He described Paramecium aurelia, one of the species, with 14 varieties, and I looked at these varieties and I said, ‘Well, they're all perfectly good species because they coexist’. This was as far back as my 1942 book, and he definitely disagreed with me. I invited him in 1957 to write a chapter in a book on species problems and he still firmly defended that these were varieties. Well, I think it was finally in 1974 that he caved in and agreed yes, there are good species, and described 14 new species of the Paramecium aurelia complex.

I did a lot to describe more carefully what biological species are. I made a more… I made a clear distinction now between the species as a concept and a species as taxon. I made a much better analysis of the process of speciation. In 1954 I had published a paper in which I showed that the usual description of speciation, namely the split of a widespread species through a newly arising geographical barrier was really a… a… the much rarer process of speciation. A more common one was that a species established a new founder population way beyond, or well beyond, the borders of the… the current borders of the species, and that this isolated founder population that had budded-off, so to speak, from the maternal species eventually could develop into a separate species. And in this 1954 paper I expanded this idea a great deal and I said that this fact that this founder population was established by just a few individuals with only very… a very small part of the genotype of the widespread highly variable maternal populations, permitted, if one allows for the interaction among genes, permitted the restructuring of the genotype and under the very strict selection of this founder population in a new environment there was a chance that something quite new could evolve in such a founder population. And I called this process ‘peripatetic speciation’. And I pointed out in the original paper that this would be an explanation of the phenomenon that Darwin had already emphasized, and every palaeontologist since, that new species in the fossil record always seem to turn up suddenly without any seeming connection to anything else. I said if you have a founder population and that evolves gradually, the chance that this will be found in the fossil record is virtually nil. It is only if such a population is highly successful and spreads widely, then all of a sudden it will turn up somewhere in the fossil record. And that very process that I describe, both in my ’54 paper and then again in my 1963 book, later on was picked up by Eldredge and Gould and, without them adding very much that is new, renamed as punctuated equilibria. And everybody who now talks about punctuated equilibria thinks this was invented by Eldredge and Gould, but Eldredge, in an earlier paper in 1971, gives me full credit for it, but the Eldredge Gould paper of 1972 fails to list the 1954 paper in their bibliography.

I referred to this restructuring of the founder population, owing to the… genetic internal imbalance and owing to the… being exposed to this new set of environmental factors, I said that the new… that… that this particular gene pool would undergo a veritable genetic revolution, and that perhaps was a little too strong a term because everybody else objected to it. But what I meant to say, and a few people have accepted that since, that this was a much more rapid and much more drastic…. that such a founder population permitted a much more drastic and much more rapid genetic restructuring than any population that is part of a widespread species. And so, to that extent, my emphasis on the amount of change in such a population and the rapid rate of change is perfectly valid. And that, as I said, is being recognized by some… some people. Now, how important it is, and… and all this sort of thing, a… a lot of work will still have to be done. Experiments have been made to test it, but they were using highly unsuitable material and therefore the last word hasn't been said yet.

My philosophy in this [sic] was a very strong emphasis on the holistic aspects of the genotype and the holistic aspects of species and of evolution. This… again it was a… a attack or a criticism of what I had called 'beanbag genetics'. Beanbag genetics I referred to, when I used that term, I referred to the kind of genetics that RA Fisher was particularly well known for, who said that he would only study so-called additive gene effects which means only the effects of a gene directly on a phenotype and not the interaction of genes, in other words, epistatic interactions. And I said this is… this is a… a very unrealistic approach because genes constantly interact with each other, any particular gene in one genetic context might be highly favorable, and that very same gene in another genetic context might actually be lethal. Well, for a long time the geneticists very much resisted this kind of thinking, but again as a… in the last five or 10 years quite a few authors have come… come out with supporting my ideas. Of course, epistatic interactions, there are no good techniques by which to study them and this is the reason why the geneticists have been so unhappy about the idea of epistatic interactions. Now, at the same time, also, I was constantly emphasizing that the individual as a whole, and as a matter of fact, the phenotype of the individual is the actual target of selection, the actual object of selection, while the geneticists in the… in the 1960s, when the book was published, were still all thinking of the gene being the target of selection. All their discussions were gene-centerd, if you may want to coin that term, and I think that all of this gave this book a… an approach and a intellectual climate, if I may put it that way, that was very different from the genetic volumes that were published at the same time. And the book had a very considerable influence, and as I said, it was very widely used in teaching.

It was big book, I forget now the number of pages, something like 700 or 800 or so, and everybody said, well, couldn't you shorten it a little bit? And I looked at it and I saw that for every phenomenon, for every… as evidence for everything that I claimed I always gave five or six or 10 examples as evidence. And I saw that, yes indeed, I could shorten it very considerably, and so I brought out an edition which was also very readable because I got not a science editor in Harvard  to helped me with the volume, this abridgement, but the English language editor. And I said to her, ‘Any sentence you don't understand, any paragraph you don't understand, tell me and then I will see whether I can make it more easily explicable’, except in a few cases where she simply didn't know the Mendelian Laws or something like that. So it was a very readable volume, came out as Populations, Species, and Evolution. However, I had over-emphasized the fact that it was abridged because at the same time I revised a great many chapters and, in… in a few cases, it was quite a drastic revision.

The uniformity of species I had ascribed entirely due to gene flow. And I was very much attacked by Ehrlich and a co-author, Holm I guess it was, saying there… there was very little gene flow. Well, he has been… he was working with a butterfly that lives in isolated colonies at high altitudes in the Rocky Mountains and, indeed, that particular species doesn't have very much gene flow. But… so there was no need for me to reduce the emphasis in gene flow as much as I had done in this 1970 volume. More recent work has come out by various authors which show that in a majority of species there is indeed a great deal of gene flow and they have confirmed something that I had mentioned in my ’63 volume and I think even earlier, that there is a… a certain amount of so-called polymorphism for dispersal facility. In every population, I claimed certain individuals have a tendency to stay right where they are, they are totally philopatric, as the term is that I had coined. Another percentage of individuals, perhaps the majority scatter a certain amount between birth and the time they reproduce, but not very far. And then there is a small minority of individuals who go far away, hundreds of miles and settle down there. I first found this in banding results of German birds, but it has now been confirmed by Drosophila and… and other organisms. So, gene flow indeed occurs a great deal. On the other hand, I introduced in my 1970 edition another explanation for the uniformity of species and that is that, simply, that the genotype that, as I had always emphasized, has a certain cohesion, also, therefore has certain conservative aspects. It is very difficult to change a genotype very drastically even by geographic variation.

There was one other point that I emphasized in the… in the new volume and that is that this claim, and I had said this already earlier, this claim that the species are unimportant in nature, they're just an accident of nature, is quite wrong. In fact the species is the real unit of evolution. Every species occupies a certain niche in nature, a certain… place in the whole machinery of life and of ecotypes and… ecosystems and so forth, and every new species is an experiment, so to speak, of evolution. Most of them are unsuccessful, die out rather quickly, but every once in a while a species discovers a new unused resource in nature, a new unused adaptive zone, and then can be successful there and speciate again there within this new environment. And in order to have evolutionary change and evolutionary so-called progress, a abundant production of new species is a necessity just like abundant genetic variation within a population is a necessity for natural selection to work.

In 1942 I had, what I thought was thoroughly, refuted the frequency of sympatric speciation, in fact I said even though it is possible there really aren't any good cases. Well, in the 20 years or 25 years after my book, various entomologists again began to promote the idea of frequency of sympatric speciation. Well, I had in 1949… in 1947 a detailed analysis of what is needed in order for sympatric speciation to be successful, and what I said at that time was still valid at that time. But, eventually, more and more people talked about sympatric speciation and it is now a wide open question, particularly since a entire new group of organisms has been found that seems to have frequent sympatric speciation, and that is freshwater fishes. And there are numerous people working on this now, papers appearing every… oh, every year several papers in the thing, so that I have to simply say that even though I had never questioned the possibility of sympatric speciation, the actual demonstration of it which was not yet… had not yet been done in 1942 is beginning to come very close to being done.

We have basically two levels of evolution. We have the level of evolution in which species and populations are involved, and then we have a level that is often referred to as ‘macro-evolution’, that is the origin of whole… whole new types of organisms, the development of new evolutionary inventions, innovations like wings on birds or like swim bladders in fishes or things like that. And there has been a argument among evolutionists, particularly by palaeontologists at… as to whether these macro-evolutionary phenomena that I have just referred to, can also be explained by the same mechanism, by the same populational approach as the… as evolution at the… as micro-evolution at the level of species and populations. And, in my own writings, both in the 1963 book and in the 1970 book and in anything I have published since, I have consistently emphasized that… that there is no break between the two. That all evolution takes place in populations, at least in sexually reproducing organisms, that it is always the either success or not of individuals that is involved, and it doesn't matter whether this is at the level of micro-evolution or in the process that leads to major macro-evolutionary changes. That, I think, for a long time was probably a minority viewpoint although Darwin already had emphasized it and all Darwinian evolutionists had always firmly believed in this. But since the majority of biologists and even… even greater majority of Darwinian lay… non-Darwinian lay people was very great, the belief that macro-evolution can be explained by the Darwinian explanation was, for a long time, the minority viewpoint. But I think and I hope that it is gradually becoming the majority viewpoint, but I have held it consistently.

Darwin was always accused of having introduced evolution by chance, and it was… he was accused with the words, ‘How can you explain the evolution of such a perfect organ as the eye by chance?’ These people – and this included even many geneticists – did not realize that natural selection is a two-step process. The first step consists of the production of variation, an immense amount of variation, and also as I showed in my 1963 book, there are all sorts of mechanisms to preserve this variation as much as possible. And this variation, whether it is new mutations or recombinations, the breaking up of chromosomes during meiosis, any of the processes that lead to the meeting of different mates with different genotypes, all this is a matter of chance, there's no question about it. At the first step of natural selection chance reigns supreme. However, the next step, the survival of certain individuals while the majority are being eliminated by natural selection, this survival is not a matter of pure chance. This is a matter of certain individuals being actually fitter at that particular moment than others and therefore having a greater chance to survive than the ones that are less fit. And so, the second step of natural selection, which also includes a great deal of chance because a very favorable individual, for instance, might suddenly die in an accident… the philosophers always talk about the two identical twins in which one of them is killed by lightning, and the question is: is the one that was killed by lightning less fit than the other or not? And philosophers having a wonderful time arguing this point. But the point that I'm making is that even at the second step where the fitter individuals, the better adapted individuals, have a greater chance to survive, even there chance plays a considerable role. So you have two things: chance and selection, which you might call ‘necessity’, or you might call ‘design’ if you're a natural theologian, and it's the two work together. Now the old Greeks already… the Greek philosophers argued, what is it that makes the world change: is it chance or is it necessity, or is it accident or is it design? Well, the Darwinian solution is they both contribute to the changes in the world. The chance factor produces the variation that is needed by natural selection, and natural selection is the necessity factor which favors certain individual… or individuals over others. So if we look at natural selection in this new way, it is perfectly clear that all the criticisms of Darwin were quite… they were failures because they didn't take into consideration that natural selection is a two-step process with a very different load of chance in both parts of this process.

The majority of scientists are specialists in one particular area, and when I say ‘majority’ I would say the large majority. I have always been different in that respect because I've always been interested in all sorts of things. That goes back to my childhood. Of course, I grew up in a family where books played an important role, my father had shelves full of books on philosophy, on history, on art, my mother was very much interested in art, so I was exposed to a highly varied… intellectual environment, and that stayed with me all my life. I've always been interested… I still today love to go to art galleries when I come to a new city and read on material on subjects that theoretically have nothing to do with my field. But history certainly was something that was very much of interest to my father and to my family, and even in my PhD thesis which was published in 1926, the history of the dispersal of that bird, the Serin finch, from the Mediterranean into northern Europe, was an important component. And, from that point on, every once in a while again, I would do a historical paper. For instance, I discovered that Americans and British thought that Howard in Britain had discovered the concept of territory, and so I published a translation of a paper by a German ornithologist with the name of [Bernard] Altum in the 1830s or thereabouts where he completely, and in great detail, describes territory. This was a historical paper. Later on I did something similar on a behavior person with the name of [Hermann] Reimarus who published in the 18th century. And, of course, my teacher in Berlin, Professor [Erwin] Stresemann, was very much interested in history and published all along historical papers and eventually a wonderful book on the development of the science of ornithology.

I read a book by the American historian, Arthur Lovejoy, entitled The Great Chain of Being. And, in this book, Lovejoy shows how an idea, a very basic broad idea, that Aristotle had first developed, changed in the course of history and became more widespread, more dominant, and that idea, so to speak, had an evolution, just like a kind of animals would have an evolution through time. And this thought that an idea could have an evolution and that such an idea could have a rather dominant influence on the particular period in which it was changed, greatly fascinated me and has been, sort of, in the background of my thinking ever since in the numerous historical papers that I have written since that time. Now… I'm, of course, not the only one that has been thinking of such… along these lines and it has become quite clear to a number of historians that concepts, which are these ideas, play a great role in science. And I go even further: I say that new theories are found in the physical sciences usually on the basis of laws while new theories in biology are usually based on new concepts, like Darwin's concept of natural selection, like the concept of territory, like concepts like sexual selection or in ecology, like… resources or competition or predation. All these… none of these things are there at the basis of… of biological theories is based on a law. They are all based on concepts. So concepts are, in my opinion, the most important thing for the history of biology.

The philosopher of science, Thomas Kuhn, developed or published in 1962 a book on scientific revolutions in which he said that you had a paradigm of theories that dominated a certain period and then you had normal science in for a long time following. Then again, you had a major scientific revolution resulting in a new paradigm which then dominated all the thinking for the next 20 or 30 or 50 years of normal science. Well, I went through the history of biology, where we also have many scientific revolutions – just think of the Darwinian one in 1859 – and I found that they do not at all go on like Kuhn says. For instance, let's take the… in the case of Kuhn always a paradigm is totally replaced suddenly by a new paradigm. Well, Darwin, in 1859, when he proposed the theory of natural selection, this was not at once accepted, in fact it took 80 years before it became a majority view. But it competed for this whole period with three other explanatory theories of evolution like… inheritance of acquired characters, mutations, cosmic teleology and so on and so forth. So, I developed gradually ideas in this field that were quite different from the standard opinions of the historians of… of science, most of which had come out of physics. And I first published individual papers, for instance, I did one on Louis Agassiz who was so opposed to Darwin's evolutionary theories after they came out in 1859. And I showed that Louis Agassiz was dominated by a set of concepts and ideas that simply made it impossible for him to accept Darwinian revolution.

The evolutionary synthesis, in many ways, was a marvelous illustration of the way concepts were developed and replaced and where compromises were made by opposing viewpoints. And I realized that and I decided in the early 1970s to organize a workshop in which the evolutionary synthesis would be thoroughly discussed and I tried to invite all the surviving architects of the synthesis. For instance, [Bernhard] Rensch in Germany, who promised he would come, but at the crucial moment came… became ill with shingles and couldn't come. I invited Julian Huxley, but he was also ill, and he died very soon after that, I invited George Gaylord Simpson, and he refused to attend and I… first he claimed there was a conflict of dates, so I organized a second workshop so that he could attend and… and he again said no he's not going to attend. And then afterwards he complained bitterly that the participants of the workshop had not properly explained and interpreted his ideas. Well, that's exactly why he was supposed to come. Well, he was in his paranoid condition, decided not to come. Well, there was one person I did not invite who was still surviving, he was in his mid to upper 80s, and that was Sewall Wright. And I had perfectly good reason for that. I'd been in several conferences where Sewall Wright had participated and he always talked endlessly and I found him historically, very often, quite unreliable. For instance, he also always claimed that he never had changed his mind after his early papers in… in 1916 or 1918 or something like that; in reality he had constantly changed his mind. However, so that genetics was properly represented, I invited something like, I don't know, eight or 10 or 12 geneticists including [Theodosius] Dobzhansky and… and [George] Stebbins and all the other personal geneticists were invited. They were compared… well, several palaeontologists were invited because Simpson wasn't coming, and so we had quite a very large group and the proceedings and all the discussions were recorded on tape, with one exception – a very colorful presentation by the British geneticist EB Ford, where he describes his family background. He came from an aristocratic family, and it was really a marvelous account. Unfortunately, the tape recorder hadn't been turned on, but otherwise everything was taped and the tape is still in existence.

The reason why, as we can now say in retrospect, the workshop was particularly successful was that I had worked out an extremely detailed questionnaire which every participant had to answer, and these questionnaires are now all deposited at the American Philosophical Society so that anybody can check them if they don't like the final report that I wrote together with Will Provine. Now, I chose Will Provine because he was young, very active, very eager and I thought this would be a good person to help me. It turned out later on that actually his ideas were not at all the same as mine. He was not a trained biologist, but he was raised as a mathematician and he thought that the evolutionary synthesis had been mostly done by the population geneticists which I did not… this belief I did not share with him and, in fact, I was able to demonstrate that this was really not the case. However, all the evidence, all the… the statements of people could be read in the volume that was finally published in 1980. And there was one particularly interesting contribution. I had also invited, because he happened to live in Cambridge, TH Morgan's last student, his name was Weinstein, I think it's Alexander Weinstein. And at one point the discussions… in the discussions somebody said, ‘I noticed something very peculiar in the publications of TH Morgan. In 1916 in a book on evolution he presents a perfectly correct picture of Darwinian natural selection, but in his last book on evolution published 16 years earlier [sic] in 1932 he… everything he says about natural selection is wrong. How could this happen? Was this a matter of old age’? And then Weinstein spoke up and he said, ‘Oh, I can explain that’, he said, ‘When Morgan had finished the manuscript of his 1916 volume he brought it into the… into the fly room at Columbia University and there was [Alfred] Sturtevant sitting there and I, and Morgan said, ‘Would you be willing to read through my manuscript and tell me whether there's something wrong with it’? And we did and we both agreed that this chapter on natural selection was all wrong, was terrible. So we told him so and he got a little bit angry and he said, ‘Alright, you two write that chapter!’ And Sturtevant and Weinstein wrote that chapter and naturally everybody says it's a very good account of Darwinian selection, but it wasn't written by Morgan. And when he himself wrote his last book without the help of Sturtevant and Weinstein, of course he went back to all of his mistakes. And if it hadn't have been… been for this workshop… workshop and Weinstein's comments, nobody would ever be able to explain this discrepancy.

The volume is widely read, in fact, so widely read it has run… it's gone out of print and Harvard University Press has decided to republish it and will come out new again next year. And they asked me to write a new foreword for the reason that there is still some uncertainty because Provine, for instance, has published a report on the evolutionary synthesis which is quite in conflict with my version of it. And I analyzed the whole situation and I discovered that there were three periods actually in evolutionary biology after the year 1900. After the rediscovery of the Mendelian publication, the so-called Mendelians took over the explanation of evolution and these were Hugo de Vries of the Netherlands, Bateson from England, and Johannsen from Denmark. And they all three were mutationists, they believed that evolution proceeded by major mutations that produced a new species in a single step, and all of… all three of them were very much opposed to natural selection, they didn't believe in natural selection. And that was the, so to speak, official viewpoint on selection among the geneticists. Well, this period lasted… and TH Morgan… included, he also accepted this viewpoint. Then, beginning 1916 a number of papers came out, one particularly by RA Fisher which… and the later findings in the Morgan lab that many mutations could be very small changes and evolution could happen very gradually and therefore there was no objection any more to natural selection, and the new viewpoint of the population geneticists developed between 1916 and 1932 in which this was the standard interpretation of evolution and it was quite in consonance with Darwinian interpretation. And this was the synthesis between the new genetic thinking, the populational genetic thinking, and the Darwinian interpretation, but it wasn't the evolutionary synthesis. The evolutionary synthesis covered the years 1937 to 1947 and was initiated by the publication of [Theodosius] Dobzhansky's Genetics and the Origin of Species. And as I think I already mentioned some time earlier, Dobzhansky had the great fortune and advantage to have been a naturalist as a youngster and he was a collector of butterflies and beetles and he had become a specialist of the Coccinella beetles, the ladybird beetles. And so he was fully familiar with what species are and what speciation is and with the whole thinking of the naturalists in the subject. But then when he was 27 years old he got a scholarship to come to America from Russia where he was, and joined the Morgan lab where he came under the influence not only of Morgan but also particularly of [Alfred] Sturtevant. And he acquired the thinking of the geneticists, the population geneticists, so he had two of these viewpoints, two of these sets of concepts and ideas which he found were compatible if properly interpreted. And this compatibility he presented in his 1937 book Genetics and the Origin of Species and this led to a synthesis of the fields of the naturalists and the fields of the population geneticists. And it must be emphasized that in the writings of the population geneticists prior to Dobzhansky's book you get hardly… you find hardly a word about speciation, species, macro-evolution, that was something that geneticists who worked with a single gene pool could not possibly deal with, could not possibly handle and therefore they simply ignored it. And the important step in the evolutionary synthesis of the period 1937 to ’47 was that the two fields – the study of adaptation which the geneticists were doing, and the study of the origin of organic diversity which the naturalists were doing – were shown to be compatible with each other and were fused together into one single field, the field of evolutional biology or as it is called, the field of the evolutionary synthesis. So that was really for the whole field of evolution an absolutely crucial period, this coming together of the naturalists and the population geneticists.

The really important thing in biology and in the progress of biology, the advance of biology, was the development of new concepts and the role these concepts played in opposing preceding concepts and preceding opinions. And I had started working on a book on this subject right after I had resigned from the directorship of the MCZ [Museum of Comparative Zoology], in other words around 1970. I'd gone to Tübingen in Germany in 1970, and again to Würzburg in 1977, working very industriously on the history of biology and particularly on a new kind of history. Mine was not going to be a descriptive history of everything that happened, whether it was important or not, but mine was very clearly, as the title of the book that I published in 1982 says, The Growth of Biological Thought. I'm tracing what we think and believe about the living world now, I'm tracing that backward to its roots and anything that happened at the same time in the year 1800 that had no connection with these future developments I'd simply leave unmentioned. Now this has been sometimes criticized as 'whiggish' as the term is among the historians. Whiggishness refers to the fact that the certain types of… of historians have presented British history, everything that was good in British history was due to the Whig party and everything that was bad in British history was the fault of the Tories. And this kind of biased one-sided history has been referred to as whiggishness in history. And we have whiggishness in history of science also when, for instance, let us say Lamarck is criticized for… having believed in an inheritance of acquired characters; that is straight whiggishness because at his time everybody believed in this and it is not something to be criticized. On the other hand, to show where Lamarck fitted into the growth of modern thought and devoting quite a bit of time and discussion to Lamarck is not whiggishness, because he is looked at… he is part of the growth of the biological thought and we must understand his period in order to be able to understand what happened after Lamarck and what happened after the people that were after these people. So, I have always defended a historical view of the development of things and I do not consider it whiggish unless I make unfair criticism of… of people in the past for not having known what we now know. We have to judge them on the basis of the knowledge that was available at the particular time. For instance, Darwin never understood variation, genetic variation. Well, we can't criticize him for that, genetics didn't exist at that time, molecular biology didn't exist at that time, how could he have known these things? So I had to make this remark about whiggishness because certain people have used the word whiggish in a very incorrect and even unfair way.

From the beginning to the end of the book it is a history of the basic concepts in the field of biology. Now, I felt qualified to do with three major branches of biology, namely, the first one being field of systematics; the second one being the field of… transmission genetics; and the third one being the field of evolution… evolution of biology. And those are the three parts of biology that I deal with in my 1982 book, and I have in… all the way through attempted to go back to the primary sources, read things that literally nobody ever reads because they always go back only to the secondary sources. And, for instance, I went back to the writings of [Friedrich] Miescher, the fellow who discovered DNA in 1869, and I found all sorts of things about Miescher that were very interesting and that you do not find in any of the histories of the discovery of DNA written by [RC] Olby and various other people who've written books on this subject. The point being, Miescher, of course, wrote in German and most people don't read German any more. But… I, as I said, I tried, if possible… for instance, French authors I also… I always went back to the original French texts in my analysis.

One of the really… how shall I say, staggering, Darwin would have said, discoveries I made was that biology, the science of biology as we now know it, really is a very recent development. There wasn't any biology in the 18th century. There was anatomy and physiology in the medical schools, there was natural history, most of it either done for the sake of natural theology, for purposes of religion, or done just as a hobby. But biology as we now know it originated in a short 38-year period from 1828 to 1866, documented or indicated by the names of: Karl Ernst von Baer, embryology; Schwann and Schleiden, cytology; Helmholtz and Dupont Raymond, physiology; Claude Bernard, physiology; Darwin, 1859; and Mendel 1866. And all the foundations of modern biology were laid in that period. And that is very important because the philosophies of… of science usually go back to the scientific revolution which is the period from 1660 or 1650 to 1720 or so… something like that, I don't know the exact years that you would choose, and to the Enlightenment and so forth, but any… there really wasn't any real biology in that period.

In these 38 years of the beginning of biology there was a tremendous development of new ideas, new concepts, new knowledge, and then things slowed down and for the next hundred years there was a steady progress but it was rather slow. And one reason of this… one reason for this was that there were so many opposing ideas, so many opposing concepts that had to be overcome – and I will come back to that later – before biology could really harvest what it had seeded… sowed in the years between 1828 and 1866. And there was one thing in particular that, as far as I'm concerned, was slowing down progress, and that was so-called ‘physics envy’ by so many biologists. They thought they were… sold by the physicists the idea that physics was the only really good science and they wanted to make… so they wanted to make biology just like physics and put it all in terms of laws and mathematics, and of course it didn't work. But they didn't realise that and it took a long time until this feeling that biology got to be just like physics was overcome.

In 1959 biology celebrated the 100th anniversary of the publication of The Origin of Species, and also the 150th anniversary of the birth of Charles Darwin. On that occasion a number of celebrations were organised, the most elaborate one was in Chicago and a series of three volumes issued from the symposia and lectures and whatnot that took place on that occasion. Julian Huxley gave a… a famous speech that caused some eyebrow-raising and everybody who was anybody in evolutional biology attended. I attended it, too, on the way to Australia where in Melbourne I had to give a lecture celebrating the 100th anniversary of The Origin of Species and simultaneously, by coincidence, the 100th anniversary of the founding of the Royal Society of Victoria.

I used three months that I spent in Australia to see a… a great deal of Australia owing to the friendliness of my friends over there who took me on excursions right up to Queensland, through the interior of New South Wales, and finally from Perth into the heart of the Australian desert. And it was quite a remarkable experience to see all this, and in the interior of Australia when night comes you just stop your vehicle and you spread out maybe a bit of a… a plastic sheet and then you just lie down and sleep under the open sky because the one thing that you don't have to be afraid of… that there would be suddenly rain! It just doesn't happen there. Although there was a… a hurricane coming in at the coast and we had to rush away from the… one of the interior areas because there was a very flat area and every 15 or 20 years there is such a hurricane coming in and then there will be 15 or 20 inches of rain and this flat area will be just one single lake, and that's exactly what happened after we had escaped from there.

One of the things that most people don't realize, in fact some people have even denied, was the conceptual achievements of Darwin. For instance, even such a usually insightful person like George Gaylord Simpson stated, ‘Darwin was no philosopher’. Well, Darwin was one of the greatest of all philosophers, but that wasn't recognized when Simpson made that statement in about 1964. I felt that The Origin, particularly the first edition of… of 1859, was too much neglected and the reprints didn't keep the same paging so you couldn't refer to Darwin's original statements. So, I persuaded Harvard University Press in 1964 to publish a facsimile edition of the first edition. And since I had just published the, with Harvard Press, the highly successful Animal Species [and Evolution] in order to… to oblige me they said yes, they would publish such a facsimile edition. Well, it has been selling ever since. In fact, I think last year it sold in one single year 2200. It's been… Darwin's Origin has been one of the most successful books that Harvard Press has ever published and I get 5¢ per copy for my foreword, the new foreword I wrote, and so I am being enriched by courtesy of Charles Darwin.

Usually, when people talk about Darwin's achievement they speak of Darwin's theory in the singular, and… this goes right on to the present day. Well, years ago I already pointed out that, actually, Darwin had published a whole number of theories and they're very different from each other and not only that, but his followers adapted and accepted some of these theories and not others. For instance, common descent was accepted by Huxley, but I think Lyell never was very comfortable with it; neither Lyell nor… TH Huxley accepted natural selection. And in the days right after the publication of The Origin, in other words in the 1860s, when somebody was called a Darwinian, what it meant was that he didn't believe that the world was created by God, but that the world had originated by natural means, that is what it meant at that time to be a Darwinian. If today you say somebody's a Darwinian it means that this person believes in natural selection. So, there has been a steady change. I… I published a book recently called One Long Argument which is the first summary and detailed discussion of Darwin's theories. If you go to the big biographies, of which one appears just about every year, big Darwin biographies, they tell you every last detail about his life and his illnesses and when he had a cold or not, but do you find a decent discussion of his theories? No, you won't, because these people are historians and they just don't feel qualified, and they are not qualified to discuss Darwin's… theories in detail. So, this rather small book of mine, One Long Argument, was the first really detailed treatment of Darwin's theories in the last… I don't know what, 50 years or more. And it is very important to distinguish these theories.

Darwin had five quite important theories which represented his evolutionary thought; these theories were not all accepted by the Darwinians, by his followers. In fact, some of them accepted only one or two of them, and it wasn't always the same which of these five theories they would accept, by the various different people that considered themselves Darwinians. For instance, TH Huxley and [Charles] Lyell never believed in natural selection. I think Lyell never really believed in common descent, he still had a sort of a vertical feeling about all this… all descent and phylogeny. Well let me go and discuss these various theories one by one. The first one was simply the fact of evolution which at the time of Darwin was still very much of a minority opinion in spite of [Jean-Baptiste] Lamarck and [Robert] Chambers and a few other forerunners. Darwin called it the theory of the non-constancy of species, because he fully realized that the species was the crucial factor in evolution. Now that's the first theory. The second one was that of common descent. Up to that time, following the scala naturae of the 18th century, the feeling was that all life started with some very simple… animals, little infusorians or whatever they called them. Lamarck, for instance, believed that, which originated by spontaneous generation and then gradually became more and more perfect, as they called it, until finally they became vertebrates and… and right up to man. Now, this singular… single lineage ascent was widespread until Darwin's time, and Darwin was the first one who really consistently and deliberately believed in branching evolution. Lamarck recognized a few branches, but basically his concept of… evolution was just a vertical lineage. So, branching common descent, which means branching evolution, was the second of Darwin's major theories, and it was the most successful of all of them in Darwin's time. First of all, it provided by far the best evidence for evolutionary change, and secondly it provided an explanation for much of the empirical evidence that people had at that time. For instance, the evidence for the Linnaean hierarchy, why is there such a hierarchy? And the findings of [Georges] Cuvier and the comparative anatomists that most of the organisms could be… or certainly most of the animals could be assigned to a number of types and good deal of development within these types. All this was at once fully explained by the theory of common descent. The third of Darwin's theory was that evolution was gradual. It wasn't a… by jumps, by mutations, by saltations from one type to another as the essentialists had postulated because an… an essence cannot change gradually, and Darwin introducing population thinking saw that all evolution was gradual. And of course this was reinforced or maybe even initiated by Lyell's uniformitarian theories of geology which also emphasized that all change was gradual. Now that was the third. The fourth one was theory of speciation; that species multiply and that species can give rise to new species. And the fifth one, of course, was his theory of natural selection, which in Darwin's lifetime and up to 1930s was in a minority view when more people believed that evolution was due to Lamarckian forces or due to an intrinsic drive toward perfection, in other words teleological thinking, or due to… jumps, mutations and so forth. So the… these opposing theories were more popular than Darwin's theory of natural selection.

Darwin, of course, in spite of all the contributions he made, and in spite of the fact that basically what the modern evolutionist believes is remarkably similar to what Darwin had proposed in 1859. The only really major difference is that, well, two differences: Darwin did believe in some soft inheritance, some Lamarckian inheritance, that was one difference. And that was believed by everybody at that time. It wasn't until [August] Weismann in 1883 published a paper which he challenged this… that it was no longer considered the eternal truth with respect to evolution. And the second was that Darwin never understood, and as I mentioned earlier, never could understand the source of variation or anything about variation because one didn't have genetics yet, one didn't have molecular biology. Now, Darwin wasn't always right. For instance, he has been later in a very whiggish manner, been attacked for believing in the theory of pangenesis which is that little bodies, gemules, form in all parts of the body and eventually move back to the gametes and are the carriers of the information which, according to the theory of the inheritance of acquired characters, must be transferred from the body to the gametes. And he said, ‘Well if… if such an inheritance takes place it must be explained’, and that was his theory of pangenes. Now, if he had waited another year or two until Weismann had demolished this theory then he wouldn't have had to propose his theory of pangenes. He needed it to explain inheritance of acquired character. That was one of his failures. And the other one was that in the course of time he got quite confused about variation in the sense of particular the word ‘variety’ and the botanists had a totally different concept of variety from the zoologists. And Darwin first had the zoological concept and was able to develop a very sensible theory of geographic speciation. But then when he confused it with the concept of the botanists where the word variety referred to individual variants within a population, he switched over to a theory of sympatric speciation which was based on entirely misleading conclusions. So let us admit that even Darwin was human. Now… the thing about Darwin that in a way has always puzzled me is when we really look at his work, all of his publications, it is remarkable how much he achieved, and it is even more remarkable how often he was right. Practically all – except the… the few that I mentioned – practically all other instances what Darwin said eventually turned to be… turned out to be right, even though in his lifetime it was attacked and generally rejected. And not only in the field of biology, evolutionary biology, but as I already intimated, in the field of the philosophy of biology Darwin is the basis of all the modern thinking. So he was really the great man that a lot of people have always claimed he was, but this is something that far more people have challenged and rejected. But let us remember, Darwin was a very, very great thinker and it is still almost puzzling how he could have been right in so many different of his theories and conjectures.

As I got deeper and deeper into the history of biology, and in particularly in connection with my Darwin studies, I became more and more in contact with problems of philosophy. And, as I studied and I started to read the philosophic literature, the leading so-called philosophers of science, I began to subscribe to philosophical journals and I was dismayed and distressed that the real problems of biology were not mentioned by anybody, they were not treated by anybody. And what was called philosophy of science wasn't philosophy of science at all, it was philosophy of a mixture of physics, mathematics and logic, and much of it totally unsuitable for biology. And I finally got quite angry and I think it was in 1967 or thereabouts that I gave a lecture to the… at a AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science] meeting in Berkeley… no, it was in Los Angeles, in California, in which I lashed out against the philosophers – this was in a philosophical symposium – saying, ‘You're talking about philosophy of science and it's nothing but philosophy of physics’. And there was something rather amusing, the next speaker after me was a astronomer who constantly said, ‘Philosophy of science, I mean of physics’. He was sufficiently scared by my angry outburst that he didn't dare to use the word philosophy of science when he really meant philosophy of physics. Well, it took another two or three years before this paper of mine was published. In the meantime I continued to do more reading and more thinking about it and I gradually realized that I myself, already, had greatly contributed toward the development of a philosophy of biology.

I was, I believe, the first one who very… in great detail and with great emphasis pointed out that something like the biological populations in which every individual is different from every other one, something that is implicit in Darwin's theory of natural selection, that such a thing does not exist in the inanimate world. And the… any… or the… the developing philosophy of biology, in that philosophy the concept of populations, as I have just described, has become very prominent. It's one of the cornerstones of a philosophy of biology. Another one, of course, is the fact that in inanimate nature all activities that occur are due to the action of the universal laws of physics, while in biology we have a dualism of effects. Any activity of a living organism, whether it is in physiology or in growth or in behaviour, always is controlled by two sets of factors: the first one being these same universal laws of physics, but the second one being the genetic programme which details… which controls, to a greater or lesser extent, every single action and activity of a living organism. So, here we have already two great distinctions of organisms as compared to inanimate matter. Now, I have in one of my recent publications… several of my recent publications, a long listing of all the differences between living matter… living organisms I should better say, and inanimate matter. And I cannot, now, off the top of my head give you this list again. But, for instance, one of the great distinctions is that history is an important component of any living phenomenon because history through evolution, through natural selection, has affected the genotype of every organism. While in… in the physics, for instance, whether an electron that we find here on earth has come from Mars originally or was in a… in a high weight metal or in a… in hydrogen or helium, all this sort of thing is completely irrelevant; an electron doesn't have a history the way an organism does.

In physics you deal with these universal laws, while, for instance, in evolutionary biology you cannot experiment with the phenomena of evolution. When you want to explain the extinction of the dinosaurs there's no experiment that you can do that would demonstrate the extinction of the dinosaurs. You have to reconstruct the past, you have to create what is called a historical narrative which is like a working hypothesis, or as Popper would call it, a conjecture. And then you test this by seeing how it fits with possible… with all the evidence that you have. And I always use as my example the extinction of the dinosaurs. At the very beginning people thought, well the dinos probably fell victim to a particularly virulent infectious disease, some pathogen that… that affected dinosaurs and nothing else, but that didn't work out, there were too many possible objections to this. And then the next theory was, well, at that time there must have been a drastic change of climate and the dinosaurs fell victim to this change of climate, to this climatic catastrophe. And that didn't work out because they couldn't find in the record of all sorts of things like sediments and… and ocean deposits and whatnot any… any indication of a drastic change of climate at that period. And finally, Alvarez came out with the theory that a meteorite or an asteroid had hit the earth and had exploded and that had been the cause of the extinction of the dinosaurs, directly or indirectly, by the change in the weather. And so, yes, a climatic change, but a very temporary one. So, here you have a narrative that Alvarez proposed and every test that has since been made fits with this scenario. In fact, they found the impact crater at the tip of the Yucatán Peninsula, and also has found the ejector from this crater in some of the nearby Caribbean islands. So, now this historical narrative proposed by Alvarez is tentatively accepted by just about everyone. And so it goes with all past phenomena. One has to… one can explain… only… let us say there is this suddenly turning up of North American mammals in South American strata at a certain time in geology and the historical narrative says well that was… was the time when the Isthmus of Panama originated between North and South America and these mammals were able to move across, walk across and reach South America. And so it is with all past evolutionary events. One must construct a historical narrative which is an inference from the existing facts and then test this narrative by all sorts of ways and means and see whether it is able to answer all the questions that are directed against it.

Much of what I have just discussed has been discussed in much greater detail and classified properly in two recent books of mine; one published in 1988 entitled Toward a New Philosophy of Biology and actually this was a series of essays, most of which I had published earlier, but all of them ultimately dealing with the philosophy of biology. I didn't have a well organised real, well rounded philosophy of biology and that's why the title was Toward a New Philosophy of Biology, hoping that some philosophers might pick this up. Well, no philosopher did. In the meantime, I'd been doing more thinking about these matters and I published this year a book entitled This Is Biology and the major… well, there are a number of different reasons for this, and a number of different objectives of this book. One of them is to show that biology indeed is very different from physics and physical sciences. Another thing I want to show is that, therefore, biology is an autonomous science, it is a science, but it isn't a science like… like physics and it points… it… it shows what the structure is of biology, it shows that biology has a… in practically all branches of biology there's a relation to mankind and to human concerns, and I illustrate this by the field of ethics, and I show that by properly following the findings of behavioral biology and evolutionary biology we can found… find a foundation for human ethics. And I, in particular, point to the fact that not only the individual is the target of selection, but in social organisms the social group as a whole might have a selective value and a harmonious, internally balanced group consisting of altruistic individuals will be more successful than a group that is torn apart by dissension and in which the egotism of individuals is in the way of cooperative collaboration among the members of the group. So that, actually, the old claim that selection is a strictly egotistical phenomenon and therefore selection is incompatible with altruism, that claim is invalid because it overlooks the fact that the social group also is a target of selection. Now, in this book, This Is Biology, I come to grips with all the… or with most of the major ideologies that have been dominating human… Western human thought during the last 200 years or so and many of which, if not most of which, were to some extent at least, incompatible with biology.

If we go back through the history of evolutionary thinking and actually it goes back… right back to the Greeks, but let's just go as far back as the 18th century, we find that basically there have been only three real theories of evolution. The first one is 'transmutationism', which is the essentialistic answer to the problem of evolution which means that all changes… evolutionary changes are due to mutations. Hence the name transmutations, mutations that is, big jumps, big saltations, the creation of new types because transmutationism is based on essentialism and typology, and any change that can happen only through the production of new types. Now, that's the first concept of evolution and that didn't die with the proposal of The Origin of Species in 1859. For instance, TH Huxley, Harvard's… Darwin's friend, was a transmutationist and the last three representatives were the German geneticist… German-American geneticist, [Richard] Goldschmidt, who believed in major steps, what he called 'hopeful monsters'; the botanist Willis who said that all new species originate by a single step; and finally the palaeontologist Schindewolf who… based the whole palaeontological history on transmutationism. That's the first one of the three. The second one is transformationism. That means the gradual change, this was a, so to speak, a softening of typological thinking. Yes, at any one given time a type is… is constant but in the course of time a type can change. And of course the… this is where the word ‘evolution’ was first used, it was used for the development of an egg into an adult. It is evolving, it's transforming from the egg, the fertilized egg, to the adult individual, and so the definition of transformationism is that it's a belief in evolution based on a gradual change of a particular object… of a particular entity. Such transformations, of course, we have in astronomy, changes in stars from one kind of star to another kind, we have it in a somewhat broader sense of the word in geology with the building up of a mountain range by tectonic forces and then the gradual erosion again by subsequent thing. So, transformationism… the typical example, of course, is [Jean-Baptiste] Lamarck's evolutionary theory where his little infusorians gradually evolved into the higher organisms, plants and mammals and ultimately man. Now, that's the second of the evolutionary theories. And the third was Darwin's variational evolution which said that at any given time you have variable populations and by the forces of selection and the genetic forces of mutation and so forth, these variable populations gradually change from generation to generation, and that is the evolution that Darwin believes in, and that is the evolution which the modern evolutionist has accepted.

This modern view that we have now accepted is a tremendous change from even as recent a time as the period of Enlightenment. There was a continuous change of the basic underlying ideologies. There was proposal of new things and the changes in one field, for instance, very often biology was leading and proposing changes in thinking, and they were eventually adopted also in physics. And let me take up a few of these basic ideologies… ideologies and show what they were like in the beginning and what they are like now, and the point that I make, and it's a very important one, is that the… these ideologies were not leading us to new concepts in… in science. In fact, contrary to what many historians claim, I believe that virtually all changes in science, particularly conceptual ones, came out of science, were a result of the findings of science, and were resisted by these widely held ideologies. And the greatest impediment to progress in intellectual thinking is the so-called zeitgeist, that which everybody believes. And that gets us back to [JBS] Haldane's famous eternal truths, and we are… and particularly natural selection had a great battle to overcome these widely held… generally held ideas and ideologies and break them down one by one. And let me now begin with the first one, that is, essentialism. I talked about this already before. Essentialism goes back to Plato and the Pythagoreans who said there are a limited number of classes of objects in nature; there is variation but these are only the… the incorrect shadows on the cave wall so to speak, as it was in Plato's allegory, of the real object; the real object as such can never change, it is constant. Now that essentialism, that typology, was overcome by Darwin's population thinking and is now completely… in at least in biology, completely replaced.

Reductionism. That is a much later one which said… although there were reductionists already among the ancient thinkers, which said that we can get a real compete explanation of the phenomena of nature only if every more complex system is dissected into its components and then these components dissected into their components until we are down to, as they called it, to the smallest parts. Now, it turns out that this is very often confused with another methodology of science which is that of analysis. Of course, from… as… beginning with the Ionian philosophers who analyzed the world into water and fire and earth and air, all through the life of science… of science there has been analysis and analysis invariably has added to our understanding, to our knowledge. The human body was dissected into the muscles and bones and nerves and blood vessels of which it consists and that added greatly to our knowledge. There is one great difference between analysis and reduction. The person who does analysis does not claim that he has totally explained everything because he has the components but he does not have the connections between the component. If, for instance, he analyzes water and finds that it consists of hydrogen gas and oxygen gas, he can, if he is careful enough, mix these two gases and have now a gas that's mixed hydrogen and oxygen, but it still isn't water because the particular connection… the particular tying together of… hydrogen and oxygen that accounts for water has not been explained by the process of analysis. The reductionist, by contrast, says that at every lower step he has the total explanation of the preceding system, and as it is said in a simple saying, that the… the reductionist says any system is the sum of its parts, and the person does analysis says, if lucky yes, this might be the case, but very often there is more there than the sum of the parts. And I remember that I… because there is a phenomenon, which is… has been called emergence, at higher levels of putting things together almost invariably new properties, new characteristics turn up which could not have been predicted from the lower levels of the components. But this again is a… something that is explained in… in great detail in my new book This Is Biology and emergence in… even 50 years ago was considered some very soft or fishy or… or unscientific subject. And I remember in 1951 I gave a lecture in Copenhagen to a group of professors at the university and… and leading citizens, they had sort of a club together, and I… at that time I realized that emergence was highly unpopular and considered quite unscientific and I sent in my lecture which was devoted to the difference between biology and physics. I said that one of the differences between the two fields was that in biology we accept emergence and physics they don't. And lo and behold, in the audience was Niels Bohr, the famous physicist, and he got up and he said, ‘Professor Mayr, I'm afraid I must disagree with what you have said about emergence’. Well, that's exactly what I’d expected, I mean, he would say… but much to my great surprise he said, ‘You are all wrong saying that's a… that this is a difference between biology and physics because in… emergence is very widespread in… in the physical world also’. And then he quoted the example of water, and of course now, for instance, Popper has written a major paper on the subject in which he totally endorses emergence and says it is very widespread and any… almost any complex system, any higher level system has always characteristics which could not have been predicted from the components. So the rejection of reductionist… the reductionist claimed if I have all the pieces I can explain everything and build up any system. They cannot, and that is now being more and more realized. Of course, analysis is a very appropriate system, but when you make analysis you still may not know like when you analyze water into hydrogen and oxygen, you may still not yet know what interaction there is between these components.

A further one of these ideologies is what I, broadly speaking, call physicalism, that is a belief in all the things that are true for physics, for instance, determinism. When you go back to Laplace, around 1806 he made the statement, if he had an exact description of everything in the world as it now exists, then he could predict what would happen in the world until infinity. Well, even within physics, by 1850, Maxwell's equation etc, this strict determinism was no longer believed and, of course, in biology in a field, let's say, like evolutional biology predictions are possible usually only in comparatively simple situations like putting certain chemicals together you can predict what will happen. But in all more complex situations the prediction at best is probabilistic. That is one of the physicalist components. Another one is the business of to what extent one can explain a living organism by simply… by… by mechanical means. As Descartes said, ‘The animal is a machine’. Well, this led to the famous fight between the mechanists and the vitalists. The vitalists said, no, an animal is more than a machine. There's something there that is not explained by the machine metaphor. However, the vitalists… all their endeavors to solve what this ‘extra’ is, the lebenskraft… the… intellegie the… what is it? … élan vital etc. All these solutions that the vitalists proposed were all mistakes, and therefore vitalism got into very bad repute. But now that it is quite explained what the vitalists had said exists, namely the genetic programme and all the other dualistic aspects of living beings is that what the vitalists had been looking for. And it now in retrospect is quite clear that the vitalists basically were more correct than the mechanists, except that their attempts to provide a solution were mistakes. But a modern biologist is neither a mechanist nor a vitalist, and we don't have a really very good word for it, but the word that is perhaps used most frequently is that this kind of belief is organicism, it's found only in organisms. Holism has often been used, but holism is also a widespread term in inanimate explanations where you also can have holistic explanations, so it doesn't really discriminates between living organisms and the inanimate world.

Let me now come to another one of these ideologies that was very detrimental and played quite a role in the period after Darwin published The Origin of Species. That is teleology, and teleology said… and there were whole evolutionary theories: the orthogenetic theories, Teilhard de Chardin, with his… omega principle is a case; Fairfield Osborn, with his… Henry Fairfield Osborn with his aristogenesis; the Russian evolutionist Berg with his nomogenesis. All these authors said there's something in living nature that leads to ever greater… that leads to progress and ever greater perfection. And that was because they had a belief in cosmic teleology. Well, every year, just about every year, a book… a new book comes out on teleology and always it's a complete mess, because the authors don't realize, these philosophers, that the term 'teleological' has been used for five entirely different sets of phenomena, and unless you clearly discriminate between the five you cannot explain anything. Now the first one, not used by very many but used by certain philosophers, is what I call teleomatic. If I have a stone in my hand and I open my hand it comes down to an end stage on the floor. Anything… or if I have a red hot piece of iron and I bring it inside a room it eventually acquires room temperature, and that's the end point. Any such end point that is strictly controlled by universal laws like gravitation, or thermodynamics, is a teleomatic process. It has nothing to do with any cosmic teleology. The second one is teleonomic, and that is any process that reaches a goal of strives toward a goal, and the basis of this goal being programmed in the genetic… or coded in the genetic programme of this organism, is a teleonomic process. And that includes all activities of living organisms that are directed toward a goal. It is always… the genetic programme is always involved in one way or another. So that's the second one. The third one is something that doesn't actually have any movement… any movement to a thing, but there are things – and the German philosopher Emanuel Kant talked about this a great deal – that are simply things that we know in the Darwinian… language would say are well adapted. Now, he considered the heart a teleological organ because it pumps blood through the body, or… the eye is a teleological organ because it permits vision and so forth. But actually there is no movement involved, there is no endpoint involved, therefore I prefer just to refer to this category as adapted entities or adapted processes. The fourth one is something I long, in my earlier papers, ignored because it bothered me, and that is purposive activities, and I thought it was something strictly human. But, in the meantime, the studies of the animal behavior people have shown that purposive behavior is widespread in higher organisms, particularly the mammals and birds, and is connected with the existence of a considerable amount of intelligence that permits planning. If a pride of lions, for instance, splits into two parts in order to surround a victim, then it is a… a purposive action based on planning, and that's the fourth of the teleological process. And the fifth one is cosmic teleology, the intrinsic drive to perfection and so forth, and that one simply doesn't exist. So, now the modern explanation of teleological says there are four processes involved that can be explained scientifically and the fifth one doesn't exist.

Let me use the word monism, which has been used in many ways, but in this particular case it's quite appropriate: the belief that there is just one thing that explains everything, in this case it is the universal laws. Well, in biology we have a dualism which means we have the genetic… we have the universal laws and we have the genetic programme. Now this is… related to a way in which we make explanations in biology. If I, for instance, want to explain why a particular bird – let's say a flycatcher that nests here in the garden – migrates in the winter to South America, we can find that there are series of causes for this that can be reconstructed and that can be called proximate and ultimate or evolutionary causes. Proximate causes are all the physiological processes that go on, the… immediately… that have to do with the phenotype of the… of this organism and permits it to do these things, and they are mostly related to physiology. And the other set of causes… and in… in inanimate nature there is… there’s only that one set of causes which is the… the… what is related to the universal laws. The second set of causes in an organism are the ultimate or evolutionary causes or explanations, and that is this organism migrates because it has a genetic programme which tells it when the temperature drops below a certain point, or the photo periodicity reaches a certain level, then it is time for you to get moving and migrate to South America. And that again is an absolute, complete difference between organisms and inanimate matter. In… in inanimate matter they have only one set of causations, in living organisms we always have both proximate and ultimate, and a full explanation of any biological phenomenon requires the solution of both of these causations.

I have presented a great deal of evidence for the autonomy of biology. I have shown that biology differs in innumerable ways, and very important ones at that, from the physical sciences. And this brings up the whole question of just what is science and what is the relation of fields like physics and biology to science? And my answer to this is that the former idea that physics was the exemplar of science and that there were some other less scientific sciences, if I may use that description, is absolutely wrong. There is indeed such a thing as Science, spelt with a capital ‘S’, and in my book again, that I’ve referred to, I give a list of 10 characteristics of Science. One of them is Science is objective, Science is willing to abandon certain beliefs and things, while, for instance, a revealed religion usually has a series of beliefs that cannot be abandoned because they are part of the thing. And there are many other characteristics. Science can… must be tested all the time, and so forth. However, there are… in the so-called philosophy of science that has been dominant from the 1920s to the 1970s, there were a number of beliefs and statements and components that are true only for physics and not for biology. And my conclusion is that we must make a distinction between Science as a whole, which is, so-to-speak, the combination of all the individual sciences, and a series of what philosophers have referred to as 'provincial' sciences of which of which biology indeed is one, but physics indeed is another one. Physics is not different from the others, it's not better than the others, in fact, the science of biology is in some ways more important because it has more relevance to mankind.

We have a philosophy of science which turns out now to have been just simply a philosophy of physics. We have beginnings of a philosophy of biology, and we have the basic principles of such a philosophy of biology, but what… what will be and what is a philosophy of Science? Well, we are not quite sure yet, but it is certainly clear that the future philosophy of Science, in order to deserve this name, must be equally… must be able to fit biology just as well as it fits… fits physics. A complete philosophy of Science must include both the principles of physics and those of biology. And that is something that we should be striving for and I hope that the younger philosophers of philosophy will become sufficiently familiar with all the autonomous aspects of biology in order to be able to design a philosophy of Science that is… is equally fit for physics and for biology.

I indeed have received many honors and I cherish them all, particularly because always there were some friends of mine or some people that admired my particular way of doing things that lay behind it and so I feel not only honored but I also feel very pleased by this personal interest of my friends. Now, let me take up individual honors. There're two honors, for instance, that will last beyond my lifetime. One is that the library… the absolutely marvelous natural history library that was founded by Louis Agassiz of the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard has been named the Ernst Mayr library. And even after my death this will be a reminder of my activities at the Museum of Comparative Zoology. And I've just returned from Berlin in Germany where the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences [and Humanities] together with the Wissenschaftskolleg founded a permanent lecture series to be called the Ernst Mayr Lecture, and that was a great pleasure for me to be able to give the first of these lectures. These are all to be devoted to the bio-sciences and they will continue year after year, it’s an endowed lectureship to honor me, and that of course has tremendously pleased me. Now, of course I could say now the first honor that I ever received I was very fond of and I still am in a way, and that was the Leidy Medal of the Academy of Natural Sciences at… in Philadelphia. Among the honorary degrees I couldn't make any particular choice because there were so many very distinguished institutions involved like Cambridge [University] and Oxford [University] and Harvard [University] and the… [University of] Paris and Uppsala [University] and the oldest university in the world, [the University of] Bologna. And I cannot make any choice. What in a way pleases me and makes me very proud, and I probably shouldn't be, is that I am an honorary fellow of the five oldest academies of the world, all five of them and I don't know whether there's anybody else who can say that. The first one, of course, is the Accademia Nazionale… Naturale dei Lincei, in Rome, founded by… in the year 1600, Galileo was a member of this academy. The second one is the Royal Society in London, founded in 1660. The third one is the Académie des sciences in Paris, founded I believe in 1664. The fourth one is the oldest German Akademie, that's the [German Academy of Sciences] Leopoldina in Halle, founded around 1684. And the fifth one is the oldest American one, which is the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia which was founded by Benjamin Franklin in 1743. And the only reason why I could have been elected by so many different academies is that I have been active in five different scientific fields. And quite naturally there were always somebody in one of the five fields in one of these academies who was particularly anxious to honor me. Another set of honors that I probably should mention is, in biology we don't have any Nobel Prizes, but a few international prizes were established to fill this gap, and I have been so fortunate to have received two of them. First the Balzan Prize, established by a Swiss-Italian group; and the second one the Japan International Prize, which I received in Tokyo two years ago. I think that is a long enough a list to… satisfy all purposes.

I am one of these fortunate people who never looks back. Am I… I’m absolutely future directed and I never… when I make a decision, obviously at the moment when I made the decision all the evidence permitted… indicated I should make that particular decision, so I never question my past decisions. There's only one thing where I… if I had the opportunity to live my life over again where I probably would make a change. And that is that in the period from 1931, when I started at the American Museum [of Natural History], for the next 20 years I most conscientiously did what I was to… told to do at the American Museum: work out these… these bird collections which, after about eight or nine years, no longer really yielded new basic insights… biological insights to me, but, since it was my duty to work out these collections, I did this year after year. I think if I had shortened that period and had earlier begun to work on basic evolutionary theory on history of biology and particularly on the philosophy of biology, I could have achieved some things which now I will never be able to achieve because at age 93, one knows that one doesn't live forever.

Well it always has amazed people that [Charles] Darwin and [Alfred] Wallace, in 1858, came out with an essentially identical, at least highly similar interpretation of evolution. The question was asked, well what in their background has led them to that similarity? Well, I shall not… there are usually three or four factors indicated, but one of them is that they have been in the tropics and have studied the fauna of topical islands. And that indeed is a most important experience that any naturalist, any evolutionist can have, and that has been my fortune that I've had this experience. And not only have I gone from island to island, and this includes mountain ranges in New Guinea which are islands in the low lands and show exactly the same phenomena as low lying islands in the ocean. But the importance of barriers among islands, the differences of different populations on different islands, the differences between big islands and little islands, all this sort of thing inevitably leads you to theories of speciation and leads you to the application of these theories of speciation to other evolutionary phenomena, including even macro-evolution. Now, this is… in my case, I was even fortunate that then not only I saw these islands but I was permitted to work out the scientific results of the collections and was able to compare particular species from island to island to island which showed the pathway of evolution. And the study of such collections, as both Wallace and Darwin knew, is of incredibly high value.

Where did [Charles] Darwin get all the information for his Origin of Species? Well, he got it largely… not just from the Beagle voyage, but also from the working out of the collections, and he devoted I believe it was eight years, for instance, to a monograph of the barnacles of the world. And it is almost invariably, except for Professor Ghiselin, been underestimated the lessons that Darwin learned from working on these collections. It isn't until you really study series of specimens, see the variation within the series, see how a population is structured, what the kind of variation it is that you find within a population, how it differs from a population that is on the next island, how much of the variation overlaps with this one – all these phenomena, you can't study them on a continent. And I would say that the study of islands, when it comes to the problem of speciation, teaches you far more than you could learn from anything else. And Darwin and [Alfred] Wallace were fortunate to have had that experience, so did [Erwin] Stresemann and [Bernhard] Rensch and so did I in New Guinea in the mountains, and in the Solomon Islands in the lowlands. It is an experience that cannot be replaced by anything else.

You must not forget that I was taught by [Erwin] Stresemann and [Bernhard] Rensch, who also had such ideas and published on such ideas and gave them, so, much of what I have published is in principle not entirely novel or new, it already has… had been pronounced by other people like Stresemann, Rensch, Karl Jordan, Ed Poulton, Moritz Wagner, if you go far enough back. It is only that I have been able to state it, articulate it perhaps more clearly, define it more decisively, produce more actual illustrations for it, and I think that there is no particular time point where I began to think about these things. As soon as I entered, so to speak, the Berlin [Natural History] Museum, that was the moment when I began to be exposed to such ideas.  
