eugene.garfield

Eugene Garfield (1925-2017) was an American scientist and publisher. In 1960 Garfield set up the Institute for Scientific Information which produced, among many other things, the Science Citation Index and fulfilled his dream of a multidisciplinary citation index. The impact of this is incalculable: without Garfield’s pioneering work, the field of scientometrics would have a very different landscape, and the study of scholarly communication would be considerably poorer.

My grandparents were, were orthodox but my grandmother - I don’t ever remember my grandmother saying one word about anything religious. My grandfather was a - you know, he went to synagogue several times a week, I think, and... although he was not a very well educated man. He was... when I... years, many years later when he and I were travelling together on a trip in an automobile with my uncle down to, to Florida, which was a, kind of, important year in my life because that caused me missing, I, I missed a half... I had a, I flunked a course in school because I’d gone to Florida and I had to make up the course, and that meant that I had to go to summer school, so in summer school I took up make, make-up courses and... but I, I found out from my grandfather, when we were travelling, that he had done two things when he was - he was brought up in what was then Lithuania part of the Russian Tsarist empire. And, we were travelling across a river in Georgia somewhere and he sees there are two guys that are standing on this raft or log, loggers, you know, pushing logs around, and he says to me, 'That’s what I used to do in the Old Country'. And, I said, 'But I thought you were a tailor', you know, because he... when he came to New York that’s how he made his living and he made pants and sold them on Canarsie Street in New York. And, he said, 'Yeah, but that was, that was only in the winter time, in the summer time I worked, you know, as a, as a logger'. And, but he... he could write, as I understand it, he could write Hebrew [sic] but my... grandmother’s youngest sister who came to live with us when I was about 4 years old and with whom I actually shared the bed with for, for several years until, until she found her own place, she came over in 1929, that was, you know, that was some year to be coming over to New York. And, she was extremely well educated because what happened was when my grandmother was born - no. When my great aunt was born my grand, my great grandmother died in childbirth, and so the two- my grandmother and her sister, Ida, were given to two... put out, put in... so to speak, foster homes. One, my aunt went to live with a very well educated family, I don’t know what they did, business, but she learned to read, and my grandmother never learned to read, but she became a fantastic cook because she used to have to take care of this huge family and prepare meals for parties and so forth. So, they were not, you know, very highly literate people but I can remember not believing that my mother, grandmother couldn’t read, because I was sitting in the kitchen with her and, and I pointed to calendar, can you read those numbers? And she said, 'Yeah, I can read numbers'. So she read the numbers on the calendar. But, I, I couldn’t, kind of, grasp the idea that she could not read English, you know. Many years later my, my youngest uncle who is only 6 years older than I am and still alive, he started to teach her - tried to teach her to read but unfortunately she died relatively young. She died of cancer, breast cancer when she was 58.

My grandpa... mother was a very important part of my life because my mother became a mother at the age of 16. My sister’s 2 years older than me, and she was already... so my mother was only 16 years older than my, my sister. And... because my father basically deserted her, she had to go to work and so we spent a lot of time with my grandparents, stayed there constantly. And...
[Q] Did you ever meet your father or...? 
 Oh, yeah. It was a very... a very tempestuous family life. I... which, I... you know, I once wrote up as... Barry Blumberg and I belong to this club of 80-year-olds, you know, people who were born the, 1925, and we, we’ve been up to his place in Maine, every, every 5 years he has a gathering of six or seven scientists who were born that year, and they... I, I... they asked me to write my autobiography so I described all this. Basically I have the, I have a theory that probably my mother, I have no proof of this, but my mother probably got pregnant and my uncle was, was livid. Her older brother was... she had five brothers, and her oldest brother was a, a relatively successful businessman in the, in the garment district. He, he owned a company called Wolf & Barse, and I... later on I actually worked there. And, as I understood it, he got a hold of my father and, and beat him up, or they had a fight, and the two of them hated each other from that day forward, okay. And, every chance either one of them got to express that anger it got out, it affected us, you know, because on the one hand... I’m not saying my, my step, my father was actually not an angel by any... not only did he... what he did... he, I, he never did... I don't know, my sister was born, they must have lived together and then he left even before I was born, okay. And, the interesting thing about that is that he then later married the woman who then became his, his sweetheart, whatever, girlfriend, and they stayed together until, until he died, so he was married to the same woman, who, who I did meet. Her name was Anne. And, she was actually nicer to me than he was, but I did not see my father until I was about 5 years old. He came... I can still remember him coming to... we had a, a three-room, I think it was three-room apartment on the fifth floor of a tenement building in the East Bronx. And, that’s when my aunt came to live with us. We stayed in one room, my sister was in another bed, and my, my mother must have slept in the other room, and then there was the kitchen. And, there were these two beds, my father was sitting on the one bed and I was sitting on the other looking at him, and he says, I want to show you something, and he pulls out a gun. My father was a bootlegger. Why he showed me the gun, I don’t know, but you, you have to think about that he was probably, what, about 23 years old, and always think about that when, when I think about... you know, by the time I was, I was the father also, because later on I got... when I got married I was 21 and Stefan was born in 1947, so, I was born in ’25, so by the time I was not even 22, Stefan was born, okay. And, so then after that I didn’t see my father again for 5 years. He did everything possible to avoid helping my mother. He never, he... for 10 years he did not give us a nickel, okay. And my uncle, on the other hand, supported us, so he became a, kind of, a surrogate father even though I never... the only time I would ever see him was Friday night we’d all meet and my uncle would come, frequently with business friends, to partake of my grandmother’s cooking which was really outstanding. And, so every Friday night we’d go there and all my, my uncles would be there and my mother, as I said, had five brothers from... she was the second oldest. My, the oldest was Sam, the, the one who hated my father, and then after them there were five other brothers, four others, Abraham, Nate, Hyman, and Bernard, Bernard.

We lived... New York, East Bronx and West Bronx is like, I don’t know, it’s like moving from... I guess, it would’ve been like moving from Parkside Avenue to Mantua, from Mantua to Parkside, okay, in those days. We lived... at first we lived in this, you know, when you’re a kid, you know, you don’t, you don’t think it’s so terrible that we lived in the... East Bronx was a, a pretty rundown... they used to, they had these old tenement buildings that were all walk-ups. There was no such thing as an elevator. And, my mother, being a single parent, placed us... they tell me that I was the first infant in the, what they called the first Jewish Lady’s Home Nursery. There’s a street called Fulton Avenue in, in the Bronx, which several years ago, I drove through there to see, to see the old neighbourhood, some of the things I could see, but it was right near the corner of a... of Crotona Park in the Bronx. The Bronx has several parks but Crotona Park is a fairly big park, and right, that corner is where Crotona Park is, so I can remember that, and so we lived on the St Paul’s Place which is a street that’s still there. But what they have on that street now, they’ve torn down all those buildings, basically, they have a big housing project, okay, although some of the street is still, still intact. There was a... when we were kids the corner of... there was an elevated train on what I think was Webster Avenue, is what it was called, and that was eventually torn down, but on the corner was a candy store. In New York the concept of a candy store is unique. It’s not, you know, when they say candy store they mean, like, a... it’s, it’s more like a, a combination store for... candy store, soda, you know, soda fountain. You’d go there if you wanted... They had pinball machines that you could play, and you bought school supplies there, sort of, penny candies, and so on, so a lot of people used to hang out at the candy, corner candy store. Now, my mother, when she would, would take us to the nursery, and every day when, when she came home she would take us to that candy store and we would, my sister and I, would share a, a chocolate milkshake. That was, you know, in those days you could probably buy it for a nickel or a dime, and I grew up on those things. Actually, it took me decades before I got out of the habit of drink, drinking milkshakes. I, I still, once in a while I crave them, you know, but... when I went, when I went to college in, in Colorado where by the time I... when I was a freshman, they had a, a dairy in the, in the centre of Boulder. I forget the name, but you could go down there and for 11 cents, this is 1942, for 11 cents all the milkshake you could consume, loaded with ice cream and everything, you know, so you could, you could live off of that. Anyhow, so, but we, we didn’t have milkshakes. We had malted milks, okay, so we also added malt to it. And, so, my mother would take us there, and she, she had a, a job doing what they call... those days poor working girls could, she, she didn’t have any, any training or anything, well, she was 15 when she got pregnant. She graduated from grammar school but she had no particular skills, so she went to work doing piece work and she work, did... what she did was if you buy costume jewellery, costume jewellery is made out of something with... they just take rhinestones and you put these rhinestones in, in, I guess they’re prefabricated, moulded settings and they make costume jewellery out of it, so that was her job. She’d get a batch of these moulds and then she’d get the, a whole pile of, of stones or beads, or whatever the hell they were, and, I’ll never forget, and banana oil. Do you know what banana oil smells like? If I smell banana oil I get - it’s instantaneous, I was imprinted with that smell, because she would come home and we would sit around the kitchen table and help her put these stones with the banana oil into the thing, you know, and she’d get paid for every, you know, I don’t know what they paid her, probably a, a couple of cents for every one she did and she’d bring them down. That’s how she managed to... she worked in... my uncle helped her.

So, that was, that was the East Bronx, okay. Now, when I was in that part of town I attended... in New York all public schools have numbers. I attended public school number two in the Bronx. But, later we then I, I guess my uncle helped us to move to the West Bronx, okay, and in the West Bronx we lived on a street called Woodycrest Avenue, and Woodycrest Avenue was a, in an apartment house which does seem... was not a tenement that’s for sure, but we had a, again a three-room apartment in a more... I guess, there were fewer cockroaches, you know, and things like that. But, typically, the back of every apartment in New York has a, a backyard, and there was, like, an alleyway and... have you, I don’t know, have you, you’ve been to my house. I have a painting which was given to me when I was in the Library School which shows what a typical backyard in New York looks like. You can see all the clothes lines, everything. And in, in that alley vendors used to come all the time, so that you could hear people, just like, you know, you, you see color, films of foreign countries, like, guys who would be... a guy would yell out, 'We, we make keys!' or, 'We do, we sharpen knives!' all sorts of vendors would be coming through there and they would, they would yell it out, you know, 'I'm here if you have anything!' and if you wanted to get something done you’d go down and do it. So, anyhow, we lived on that street and down about from my, that particular house, about 200 or 300 yards was the branch of the, the Woodycrest Branch of the New York Public Library. And it was built on a, on a strange... it was, it was on a hill and so the way they constructed it, the bottom part of the library was the children’s branch, and the upper part was the adult, okay. So... however, we then.... what happened was that when my, when I was, by the time I was about 10 years, about 9 or 10 years old my mother met my stepfather. I don’t, I don’t remember how they met, but that was an unusual, kind of, arrangement because he was also a relatively uneducated person. I don’t think he finished grammar school. He was 2 years old when he was, immigrated from Italy and, so she was going with my stepfather for several years before they got married but that being, you know... in those days a Jewish woman and an Italian man, that was, sort of, verboten, and the odd thing about all that was that my uncle, among others, was very opposed to it, okay. And, but he started dating my mother and he liked kids so he used to take us, you know, on... he had a rumble seat Chevrolet, I think it was, so we, he’d take us for rides that we would sit, my sister and I would sit in the rumble seat and we’d go for rides up in Westchester County because he was a, he was an itinerant manager of the meat department, butcher, he was an itinerant butcher for the American- Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company had, you know, A&P, I think. I don’t know, they still have supermarkets, I guess, still. It was very well known then. Atlantic Pacific Tea Company it was called but basically it was a supermarket. And, so, since he was brought up in, in Westchester County, New Rochelle, New York, he knew all these places to go to so we would... I got to know... we would go to Jones Beach or we’d go to Palisades Amusement Park, or all sorts of places that he took us to, and he was, he was a very simple man with very few intellectual interests, you know, just... I don’t what... later on that became a problem because my mother was really a, an extremely bright, intelligent woman, I mean, and probably suffered because of that.

I think my interest in information was, sort of like, inbred in the sense that I was fortunate when I was a child to live across the street from a branch of the New York Public Library. And, my first experience with title scanning was in the library where I used to go in, in the forbidden section which was the adult part of the library, not the children’s section which I rarely visited, I didn’t read too many children’s books when I was a child, and I scanned the title of every book in the library. I still... in my head I can still see some of those books that would come to mind, even though I’d never read them. Anyhow, I...
[Q] Why did you do that?
Don’t ask me. I mean, it was something that... just a curiosity, kind of, a thing, you know, just... I, I remember the title, 40 Days of Musa Dagh always come to mind as one of the things that I saw and Red Badge of Courage, and so forth. I don’t... think that amongst my friends, when I was little, there was nobody that was really interested in, in going to the library. You know, other kids were, you know, playing baseball and, we’d spend the... every, every night at 10, 10 o’clock, or 10.30 on the corner, unlike most of the kids who were home, I would be out there on the corner discussing the results of the baseball games that took place. Every kid in New York, of course, knows, is mathematically inclined because he’s got to know the statistics of the game, of the players and everything. It’s amazing how much kids know about the, the statistics of baseball.

I was, sort of, interested in science, more, more because my, one of my uncles had a chemistry set, but I never was a big, a wild enthusiast about it. And, when I was... by the time I was 14 is when, I think, they, somehow the... my uncles were, were Marxist, three of them, the other two were capitalist, so there was that constant family tension, and that’s my mother’s family. I was, I never lived with my biological father, and so... I think that during... when I was growing up I don’t, I don’t remember how I got into it but I always wanted... I always had a, a romantic idea what the, what the west was like and I always had my mind set on going out west to go to school. By the time I was... time to graduate I had applied, I wanted to go to the University of Arizona, and for some reason I didn’t get in but I did get into the University of Colorado. And, I graduated from high school when I was not yet 17. Oh, before that, I should... I, I don’t remember how, I... was always, I was good in math so if you were good in math you could... like, I got 100 on Regent's Exam, that would, that got me into Stuyvesant High School. Well, New York Stuyvesant High School was the, and still is, the leading high school for science. Although I don’t, I haven’t been in contact with them at all. I don't know whether, how many other majors the people study at science, other than science but, when I got there I don’t know why they... always when I look back I regret that somehow I never... there was nobody that mentored me there. They didn’t, they didn’t take a kid and, you know, assign him to somebody, you, just, you... everybody was on their own, and if you were good enough to do it on your own, fine, but I never, I never got into science and I didn’t, I don’t know why I didn’t particularly like biology, and I was attracted to languages. So, in high school I studied Spanish and German but, I mean... would I, I couldn’t take more than one language and so at the end of the first year or two with Stuyvesant I, I packed it in because... on top of which I had to travel all the way from the Bronx on the subway down to 14th Street, New York which - when I was telling you about the lecture coming up  that’s where it’s going to be, on 14th Street - which was an experience in itself, going down there every day because in New York kids travelled when they were 9 or 10 years old, without, without the slightest hesitation, go from one end of the city to the other for a nickel. And... so, I left Stuyvesant and I went to high school in the Bronx, the DeWitt Clinton High School which is a huge, huge school. It’s more like a college. It always reminded me... they... at that time the school, for some reason, was on three shifts. When you were a freshman you would go for the morning shift or... and if you were a senior or a junior you’d go to the afternoon shift, so I didn’t have to get to school until, probably, until 12 o’clock every day, and I could sleep late. And, on top of which, the, they weren’t all that demanding, as it were. I don’t think... at Stuyvesant I think there would just be more of a challenge, but... so, I studied German and Spanish. I belonged to the Spanish Club and the, one of my... I remember, one of my Spanish teachers was a guy who was the editor of the Ladino Newspaper in New York. Ladino is the language spoken by the Sephardic Jews who were kicked out of Spain, okay, and it’s Spanish with Hebrew characters, okay, which I... by the way, I... attended the... what do they, what do they call it, the Hebrew School or Cheda, for about a week, and I hated it, and I just wanted to go out and I, I wanted to play baseball and my mother was a very, very easy-going person and never, never made me do anything I didn’t want to do. So, I said, I don’t want to go to this thing, and I, so I didn’t, so I, I never was barmitzvahed.

She was an incredible reader. I, I never could understand how she could read so fast. She had... I remember my first wife had the same talent. My mother could look at a page and, and have it, you know, practically... she’d read a book so quick, I’d say that, I said, tell me what... was the book about, and she knew it, you know. I couldn’t believe it. So... but... and she also had a... wrote... had a very, very, very large handwriting, and wrote, wrote very, scribbled almost very quickly. So my mother was a speed demon in everything she did. Things that we used to remember about it, if we sat down... and, my mother, by the way, became an extremely good cook. She, she was taught by a pro. Even my sister is, but... and my mother could prepare, you know, incredible meals but if you were having dinner with, say, eight people for dinner, she’d be standing up, she’d serve, and as soon as your plate was done she would take the plate, take the dishes and the dishes were washed and ready for the next meal by the time you got through with the meal. So, you know, we get in the habit. When I, when I get finished eating I’d immediately take, take a plate to the sink and I would wash it out before... because if you let it dry to have work three times as hard to clean them up, you know, people let the dishes pile up and then it’s, it’s a huge, huge job, so... those, those kinds of things that she... and she could knit. I have an afghan that my mother knitted, not for me, but I inherited it from my, my daughter and she could sit and talk to you and knit, you know, and she made all kinds of sweaters. She was incredible, talented woman. Later on when my mother got older and... I had already started ISI, you know, we were doing... I was making a reasonable living. I certainly was not poor by then. She started to work - she had, had a job as a cashier in a movie theatre. There was a movie theatre in the, in the Bronx called, it was called The David Marcus Theater. It was named after a war hero. And, she was the cashier in that place and she worked for that, for them for several years and never made a mistake. You know, she handled all that money and always had things in perfect order. But then the boss decided to let her go because his wife wanted the job. And, that began a very sad period. My mother eventually, you know, died of, died in a State mental hospital here in Pennsylvania, but she... was a... I think she might have been somewhat manic depressive early on because when I was a kid I can always remember that at certain hours of the day she, you know, she was very, very agitated, but extremely affectionate. My mother was a very loving mother, you know, she’d constantly praise us and never, never once hit us. And... but, when she... after she lost that job she became very, got into a very depressed state and... but she, she started, she joined a community centre where they, where she started to paint, and it turned out she was fairly talented. I used to have some of her paintings here. I, I’ve got them at home. And, so she was a fairly creative person and I always, always felt that if she had been educated she could’ve done a lot. That, and her being married to a man who had absolutely no interest in things like that, you know, who... his, his favourite pastime was sitting in front of the TV watching wrestling matches, you know, and, and, not the real wrestling it was the phoney ones, you know. So, this is Ralph’s father, and you know my brother, Ralph. Yeah, he’s a very smart guy with... Ralph has got certain personality characteristics just like his father. He’s, kind of, a guy that can put off till tomorrow what could be done today, you know, nothing is, nothing is urgent.

Of my five uncles the youngest one was not barmitzvahed. I mean, by that time, you know, they, they were socialist. The three of them were socialists. Marxist is really probably the best way to describe it. And... my uncles on the other hand, the two oldest uncles, were in the coat and suit business, you know. They were... and, and my uncle Sam was very successful. A very clever businessman who had several talents one of which was that he could... you know, when, when you buy material they don’t bring you a huge bolt of material for you to select, they bring you a book of little swatches and you’ve got be able to judge, from that little piece of material what this, this thing’s going to look like, if you put that material into a woman’s coat or a suit, and he had that incredible talent to be able to buy the right, at the right price and right materials. And, secondly, in that business, unlike typical Jewish men who are... I don’t know how many Jewish alcoholics you ever encountered, very few, actually. And, and, by the way, I believe it’s because they say it’s because of the alcohol dehydrogenase. It’s a, it’s actually a, some kind of genetic thing. And, I myself, I always, always comment about this. If I have one beer I just can’t... it’s... I just cannot consume much more than one or two beers, you know, and I never could understand how other people could drink more than one. Now, it doesn’t necessarily apply to other kinds of alcohol. Sol Herner was a big drinker, you know, he, he was... and I always, I always told him, I said, you remind me of my uncle. My uncle learned to drink and that was the key to his success with selling, as a salesman, because he used to wine and dine his customers, you know, and so he had that talent. Then he had this, we all knew he had the ability to do very quick calculations in your head, so he would walk around... When I was... I started to work for him when I was about 12 or 13. I used to go down to my uncle’s business which was... he had a loft in a building, 37th Street and seven, between 7th and 8th Avenue in New York which is the heart of the garment centre, and we would... it was on the second floor. I would go up and I was, like, a, what they call, the building clerk. There would, there’d be orders that we would have to write out an invoice for two coats or five coats, or whatever it is, and put that in... with the, the coats and then they would be shipped out. Well, he would come around... And, and the copy of each order would go into a drawer, and every hour or so during the height of the, when... you’re extremely busy we used to have to work 18 hours a day. You would come and you’d, you’d work until midnight because that’s the season. You’ve got to get the stuff out. If you don't ship them, ship them you don’t do it you don't sell them. So, he would come around and, and add up - he’d, he’d quickly go through the... invoices that I had done and, and then he had a little piece of pad, he always had this thing in his hand, a little... he made a pad, pad that was like one and a half inches high and he would write down his numbers, and everywhere, everywhere you’d see him go he would be writing down notes. So, I always, that’s why I always carry a pocket notebook to write down because I never can remember anything without writing it down. So, then I used, used to work on Saturdays and I had a business which was retail. People thought they were getting bargains so they’d come to these wholesale places on Saturdays and say, oh yes, I’m a friend of so-and-so - because technically you weren’t supposed to sell retail because if, if the, let’s say, JC Penney or other, other buyers of the, of... from the company would find out you were selling retail, you’re undercutting your own customers. You’re not supposed to be selling retail. But they would come around and they would say, well, I’m a friend of so-and-so, and we would sell them a coat and we’d charge them the same price they’d pay, pay in the store but they thought they were getting a bargain. And however, those were cash sales, and I think that was a good way for them to make some money without reporting it, as, you know, part of the general shipment. So, I used to take care of those. When people would come in I would show them the coats and they would pick something out then they would pay for it.

When I worked for my uncle I was still going to Stuyvesant. I would work there... during the summer it was a very busy time in the coat and suit industry because... you’re now shipping and... winter calling, okay, and, and in the winter you were doing spring, right. So, I would go to school and then work there. I was earning - at that time the minimum wage in New York was 30 cent per hour. I think this is around 1937 or ’38. I was working there a while and I... said to my uncle, I said, 'I would like to... I think I need a raise'. He says, 'What do you need a raise for, you’re making 30 cents an hour, that’s a lot of money'. I was only 13 or 14. I said, 'Well, I want to buy a clarinet and...' So, he says to me, 'How much is the clarinet?' I don’t know, I think it was, like, $12 or $15, it was a Peddler clarinet which, in those days, was a very common brand of clarinet made in Elkhart, Indiana which I think is still a, you know, a place where they make instruments. And, in, in Stuyvesant you could get free clarinet lessons, you know, if you had... you, you could probably even borrow a, an instrument but you couldn’t necessarily take it home, but I don’t know, in those days. Anyhow, I, I wanted to have my own, and he says to me, 'Well, as your uncle, no as your boss I’m not going to give you a raise, but as your uncle here’s the 15 bucks, go and get the clarinet'. So, that’s how I got my clarinet. And, I used to... and so I got the clarinet. I was a freshman at Stuyvesant and the way they did things there, and this is how I... people wonder how I can be sitting, you know, in, in a room of people, or... and not hear anything, you know, you learn to focus. In order to practice, or, or to even take lessons at Stuyvesant, the... we would sit in the balcony of the auditorium of the school, and the guy would give you a lesson and there’d be somebody three feet away getting a lesson with somebody else. It was just... you, you just had to be able to, to block out anything else that was around you. And the same thing when I travelled. I mean, people don’t understand how I can, I can read on the subway, or read in a moving car. I, I did all my homework on the subway. Remember, I had to go from the Bronx all the way down to Union Square and, and that was, you know, 45, a 45-minute ride, you know, from the, from 168th Street in the Bronx all the way down to 14th Street. So, that’s how you develop certain habits, but after... so, that’s how I, I first started studying the clarinet, and I, I didn’t, I didn’t... after I left Stuyvesant I don’t think I continued it. I don’t know why, but... my mother had originally wanted, had gotten us some piano lessons and I, I don’t remember... I remember the teacher used to... this piano teacher, if you made a mistake she would take your hands and bang them on the piano, I hated her. An incredible way to teach you to play. So, I, I didn’t stay with that very long. My sister, I think, remembered that too. But we had... you know, in those days, when we lived... even in... we... couldn’t afford it otherwise, people would literally pay you to take their piano away. So, it was enough to cover the cost of moving the piano in, you know, because we couldn’t afford a piano and, you know, there were people who were... in 1929 an unbelievable amount of people, you know, who, who were - the Crash - they, they lost everything and they had to sell everything, and it was difficult. There were so many pianos available you, you know, you could... just for taking, you could take them but how are you going to take a piano? You’ve got to get the damn thing delivered up to, get it up to a third or fourth floor apartment. It was quite a feat. So, it reminds me of the time when we opened up the office at 1523 Spring Gardens Street and we were up, we had the third floor tenement for the office of ISI. It wasn’t ISI then. And, we bought a desk somewhere, I don’t know, a cheap desk and in order to get the desk, we couldn’t bring it up the steps, we had to take it through the window. And I used to tell the story about this. There was, there was a,  a, kind of, a, a homeless alcoholic, or whatever he was, a homeless man who used to hang around here and he, he always wanted to be, somehow be helpful so we were moving this desk. I remember my brother-in-law came and he was helping me move this desk. We were hauling this desk up through the window with a rope. This guy comes along and he, he sees us doing this, he says, 'Let me hold this for a while for you', I had to do something, I forget what it was, and he, he took a hold of the rope and as soon as I started to let go, the guy was flying out the window with the, with the desk. Oh God, what a, what a, what an experience. So, but those desks were unbelievably heavy, you know, the old fashioned wooden desk.

Before I got to the University of Colorado, in the summer of 1942, when I went out to Colorado by train, took the train out to, to Denver, I was met there by a friend of one of my uncles. And, I had over a month to go before school started. She said, 'How would you like to work for a month or so? I have a friend...' She had... a friend of hers was a guy named Carl Campbell who was a very interesting man. I had never met an albino before, and Carl was an albino. And, it’s an interesting experience because they have, you know, their, their eyesight is incredibly poor and Carl was a guy who, when he, he would, every... if he had to read, he had to read he would be up in, like, in a double bunk, he would be up by the ceiling reading with the light right down by him. But he was an incredibly literate man. He just... eventually became a Professor of Economics after, after the war, but he was obviously not qualified to go in the service and he was running the tool shed at a construction job in the Rocky Mountains. And, what was this job? It was... the army was just then building Camp Hale which later on became the... you know, the Headquarters for the Mountain, Mountain troops. And, so I went to work as a labourer out there. That was an unbelievable horrible experience working as a labourer. And, I, I got... after a couple of weeks I got really sick and eventually hitch-hiked... had to hitch-hike all the way back to Denver and almost, almost died on the way back because somebody had put... they had, they’d gotten a lift with some Indians and they dropped me off in the road and they said,'Oh, you’ll get another ride', and I waited for hours and hours, almost froze to death, while I was waiting for another ride to get into Denver. Eventually I got there and I remember staying... I, I checked into a hotel which was $1 a night, the Milner Hotel, and they had a chain all over the country. You could stay at the Milner Hotel and get a clean sheet and bed for one buck. And, I slept for 48 hours. I was, oh, really sick. And then finally when I got out of it, then I finally went up to Boulder and signed up for my course work and so on. That, that was how I got to know something about Colorado.

When I was in high school I was not - somewhere after the, after I left Stuyvesant, I was not all that well motivated at school. I wasn’t... I mean, I got good grades in things that I could do without doing much work, you know. And, when they... I had to make up... when I went... when... my, my uncle Nat and his wife drove down to Florida for a, a winter vacation. I told you about my... grandfather told what he did in Russia, but he, I... because out of school long enough that I had to make up... I failed some course and I had to make up some history course or something like that, and in order to get more units they told me I could take electives that wouldn’t require any homework. So, that’s how I studied typing and office practice which means I knew how to use mimeograph machine, you know, the old ways, the old ways of doing business in those days. That typing course was, was a godsend for me, you know, I mean, later on, you think of all the times you use typing in your life, and it was not a routine thing for people to know how to type in those days. There were a lot of things that came from that. And, then... so, later on even when I, even when I was in the army, I, I was telling my, my son the other day, how I was offered the job as company clerk at Camp Blanding because that was... I just visited Jacksonville where Stefan lives, you know, and Camp Blanding is not very far away, that I was offered the company clerk’s job that... by my... with the top sergeant in the... because I knew how to type, okay, and also because he liked my mother’s shipment of Jewish salamis. This guy was an Irish guy married to a Spanish girl and he just loved halvah and all, and all the delicatessen stuff that my mother would... I was going to starve to death in the army and so we’d, they’d send us these kosher salamis or boxes of halvah, and all sorts of interesting stuff. So, but, no, I, I volunteered for the, for the mountain troops because the reason why wasn’t that it was such a... so wildly enthusiastic about being in a skier, it was because my wife was... my... who was my, my girlfriend then, was in, in Colorado that’s why I volunteered in the army to go to, to go to the mountain troops [10th Mountain Division].

When I went to school in Colorado but I only lasted 6 months. It was during the war and I decided to leave school which upset a lot of people. I went out to San Francisco and I got a job working in the shipyards, as a welder. I was trained as a welder and, and I lived alone in San Francisco. I had a, I rented a very small apartment and while I was out there... I had met my first wife in Colorado but had left. She was a physics major and I eventually got a degree from Boulder and, and then moved out to California later. But I then came back to... after working in the shipyards it was... the war was on and I knew that eventually I would be drafted, so I, I don’t know why I decided I wanted to be in New York when it happened, and, but a friend of mine, Richard Aspinwall who just, just died, actually, just about a year ago, had joined the Merckhant Marine and that was... my plan was to join, go to the Merckhant Marine Academy with him. So, when I came back to New York I immediately got a card from the Draft Board, so instead of just ignoring the card, which I was told I could easily have done nobody would’ve bothered, I’d just gone to the Merckhant Marine Academy when they accepted me, I just showed up to the Draft Board and the next thing I knew I was out at Camp Upton. I was drafted, okay. But, I had been staying at... my, my mother was living in the Bronx and so I got drafted from that address, I guess, Gunhill Road in the Bronx. Now, after I, I went into the army, having lived in Colorado and now Faye was there, when I got drafted... I was telling the story... my... because I was just down near Camp Blanding is where I went for basic training, just outside of Jacksonville. And, they, they asked... when you, when you were basic training, when you leave they ask if you want to join a, a regular, paratroopers or mountains troops, I signed up for the mountain troops. They took me because Faye was in Colorado. If we were to get out in Colorado I’d be able to see her. So, that’s what happened. I... showed up at the Camp Hale in Colorado after basic training. But, the other, other story that I had to tell them was while was at, while I was at Camp Blanding, my mother used to send these packages of food, and I had a top sergeant who loved her stuff, and he said to me, you can become a company clerk, you won’t have to go... on combat and so forth, why don’t just take this, because he found out I could type, you know, that, that same old thing with the typing. And, I said, no, I volunteered for the Ski Troops and that’s how I, I went there.

Well, what happened was that after I got to Camp Hale in the army, it was already about, I think, late January or early February, and I was past the training sessions for skis but they made me a snowshoe man, or something that means you, you carry machine guns and stuff like that. And, also, you, you learn how to be a, to pack a mule. The animals were very important in mountaineering, but you weren’t allowed to over... put more on a mule. You could put 100lbs on a man but not, not more than 200lbs on a mule. So, but we... at night-time we used to sneak stuff on the mules. And, but, in April apparently the army decided to send... it was my understanding they were going to send these, the guys to fight in Burma, you know, in the mountains, you know, mountains in Burma. And so, they said, you, we need to send you down for some jungle training. So, they took this whole division, at least my regiment, and shipped them off to Texas in the middle of summer, I mean, in June, whatever it was, and they... the weather was incredible, you know. So, I was down in, at Camp Swift which was outside of Austin, Texas, and that’s how I had my first encounter with... At that time, Austin was a town, a small town, the capital of Texas, a university town, and having been in Colorado, these guys would go on weekend passes, they would all rush into the town and there’d be 10,000 soldiers marching up and down the streets looking for something to do, and I used to go out to the university to listen to music out in the, in the library. So, what happened was that they, they asked if I wanted to sign up for officers training school when they heard that I had a few months of college, and, so I, I did, and I went to OCS, Fort Benning in Georgia. When I lasted... I think I went through about 13 weeks or something like that, but they, then they had... the Battle of the Bulge occurred and it was some order to send everybody to different places, you know, the poard of embarkation. Eventually I wound up at Camp Mead, Maryland. And, while I was there I started having symptoms. It turned out, they diagnosed that I had a duodenal ulcer so my mother - I’ll never forget, my mother - they called my mother, she came down to visit me at the hospital, that poor man, and she, the, the doctor, captain or something, says to her, 'Mrs G, we’ve got bad news for you, we’re going to have to, we’re going to have to send your son home, he can’t stay in the army'. She started to cry, you know. He thought, he thought that she was unhappy. Oh, that was really funny. And, so that’s what happened. I got a medical discharge but, and I was able to go to school on the GI Bill. So that was an interesting period.

Now, when I went to Columbia I had to pick a major. Now, I originally wanted to go to medical school and I had signed up for that, but they told me much later... I only, I was only at the summer session in Columbia and then I went back. By that time my, my first wife had moved to California and that’s how I, I went out to Berkeley. She was already registered there. And, on the GI Bill, you know, I took the pre-med program, but then when I got through my... the VA, or whoever was in charge of, I guess, it’s the VA that does that, they said to me, you don’t have enough GI credits to finish a medical education, under this programme, which was called PL16, because you had a medical discharge you have to be able to be employed at the end of your education, so you’ve got to pick a different career objective, okay. So, that’s how I decided to go into biochemistry. I, I picked a biochem major. And, so when I finished, however, 2 years at... Berkeley, my wife applied, I’d already been married by that time and she applied to medical school and got into Temple, and then we went, moved from Berkeley where we’d been living in Oakland, to New York. And, when I got to New York I signed up at Columbia but I couldn't get into medical school at that point and I wasn’t going to be able to get the money for it, either. So, I became a, a chem major at Columbia and I went to, to Columbia to continue, and I graduated in ’49 from there, and that was when I ran into the problem of finding a job.

It’s funny how, you know, people think they’re doing you a favour by not, by... loyalty takes you in funny directions. When I met my first wife we were, you know, we were very much in love, she was 7 years older than me, and already... and she was a... very brilliant woman, had almost like a photographic memory, she had been a physics major and decided to go to medical school after she’d gotten her degree in physics. But, when she was out in Berkeley during the war, moved out there, she worked at the Lawrence Radiation Lab and she met the fellow who was her, became her second, her next husband, and Marvin Weinstein, who... we’re, we’re still good friends, but he was the beau, but she hadn’t told me. She didn’t want to tell me about it because she thought, you know, she didn’t want to write me a Dear John letter. She wrote to me almost every day when I was in the army and I still have her letters. And, and Marvin didn’t want to say anything, so when, when I came out there she didn’t say that they, they, you know, cared for each other and we got married, and then after we were married she decided that it was a mistake and she wanted to live with Marvin. So, what happened was she got accepted to medical school. We were... Stefan was born in January, we moved to New York around June or July when he was only 6 months old, and she had another, other children and her 5-year-old son, Michael, was with us and he... at that point, I was his significant parent. I mean, he, he didn’t know any, anybody else but me at that point. And so the two of them were with me in, in this apartment in the Bronx, and she had decided that she was going to go to medical school regardless of what I decided to do, and she was going to live with Marvin, so she made a deal with her mother to send Michael out to live with his grandmother. And I came home one day and she told me he wasn’t there anymore and I could do what I wanted to do about the fact that she was going to leave. So, I, I decided, I don't know, rightly or wrongly, well, you’re not going to take my son with you, you already shipped off Michael who I, who was my, I considered my child, you didn’t even ask me. Of course, with the legal issue she was entitled to do that. And, so I took Stefan with me. So, here I had this baby, 6 months old, I found out what it is to be a single parent in New York, and male. If you’re a woman it’s not so terrible, in those days it wasn’t, anyhow. I had a lot of experience with taking care of kids in those circumstances and the bias against men is incredible. I could not... they would not accept my son in any childcare centre unless any one of the female members of my family refused to take him, okay. So, my sister was not unwilling to say she wouldn’t take him, right, she convinced my mother the same, they wanted, in a sense forced me to leave the kid with them. So, I started working as a cab driver to support a nursemaid and I went to live with my son near Columbia University. I had a, I rented one huge room and this nursemaid was, I forget her name, Nellie I think her name was, she came to take care of Stefan while I went to work, or when I was in school, whatever. And that didn’t work out too long, very long, and then I, I, for while I, I found a... I, I shared an apartment with another... a, a woman who had a child and we shared the cost of a nursemaid, and I could leave the baby there. And, that didn’t last too long. I had some really interesting experiences. It turned it out that she was married to a guy who was a homosexual and I had never had any experience in dealing with people like that before, you know, and everything. So, that lasted for a certain length of time, and then finally what happened was that I... let me see, during that period what did I do? I decided that I would leave Stefan with my sister. He went to live with my sister. And that eventually proved to be somewhat disastrous because her, her husband was a, sort of, almost psychotic, and... so, somehow I managed to get through college, you know, working. I worked, you know, this is... and I oftentimes I get the period before graduating and after, there’s two different periods in which I had to work because later when I left and I’d already been to Johns Hopkins, I came back. I had to do a similar thing, to work and go to school at the same time, when I worked at the, at... when I went to the Library School I had two different jobs, you know, I had a scholarship and I had, and I also had worked in the Hickory, the Old Hickory Bookshop which was a, really a mail order medical history bookstore, and they, the people that ran that sponsor a, a scholarship IC at the, the Medical Library Association.

When I started the company Eugene Garfield Associates our, our letterhead was Information Engineers, okay. So, I, I’ve always thought of myself as an engineer and probably one of the reason, motivations for wanting to change, get ASIS to add the word technology to its title because I didn’t think of myself as an information scientist, per se. Anyhow, it was, I think, about a year or so after, I don’t know the exact date, I don’t know that I even have correspondence, it might be in my file somewhere. I got a letter from some state organization, or some professional society of engineers saying, Mr Garfield, you, you cannot call yourself an Information Engineer because if you are an engineer you have to be licensed by the State of Pennsylvania, you’ve got to be a licensed engineer, and in order to do that you have to have graduated from a, an engineering, and accredited engineering school or done some other equivalent, I don’t know what the rules are, and I don’t even know if that’s still true or not. I thought it was very funny because it was only a few years later that, I think it was either Sol Gorn or Morris Rubinnoff at the University of Pennsylvania, he asked me to come over to teach graduate students a course in information retrieval. So, anyhow, that was why I had to remove that designation from our letterhead, and by the time 1960 rolled around we changed the name from Eugene Garfield Associates to Institute for Scientific Information which had an, an entirely different, kind of, history. I didn’t know until quite recently, actually, that in the... and I think I read this either some document about the history of the field of information science, or either in Andrew Brown’s book about John D Bernal that Watson Davis had actually used a term, 'scientist institute for information', as a, as a proposed entity that should be developed, and Watson Davis was a name well known to us because he was one of the original founders of ADI, the American Documentation Institute, which started around 1935. And when I was still at Welch Library in, in Baltimore, ADI was still called ADI and you could not be a member of ADI, you had... only institutions or societies could be members of ADI. And it was more of a, a cooperative, almost like a, a non-profit trade group of academic institutions that were trying to develop new technologies for their use. And, so Watson Davis and other people like that were interested in things like microfilm and whatever, you know, so. I thought it was very amusing that they would almost have anticipated that name. And, at the same time, as I’ve often acknowledged, JD Bernal was now the inspiration to me because of what he proposed in Social Function of Science. And, when I, when I looked at that book recently I realised how much I’d forgotten about it over the years. I mean, it, it covers an amazing amount of material for a book that was written so far ahead of its time. He proposed... today people should know that he is probably the original... he would be supporting Steve Harnad and the Open Access movement, Vitek Tracz and others would be interested in that, too. But - and, the irony of all that is that the publishers, the society publishers were just the same group that opposed Bernals ideas and as are now opposed to the Open Access thing. You know, nothing changes after - how many years now? I’d say about - originally ’39 he proposed it - that’s about 75 years, nothing much has changed. So... But, but the origins of information engineering backing in ADI started as an institutional thing, and then, in 1952 they decided to make it a professional society and opened it up to individuals and that was when I first became a member. That’s why I got to be, I think, probably one of the first members as an individual, to join. I don’t know the exact year – I think it was ’52 – and I had already been, I had met Jesse Shera who was the editor of American Documentation, which is the predecessor of the Journal of ASIST, you know, and he asked me would I like to be an associate editor of the journal. I, I couldn’t believe it, but he asked me. I thought it was supposed to be such an honorific thing, you know. And, that was how I happened to be in a position to eventually invite WC Adair, the former Vice President of Shepherd's Citations, to write an article about citation indexes for Science. Because, what happened was, well, now we’re jumping back and forth. I don’t know how you’re going to handle all this. But, I had not only been interested in joining ADI but prior to that I had been involved in the information side of things simply because I learned about chemical information systems through, by accident through James Perry. When, when I worked in the laboratory of Louis P Hammett as a lab assistant at Columbia University, he was the editor of the McGraw Hill series and I guess, just like I was attracted to the public library I was attracted to his personal library. He had a huge collection, the entire chemical abstracts, his own personal collection, and as the editor of the McGraw Hill book series he had access to a lot of material. And, at the same time, I also found indexes that had been created in - or I tried - I created indexes to all the chemical compounds that are... in the closets at Columbia University, probably 100 years of students who had created compounds and labelled them, and all they needed was purification and you could use them, and these guys were spending all kinds of time remaking this stuff. I said, 'Why, why should you do it all over again when we can do it, have it done before?' So, that’s how I, I, sort of, got interested in chemical information systems and, searching and so on, and I was just drawn to it.

When I graduated from Columbia University in 1949 with a chemistry degree, it was impossible to find a job. It was a real recession. And... although I eventually got a job as a lab technician, because I was a chemist, you know, in, in a private company that did consulting work, you know, for, for companies. I temporarily had a job which took advantage of my knowledge of typing and I became a sales correspondent at La Salle University which is really a mail order school, you know, for... you take courses in shorthand and so, and as a result I could take free courses in stenotype and shorthand, and so I decided, with that background, I might someday be, you know, use that and become a secretary. I was... you know, Billy Rose was a very famous promoter but he’d, he’d gotten there because he knew shorthand and typing. He was a champion typist. I think he could type 200 words a minute or something. So, you know, typing was, oh, like, 150, but he could take steno at some incredible speed. So, when I eventually got this job after working as a sales correspondent. Just a few blocks away I, I somehow got a job as a lab technician at a place called Evans Research and Development, and while I was working for this company which had various consulting assignments, for example, they had a client that was looking for synthetic sources of agar gels which had to be imported from India and they were worried about, you know, supplies, and their, their client produced something called Fast Teeth, I think. You know, people... it was somehow connected with false teeth, or whatever it is. And, and they also tested out hair shampoos. You could get a free shampoo if you wanted. Half your head would be with one shampoo and the other half with another shampoo. So, one day I was working in the lab and somebody comes over and says to me, 'We want you to help us out. Somebody was supposed to, to meet with this client and take notes. We want you to come in and take notes'. So, they didn’t know at the time that I could, I could type and everything like that, you know, so I, I went to this meeting and I took notes of this meeting, and I typed them up, and they were stunned. They thought, you know, they... thought I, you know, I could do that much better than I could do lab work. So, they asked me if I wanted to stay on as a technical reporter, but just about the same time that I had gotten tired of working there, my cousin, my... I think, Sydney was a, a first cousin. His name was Sydney Bernhart who lived in Brooklyn but he was getting his PhD with Louis P Hammett, for organic chemistry. Sydney was a brilliant guy, very unusual fellow. He was a diabetic and always had health problems for most of his life but had, was well on his way to his PhD, and heard that I was looking for a job, and so he got in touch with me and said, there’s an opening here to be a lab assistant for Louis Hammett, and if you, if you have the aptitude and are interested you can get your doctorate here, you know. So, having already gotten my degree at Columbia I knew the place, but I didn’t know anything about Hammett other than the fact that physical chemistry was something that scared the hell out of me, and I had taken physical chemistry from another professor whose name, for the moment - Alfred - he was a well known physical chemist as well. But I didn’t know how famous Louis Hammett was at the time I went to work for him. Later on the irony of it is that he went on to become, not only a winner of the National Medal of Science, but he was a member of the Weinberg Committee that did the, the Weinberg Report on Science Information in Government, okay, which I mentioned just the other day when I was down in Oak Ridge, telling these people that Al Weinberg, coincidentally, brought together all these people that I had known on that committee, Josh Lederberg, and so forth. So, anyhow, I, I went to work for Hammett and... with the idea that I would eventually get my doctorate but while I was working in the lab... my job was, that was how I got exposed to working with ion exchange resins which were produced by Rohm and Haas. How things come around. I’m now a very good friend of the erstwhile President of Rohm and Haas, John Haas at the Chemical Heritage Foundation. He lives right near me. He’s a wonderful man. But... I would have to run his experiments on... and have to create these various esters. The whole idea was to measure the differences and the rate at which you could separate these esters on the ion exchange resins. So, in the course of the work, though, there were times when I had to use picrate and they’re very explosive, and I had set off one or two explosions in the lab, and finally, as I’ve often pointed out, Louis P Hammett, very diplomatically, called me in, in the office one day and said, you know, I think it might be a good idea if you thought about modifying your career aspirations.

I decided to go down... that was the year... I, I think that was the called the Diamond Jubilee Year of the American Chemical Society, and I went down to the meeting. I’d never been to a, a scientific society meeting before. It was held in some hotel in New York and I go in there, oh, and I also had read in the paper an ad for the Director of Chemical Research at... the Ethel Corporation was looking for what was advertised as a Chemical Secretary. So, I had... at that time I could do typing and stenography and, and I had the chemical degree so it was a, kind of, a natural fit, and so we arranged for an interview. So, when I went down to the hotel with the interview, I walked in there and I see a sign that says, I think it said, 'The vision of chemical literature'. And, I walked in the room and there was James W Perry on a, on a platform, chairing this meeting, and I started listening to these people talking about different things, and I, sort of, got the idea that here was a group of people... were doing for money what I was doing for nothing, you know. So, I said, I said to Jim Perry, I walked up to him after, sort of, the session closed, I walked up to him and I... said to him, 'How do you get a job in this racket?' you know and he laughed. He had just come out with the punch card book. He and Robert Casey of the Schaeffer Chemical, Schaeffer Ink Company, they produce ink, right, Schaeffer... and, and just produced the punch card book, Punch Cards in Science and Industry, and he also... James Perry was a chemical engineer. He was also a, had produced a very well known text book on Scientific Russian, Teach Yourself Scientific Russian, okay. So, after I said that, he said to me, well, he said, 'There might be a chance for you here... there might be... we might have an opening for you'. So, at that time James Perry had a project at MIT. I don’t know all the politics about, and working for him, at that project, was Alan Kent who later on became... I think he was the editor of JASIST for a while and he also was the editor of the Encyclopaedia of the Library Information, and the Dean of the Library School at Pittsburgh, okay. The reason... I had a lot of contact with Alan later on. And Madeleine Henderson was his assistant, I think. We’ve remained friends now ever since then. So, he says, 'Well, why don’t we meet and talk about this'. So, I invited him to come up to my mother’s house in the Bronx, and he came up there, and he, and he... and she fed him and he loved Jewish food, you see, and he liked to eat generally. So, he then gave me a copy of, of his book and he said, 'What we want you to do, you, kind of, have you come up and visit the project at MIT'. So, at some point a few weeks later he calls me and I go up to, to Boston and he takes me around the MIT library. He introduces me to Norbert Weiner, okay, who was in there. And, also he was a friend of Calvin Mooers, interesting, but I didn’t know that at the time. Calvin Mooers was the guy who invented the information retrieval and he was working on his master’s degree. So, a few weeks go by and I don’t hear from him. Finally, somehow I, I got in touch with him which, you know, in those days we didn’t have cell phones. It wasn’t all that easy to get hold of people. And, he finally... which I learned later but I wasn’t aware of it at the time, but they have closed his project down, or he didn’t get his funding from whoever was funding him, and he was going to move from MIT out to Western Reserve, I think, they went to, or, or Case. I’m not sure where. You know, he and, and Alf set up that metallurgical system, whatever. So... metal system. He calls me up and he says, 'Why don’t we meet again?' and he said, 'Do you mind, I told you the job is going to be in Boston but will you care if it was in Baltimore, if you had a job Baltimore?' I said, 'I didn’t know the difference, you know', I said. So, he says, 'Alright', and we met again. My mother fed him again, and then we... he said, I want you to... here’s somebody I want to introduce you to, and he gives me the name of Dr Sanford Larkey who he knew as the Head of the Welch Medical Library, the Director, but also as Head of the Army Medical Library he had this indexing project, you know, they were sponsoring... machine methods... to investigate machine methods and new methods of indexing. So, I go down to Baltimore and I get, I meet Larkey, and all the time I’m talking to him I think I’m going to go to work for Jim Perry, James Perry, you know. I never knew that this was a completely separate thing. Well, he meets me and they were looking for somebody who had to be... they wanted somebody who was a chemist because that was the work that was being done, partly by Mina - Williamina Himwich was a very wonderful woman who I replaced, so to speak. I mean, she left the project and I couldn’t really... She was a trained brain physiologist but she was very, very bright in other things too, and they needed somebody to do the chemical nomenclature side of subject heading analysis, and so forth. Larkey had gotten, obviously, a recommendation from Perry or I wouldn’t have been there, but unbeknownst to me I found out later when I was leaving the Welch Medical Library that Larkey had gotten a hold, or written to Louis P Hammett and Louis P Hammett told him that Garfield is an extremely hard worker but not a particularly original thinker, and that was exactly what Larkey wanted, he thought. So, that’s how I got the job. Was he surprised.

Now, the Welch experience was a, another turning point because the interesting thing is I had met my second wife, Winnie, while I was an undergraduate at Columbia. And, when I went to work at Welch Medical Library, took that job in ’51, she said, 'This is a' - she’d made up her mind- 'this was a decision point, either we... I go to Baltimore with you or we’re finished'. So, we decided she would stay and I went to Baltimore. And, Stefan was living with my sister. I had gotten a... my mother gave me a present for graduating, which was a lot of money in those days, and I gave the money to my sister to take care of Stefan. So, I went to Welch and at that project I started out... it turned out... San Larkey was a very, how shall I say, a, a first-rated alcoholic, if I could put it that way. He had a medical degree and also a degree in literature from Oxford and, sort, sort of, allegedly a medical historian, okay, so he’d... how he fell into the job as Director of the Medical Library, I do not know, but he, he did. I spent the next 2 years working for him on that project and essentially each day consisted of the two of us sitting across the table, it was located in one wing of the library, Welch Medical Library, and discussing... he would tell me all his, his war experiences as a medical, I don’t know what, how, what he did in the army, and we’d discuss subject heading analysis in terms of, you know, what we’re going to be putting in the subject heading authority list. That was 9 to 5, and at 5 o’clock he would go home and he and his wife had a big social life and she was a member of the Democratic National Committee, as I recall. And the evening was when I started to do the research. That was where I, you know, I got to know the people at the Army Medical Library and it became the Armed Forces Medical Library, and later, after I had left, it became the National Library of Medicine. And then I got to know Seymour Taine and Bob Hayne through - Bob Hayne was the subject heading authority editor, more or less, at... and, you know, Bob came to work for me later, much later. Then I met all, all sorts of leading librarians and scientists at that project. The... met Estelle Brodman was, was at the National Library. Dave Kronick was there. These were... I met all these people, and, you know, you meet enough bright people you learn quite a bit from meeting such a group. And, on top of which, the Welch Medical Library indexing project had an advisory committee of about 15 honorary consultants. Apparently serving on such a committee is, has some... people like to do this because, you know, they get to go to a meeting once every 3 or 4 months and they, well, get their expenses paid and they get to meet other interesting people, you know. It’s like we have an advisory committee here and you... why would somebody do that because it wasn’t, it wasn’t a financially rewarding thing, it was an intellectually rewarding thing, and that committee consisted of a lot of incredibly bright people. Mortimer Taube was on that committee. Chauncey D Leake was the Chairman, and that’s how Chancy and I became very good friends and he became a, kind of, mentor to me. And, Verner Clapp, the Chief Assistant Librarian at Congress was on the committee, Eugene Scott, it’s all recorded.

Eventually... because there was no other project like this in the country... everybody, you know, people kept coming visiting this project because it was the only one like it, and I met all sorts of foreign librarians who came in, the first time I ever met I met them at that committee, at that library and I would explain what the project was doing.
What happened eventually was that they, somehow they had arranged to get an IBM 101 statistical machine which was supposed to, you know, be the fantastic answer to all these irretrievable problems, you know. And I became an expert on wiring what we today call programming that machine. I mean, you didn’t program it you, you had a board where you put the wires in to do the sorting and do whatever you... selecting and so forth. And, I had already learned how to use the other IBM machines because this machine was located separately from the Johns Hopkins Hospital which was across the street, and where all the other standard IBM machines were located, the tabulators, key punchers, and so forth. We had our own key puncher in, in the lab, and Collators and so forth. And so eventually I started doing things with this machine that the IBM said were impossible to do. I mean, we, we developed... Calvin Mooers had developed something called superimposed coding, so I developed a concept of superimposed wiring and said, if he can do that with Zator, I can do that with wires, you know, so that’s how we developed, I developed that particular system.
Anyhow, by the time... There were so many different things that I did on that project. I, I met the people at Chemical Abstracts through that project. I was a volunteer abstracter for CA, and they, they gave me the subject of Spanish pharmacology because I could read Spanish and I knew enough chemistry to do the abstracting and I learned how to, you know, the, the technique of abstracting and indexing. And, Charles Bernier was the editor, I met him, and EJ Crane, Dale Baker was working for them at that time, but he never came to the Welch project.
And, so, what else? I... the project also did, did a study of abstracting and indexing services in the overlapping coverage, and so forth, you know, and then subject heading analysis, we did work with Sam... Bob Hayne, and eventually I went over to... the idea was that you introduced mechanisation so I went over to learn how they did, they put together the, the current list of medical literature. And, I developed an IBM punch card system for producing that system. There are, you know, these papers that I did, Preparation Subject Heading was by punch card methods. Well, today they’re so primitive but you think about it, back then...

What happened was that he didn’t tell me, but San Larkey had been told that the project was going to be terminated in June of that year. Somewhere in the second year of the project I decided that in order for me to do research properly I needed to have a current awareness system. So, I decided to produce what I called Contents in Advance, okay, and what I did was I wrote to all these library journals and documentation journals and said, send me the, you know, just send me your contents page and I’ll put them together as a... publication, and that’s how I started Contents in Advance. This made Larkey very unhappy. Why, I don’t know, but he just didn’t like the idea that I was doing this. Now, he was a man who liked to be in control. So I... at first... it used to be that, you know, everything he ever told me I ignored him because, you know, the hours, you know, during the day he would have one thought and then he’d go home and he’d drink himself to... blind and then he’d come in the next day and start all over again. You know, it was like he’d forget whatever he said to me. And, then one day he says to me, 'Well, you, you ignored my'... I kept on producing current, it was called Contents in Advance, he said, 'You, you didn’t, you ignored me so basically I’m terminating you, okay'. So, without even giving me my vacation time, he cut me off without my vacation pay and whatever, my job was terminated and the project ended.

We had planned to have a public discussion of the project’s different sub-projects, okay, subject heading lists, searching by the 101 statistical machine, various other topics. We organised the first symposium of machine methods in scientific documentation held at the Welch Library, okay. It was... and we advertised it, you know, we announced it. 300 people signed up, and for, for about, I think for $5 or $8 you got a, a free lunch with an all-day seminar, discussion, and a tour. We had this wonderful... the, the chef of the Johns Hopkins Hospital prepared us an incredible meal in the main room where they have the picture of the four, the four famous physicians. You know, there’s the very famous painting of...
[Q] I haven’t seen it. 
You’ve never... have you ever been to the Welch Library?
[Q] Once, but... 
That, it’s probably on the web. It’s a very famous painting of the four physicians. And, Osler was in that, probably and Welch. I forget who the others are. Anyhow, it was a wonderful meal, and one of the funny stories that comes out of that is that Ralph Shaw who was the Director of the National Agricultural Library and, you know, very famous for the work he did on, with Vannevar Bush, the rapid selector, and so forth, he was a very funny man and incredibly articulate. He later became the Dean of the Library School at, at... the first Library School at Rutgers and then he moved, later moved to Hawaii and became Director of the Library School out there and, and the library. But Ralph Shaw came to the symposium and he wrote back and he said, 'Dear Garfield, as a documentalist you make a great caterer'. You see, he’d, he liked the lunch. But, he and I became, you know, pretty good friends, and at one point he was going to hire me as an assistant professor at Rutgers later, and he had to withdraw the offer because somebody else had accepted that he wanted first, Lowell Martin, I think it was. But, Ralph was a guy who, who was an incredibly domineering person... Sam Lazerow and Norma Relcos who worked for him. And, when Ralph Shaw was out in Hawaii, at one point later on, during this Vietnam war, my son, Stefan, had, was in Vietnam and he was wounded and he came... they sent him back to Hawaii to recover. And I can’t remember the reason why I could not... for some reason I couldn’t go to see him, so I called Ralph Shaw in Hawaii and asked him if he would go see Stefan, and he did, and Stefan will never forget  because when Ralph went to the hospital he took over, over the place and started bossing the nurses, telling them what to do, and so he’s just that type of guy, you know, very domineering, bossy person. So, anyhow that’s, you know, I, I’ve often said, you know, all these people I met when I... So, when, when Larkey terminated me that was when I found out about the letter he’d got from, from Louis P Hammett because when he was... I went out there... I’d gone out and for some reason I asked somebody to show me my personnel file, you know. That’s when I saw the letter from Hammett.

San Larkey was... never got over his... he was very vindictive. He even tried to prevent me from publishing papers on work that I had done at the project. It was a... there’s probably, there’s a correspondence... and, my first paper was The Preparation of Subject-Heading Lists by Punched-Card Methods. It appeared in The Journal of Documentation, and he had a lawyer write up a letter saying that this was, you know, it was not permissible, whatever it is, there was no basis in law, I don’t think, for preventing me from publishing this paper, but he just wanted to make my life miserable. But after a while it stopped and then I did another paper on the preparation of subject heading list, of printed indexes, that was how we showed how to do the Index Medicus or whatever it was, and, and eventually it died down. And, he, he never did much after that. He never, he didn’t have a very distinguished publishing career. But what happened was, having met Sam, and having met Seymour Taine, having met all these other people, they said to me, what are you going to do now? And, I said, 'Well, you know, I’ve got to, I’ve got to support my family, I don’t have any means of support'. Seymour Taine, I think, said, 'I think it would be good if you, if you were to go and try and get a library degree'. So, I applied to Columbia Library School and I got in for this. I went there for the summer, and while I was there... and I had a, I had to pay for that because... and Columbia was not cheap, you know, the Library School was not cheap. I met the Dean of the School, Carl White his name was, and he was a very interesting, kind man, and we got to talking and it turned out he had been a preacher or a... I don’t know, a Doctor of Divinity or something like that, my mother thinks, but... he said to me, 'There is a brand new Fellowship being set up by the Grolier Society', and I didn’t even know what the hell the Grolier Society was. It turns out the Grolier Society was a name, not, there was a real Grolier Society, but the Grolier company produced the Encyclopaedia Americana, okay. So, they had a form and they asked you to fill out this application and in my list of references I gave, as my references, the Director of the National Library of Medicine, the Chief Assistant Librarian at Congress, and the Director of the National Agricultural Library. So, I was a shoe in. I got the, got this fellowship. That’s how I was able to get through Library School. And, at the same time, I was working at the old Hickory Bookshop which is a job that Sam got me, and what they wanted me to do, they were a mail order, they sold old and rare medical books and they... the place was, sort of, chaotic, it was, everything was on shelves. I, what I did was basically I went in and I set up their, a numbering system. I put a number on each book and put it on the shelf, you know, and catalogued it so you could look up what they had and where to find it, sort of, you know, and saved a lot of space by doing it. And, Jo and Murray Gottlieb, they were very, they were very grateful that I did that for them, and I figured, you know, I earned, it was enough to help me get through school.

When I was at the Johns Hopkins, you know, project I had met all sorts of interesting people like John Mauchly. I met... Calvin Mooers came to visit me. I don’t know if you remember Ellen Tornudd was the Director of... the leading librarian in Scandinavia. She’s a real good friend. She’s retired now. So, Ted Herdegen, from Smith, Kline & French, had come down to the project, and he heard that I was in library school and they wanted to set up an IBM punch card system for one of their drugs. He calls me up, and tells me that they, they have an opening, you know, would you like to be... want to come down and work for 6 months to, to set up this system? And, at the time... by then I had... my best friend at the time was somebody I’d met by accident while on vacation in, in Canada, Casimir Borkowski, do you remember that name? Well, Casimir was a very interesting guy, but then the point being that he was working for Léon Dostert at the Georgetown machine translation project from Russian to English, and I was supposed to go to work with them at the project. So, Ted Herdegen called me up and says he’s got, wants to offer me this job as a consultant, and I said, but I’m already committed to go to... I’m going to go to... I’ve got this graduate post doc or whatever you call it... no, not a postdoc, a graduate teach... research assistant at the, the machine translation project. Now, a few days later I get a call from Casimir that the Government cut off their research money and the project was terminated. So, I got hold of Ted Herdegen and I, I was desperate for money by that time, I said, 'I, I’ll come to work for you', and that’s how I, I came to work for Smith Kline. I came down there. I graduated in June of ’54 and I... but while I was at library school was when I first wrote up the idea of the citation index. The paper that I eventually published in Science was written originally as a, as a term paper.

The vice president of Johns Hopkins University had been asked to be the introductory speaker at the project, at the symposium. And he, in his talk, he made a remark that became quite frequently quoted later on, that man was, that scholars were going to drown in a flood of information. And his name was Lowell Reed and so, his remarks, maybe with a little help from, I don't know if they had a PR team at the Johns Hopkins, he was vice president of the university, was picked up by the news services and the headlines were, 'Man to drown in a sea of knowledge', or something, like, that. That produced all kinds of letters that we got from various people outside, even, academe who were interested in what we were doing. But in particular, I remember not one... we heard from the librarian at San Quentin. It was interesting how... he was apparently one of the more progressive librarians in the country. But another person that wrote to me, wrote to the project rather, or to me or to the project, and I made, I hope I still have the original, it was written in green ink, handwritten and it was a letter from William C Adair who was the former vice president of Shepard's Citations in New York, okay. I had never heard of Shepard's Citations at that point and in his letter he said to me that way back in the '20s, way back, I mean, at that point we were talking 1953 so, it was 30 years back, he had had discussions with, with some engineering or physics society about the idea of, what they call a citatory system for science. And I, and I think basically he said that they had considered it but the project was totally impractical because, whereas they were doing case law, you know,  and it's important historically, people don't even seem to know this, there was no citation index at that time for law journals. It came later, they came, that came out, Shepard's produced that citation for the law journals only after we started the SSCI, okay, because librarians started complaining to them about why, why didn't they have a citation indexing for journals. So anyway, they had figured out there was just too much literature. You know, law has got a lot of similar cases - it's nothing like the size of the scientific literature. So, nothing came out of it and then so, he said to me, he thought he would just call this to my attention and I thought, I didn't know what the hell he was talking about. So, I went down to the Enoch Pratt Free Library which is a central library in Baltimore and went into the reference room and that's when I saw what a, what a citation, what a, what Shepard's Citations was. And I literally screamed out, 'Eureka!' and I... cos what had happened was, I had been, Chauncey Leake had told me to focus my attention on review journals, right. And I had done an analysis of review articles and tried to figure out why they were so interesting and useful to people and they clearly were. And he was one of the editors, I think a band of reviewers at the time and in fact, he used to write a column, review of reviews, review of reviews. And I could see that basically a review article was, speaking in you know theoretical terms, just a, just a continuous string of indexing statements, you know, so and so has reported this, so and so has reported that, and it made sense. At the end of the sentence was this citation, right. So, if you took the sentence, that's an indexing of that document and the more I thought about it I thought, 'Gee, this is, this is an incredible idea', and trying to convert those indexing statements to what, I didn't know how to construct the index from reviews. You know, I had the idea to use index reviews but how would you use them, you know, as indexing statements? I would compare them to what Chemical Abstracts did in the way of indexing, you know. It's a different, you know, it's a different level. They were at a linguistic level, this is a, a different contextual level. So, when I saw Shepard's then I realised that the, the index had to be inverted. Instead of having the indexing terms you had to have the document as the focus and then, then the statements that fall in. That was basically it.

So, I wrote Mr Adair back, I thanked him for his idea but I couldn't do anything about it, at the time, okay. But I said to him I was just made editor, later after I left the project, I think I wrote to him and I said, I have been made associate editor of... wouldn't you like to write an article about your idea? And I said, why don't you, and I told him what to do. He wrote this very short article which did appear, and then I took that article which I cited in my paper and wrote the paper for Science, which I submitted to Science and the reason I did that was because I had met Bentley Glass at Johns Hopkins. He was at in the genetics department at Johns Hopkins when I was there and he'd come over to the project, he was always very interested in literature he was on the board of Biological Abstracts, okay and that's how I got to know them and Miles Conrad and so on. So, I wrote this paper and I send it to Bentley Glass who was the associate, one of the editors of Science magazine, you know. And he did a fantastic job of editing, you know, my paper, you know, grammatically and otherwise and eventually, it took a year, I wrote the paper while I was at library school, after I'd left the project, it went through and they published it. So, now the paper came out in '55 I believe it was July of '55.

By that time, I had come to Philadelphia and worked for Smith Kline and when I came here in October or November of '54, I was staying at the Broadwood Hotel. My sister called me up, I think it was December or January and said, you've got to come to New York to do something, take Stefan with you because he can't stay with me anymore. Her husband, her husband had a mental breakdown, and so forth. So, to make a long story short, I was working for Ted Herdegen and Ted was an incredibly compassionate man. He, I said, I went to him and I said, 'Ted, I'm afraid I'm going to have to leave, because I can't, I've got to go up to New York and take care of my son and work things out'. He said, he, Ted Herdegen, took it upon himself to find me a small house where he lived in Mullica Hill, south of Mullica Hill in Jersey. This little house was located at the edge of an asparagus farm patch, okay. Three-roomed house. 'You'll drive to work with me every day, my sister will go and get Stefan from school and when you get home, we'll be there, okay'. That's how I got... Stefan came down, and Ted Herdegen did this for me, and his sister took care of Stefan, and we did that until the summer of '55. That summer - an amusing story - I had bought a 1955 Ford and up until that time I'd had serious problems with my leg and - remember when I had the sciatica, that started back, I had injured my leg while I was driving a defective car a long time ago, I won't get into that but, I had a hand-control car set up. Somebody had told me about paraplegics driving hand-controlled cars so, I was driving this car with hand controls and I took Stefan, I said, 'We're going to go on a vacation and the vacation will be a trip out to Colorado, okay, and, among other things, you get to see where your grandmother came from'. We went to visit Mr Adair in Colorado Springs, okay. And I gave him a copy of the article and so forth and drove back, and on the way back we stopped off in Chicago and we went to see Winnie who was my, who had been my girlfriend in New York. And she knew Stefan as an infant and that was it, we decided, after we saw her, we visited her in Chicago then she came and we got married and she move to Woodbury and that's another chapter. But, by then the paper had been published in Science, thanks to Bentley Glass.

Now, what was a consequence of that, of course, nothing, nobody, at that time I wasn't thinking of producing the SCI myself. I mean, Current Contents was still Contents in Advance, they were still producing that thing and eventually I turned it over to a couple of librarians I knew who worked in the pharmaceutical industry. Anne McCann and some other librarian, Marge Couraine, I think it was. They were, I had met these people at library school and I was just working as a consultant, you know. But, as a consultant, I decided to do a management edition. I thought, Contents in Advance was okay for librarians but was it going to be a commercial success? The field of management somehow struck me as being potentially interesting so, as a documentation consultant, I put together Current Contents of Management and when I announced it, it just so happened that the librarian, Richard Gremling at Bell Laboratories, had wanted to do the same thing for his staff. So, he contacted me and he said look, 'Look, this publication you're doing is fine but I want the same thing for Bell Labs but I want you to tear the cover off and put our cover on it'. Okay, so, he wanted a customised edition. The title of that, by the way, was unbelievable. The original title of Current Contents Social Sciences was Management's Documation Preview. Documation, automation of documentation. So, a very funny story about that one, too, because somebody recently asked me about Mortimer Taube. Mortimer Taube was... do you know anything about corded indexing, the history of that? Oh, my God. Anyhow, Mortimer Taube started a company called Documentation Inc and he was angry as hell at me because I called my company DocuMation Inc, Docu, capital M and eventually when I started this Current Contents not only do I get the Bell Labs contract but a couple of guys who were from Washington DC contacted me. One of them was a PR man, the other was the owner of a printing press in Washington called the Kaufman Press. He saw an opportunity to get a printing client. For some reason they had, they'd made some money on some deal and they wanted a, it was, like, a tax loss thing. They said, come on, we'll, we're going to become your partner, we'll help you print it and so forth and promote it. So, I said, fine. We had a long discussion and Harry Brager was the name of this PR consultant. And he said the title of that publication is absolutely absurd. It's, it's an impossible thing to pronounce. Why don't you call it something simple? So he says... what is it? So, I say, he says, 'Describe it to me', I said, 'Well, I thought it was the current contents of the different journals', he said, 'Well, that's it, that's the name of your, of your magazine'. So, that's why we called it Current Contents So, however, he says, 'Okay, now we're going to, we're going to plan a direct mail campaign', and I, you know, I'd been promoting, knew a little bit about direct mail but, I said this is, this is not a publication. I didn't think it was a publication for, how can I say, line managers, if I can put it that way. It was an academic, for academics, you know, and people, librarians and so forth, they insisted that we make a mailing of 5,000 pieces or whatever, spend this huge amount of money in order to demonstrate that this thing was a killer application or not, okay. They bought a mailing list of executives who earned at that time, let's say, $100,000 or more. I said to them, 'You are absolutely crazy, there's no guy who's earning $100,000, that...' there's a guy who earns $1m a year, are you going to sit around and read Current Contents?They insisted that was the right way to do it, well it wouldn't be the guy himself it would be his assistant, it would be the librarian or whatever. They made this mailing and it was total bomb. I think we got three or five subscriptions. The first subscription came, the Allan Wood Steel Company, some vice president, okay. So, after that happened they came to me and they said, 'Well, that's it, this thing it was a great idea but it just isn't going to fly, okay'. So, they said, 'We're out of here, you can, it's all yours, do what you want with it'.

During that time I get a call from Charlotte Studer, who later became Charlotte Studer Mitchell the librarian of the Miles Laboratories, and she knew me from the medical library of the SLA, and she said to me, 'You know, Merck and a few other companies do contents page services for their staff. We would like to have something similar but I don't have the resources to do it. Why don't you do it?' So, she gave me this contract to, you know, send them Xerox copies of all the contents pages, okay, 150 biomedical journals and she said, 'Do what you want, you can sell it to anybody else, just deliver this to me, I don't care what you do, okay'. So, that's what I began to do.
[Q] Was that the first one of the sciences that you did?
It was called Current Contents of Pharmaco-Medical, Chemical and Life Sciences. And then I started printing and shipping her whatever her copies were but then other, I decided that in order to market it I had to make them buy 25 copies, no more no less than 25 copies. Then Warner Lambert and the others, the ones that didn't have... I had thought that when we started this thing it would be so much cheaper than doing it yourself that the people who were doing it would gladly buy in. But that was just the opposite of what turned out to be the case. Just like in government, these people had such an entrenched bureaucracy it took 10 years before Merck would sign up, and even the idea had been started and Merck and Cyanamid they didn't commit for the longest time afterwards. Because people had, jobs or they had commitments or whatever. You learn a lot about human behavior when you get into marketing. So, I was selling Current Contents in groups to the pharmaceutical field. Nothing else had occurred to me. One day, I get a call from a fellow named Jack Gershon-Cohen. He was the guy who discovered who invented the... he was a radiologist who invented the mammogram. He was a consultant to the pharmaceutical industry. He said, 'I have been visiting one of my pharmaceutical clients and I see this thing called Current Contents. Why don't you sell that to me and to other people like me?' So, I said to him, 'Well, we just hadn't thought about it that way. What do you think it's worth to you?' So, I said, 'Do you think it's worth $2 week?' Cos I didn't have a set up. I said, 'If you send me a cheque, if you want it for $100 a year, I'll mail it to you personally every week, okay'. And that was when we got the idea to sell individual subscriptions, okay. Now, next thing we found out, I get a call from the director of the McArdle Memorial Laboratories at the University of Wisconsin, which is where Josh Lederburg incidentally was working at the time, although it's not connected. Because the funny story about Josh is that the year he won the Nobel Prize was when he wrote to me about the SCI. He said to me, 'I can't afford a subscription to Current Contents, it's too expensive, $50'. But when McArdle got the subscription, group subscription for $30, then he bought it. I get this call from McArdle and he says, 'I see you sell this to industry and it costs $1,500 a year, you know, for 25 subs'. He said, 'Will you sell it to us?' I said, 'Why not? I'll be glad to sell it to you, what's the difference to me?' He said, 'Well, why don't you give us an academic discount?' So, I said - though I always tell people this is how I did all my major marketing research, you know -  'Why don't you, why don't you tell me what do you think is a, an academic discount?' He says, 'Oh well about 50%'. So, for $750, he got the 30 subscriptions and that was how it started. And then, eventually, I don't know how I met him, Marvin Schiller came to work for me and he had just gotten his degree at marketing at Penn State, I think, and knew a little bit about direct mail and we did a direct mail campaign. So, that's how we began the subscription service of Current Contents.

Well, I think the official year we used, as a launch year for CC life is, like '58, pretty sure, that's about it. We had done this customs service in '57.
[Q] By that time you had you own business I presume?
Well, it was still my, it was consulting, I was still consulting for Smith Kline all this time, you know, a couple of days a week with all these other things. Cos they had offered me a job and I had turned it down and well that I did because a lot of the people had said, oh, if you go to Smith Kline and you'll have security for the rest of your life. A lot of those guys were out of a job within a few years when they had a reorganisation. And then, you know, all during that time I was doing consulting for them, there were also... I was advised... we went into chemical information systems too. Don't forget the Index Chemicus started in 1960. So, Current Contents wasn't that old when we did these other things it's just that it helped finance, you know, the other things.
[Q] You were in Spring Garden Street, is that where you were? 
We were there until, yeah, and we were doing Index Chemicus from Spring Garden Street, 1960 is when we launched it. And it was a very risky proposition, you know. And then at the same time, all this was going on after I went to work for Smith Kline, and my friend Casimir came up to Philadelphia and was getting his PhD in linguistics at Penn, okay. And he introduced me to Zellig Harris who was the chairman of the Department of Structural Linguistics, you know, and I wasn't all that conscious of how radical that was. Noam Chomsky was just finishing his PhD that year that I met Harris. And so, Casimir came to work with Zellig Harris and eventually got his PhD there and he introduced me to Harris. And I found out about some of the work they were doing and I said to him, 'You know, you could get a lot of grant money', because he was talking about doing some kind of scientific text analysis and so forth. I said, 'Let me introduce you', I introduced him to Helen Brownson, I knew she was interested in languages and, you know, she was, was she around when you were still there, was she still there when you went? It didn't take 2 or 3 months, he had a half a million dollar grant to study the application of transformational analysis of statistical analysis to the scientific indexing. I don't know what, the project never went anywhere, nothing came out of it. They wouldn't listen to me. It just didn't go their way. But, as a result of all that he and I and Zellig Harris made a deal that I would come to work for my doctorate at Penn. They would transfer my, some of my credits from my doctoral program at Columbia and would call me, cos I'd already been on a, going for a doctorate there, then, I couldn't get my inter-disciplinary committee to meet, no less to agree on anything and I had to take a certain number of credits at Penn in linguistics and research and so forth and I got my degree. But my topic there, which was agreed upon, would be my algorithm for translating nomenclature into molecular formulas, which was, of course, on my mind because of the Index Chemicus. You know, the Index Chemicus was a radical thing because nobody believed that you could produce an index to organic chemical literature with a 1-week turnaround or a 1-month whatever, you know. And what I found out was that if you look, if you went through the chemical literature, you could, every new compound was identified by the fact that they reported a key empirical formula, you know. So, why are you calculating it, you know? People at chemical abstracts insisted that they'd first draw the compound, then name it and then index it. So, I said, I went to Smith Kline as a consultant, I said, 'Listen I have to figure out a way to get you', the CA was 3 years behind the literature, now how can you, it's impossible to run a research department doing chemical synthesis without actual authority. They were 3 years behind can you imagine the amount of duplication that was going on in those days? So, I said I figured out a way to get you a molecular formula index within weeks and very few people believed me, you know. So, I did it and the original idea was that all we did was, I looked for the chemical formula and that's how we identified a new compound. We took that and then we didn't need the name, we didn't even need the name we just had the formula and we gave them the reference. But, still we wanted, I got into this thing about taking the name and I figured out that what they were doing was, when you take a name you are simply, you know, it's just basically a substitutive process, you know, for the structural diagram. So, you don't need to do the reverse, you can take the diagram and create the name and the formula but you can do the reverse. And, that's where the algorithm came from, you know, that we could take a name and calculate the molecular formula by computer.

But what happened at Penn, Zellig Harris had agreed on what my, the whole thing when I figured out it worked, I wrote it up in 10 pages. Now Zellig Harris decided to go on a sabbatical, the year I'm supposed to get my degree. And he says to me just before he leaves, 'There's another professor by the name of Hiz, supposed to be an expert on logic or something like that, who'll supervise your graduate work while I'm away'. So, I go to see this guy and I bring him my finished dissertation and he looks at it and he says, 'Are you serious?' I said, 'Well, yeah'. Now I'd proved... I said to him, 'We agreed, I proved it can be done, right, and that's what Harris agreed to'. He says, 'Well, you can't get a doctorate with 10 pages'. And then, so, what happened was, I then decided that in order to satisfy his... I wrote this transformation on grammar of Geneva nomenclature, okay, which was, like, I don't know, 100 pages or something like that. I did a Zellig Harris type analysis of Geneva nomenclature roles, all right, I write this up. He had made up his mind that he was not going to make a decision about my doctorate until Harris got back which would mean I would be delayed for another year. But in the meantime, we ended up playing this game. So, I would bring the dissertation in, and what I did was I put the full text of my dissertation on a Flexowriter. You remember what a Flexowriter is? An automatic typewriter with a tape. Okay, and I run it through the tape, run the thing off. Sylvia Shapiro was working for me then and, of course, we used it for doing direct mail. I mean, those days people... we used to have a process called Hoovenized mail and personalised pictures, you know. You type, it looks like hand typed letter but it's really basically a tape that's run off and then you just change the address. So, I put the dissertation on the tape, I run it off, I take it through to see Professor Hiz, he reads it through and he, he didn't understand what the hell was going on, he didn't understand. And he would look at it and he would, well, make a change here, make a change there and he'd go through it. Made about half a dozen changes, you know. Well, he figured that having made all these changes, I wouldn't be back for another week with another, you had to have a completely perfect typed manuscript. So, I get back the next day, you know, put the tape through and we got another. He was absolutely going crazy trying to keep up with, trying to make changes. So, finally I knew he couldn't make up his mind. And I called Harris, I found out where Zellig Harris was, he was in Rome, Italy and I called him up at his hotel. And basically I said to him, 'Zellig, if you'd...' we were on a first name basis, this is the guy I helped him get a half a million-dollar grant, you know. I said, 'Zellig, either you send a cable or call the chairman of the department to sign my diploma or whatever you, you know, whatever it is you have to do, sign the papers for my degree in June, or I'm going to come over there and I'm going to drag you out of bed'. And, within 2 days there was a cable sent to the chairman, was the... not Hiz wasn't chairman, but the guy was a, I'll think of his name later, the chairman was a comparative linguistics professor [Professor Hoeningswald]. He lives in Swarthmore all the time. And, that was it, but it was quite an experience using technology to beat him at that game. At one point he says, he makes this brilliant statement to me, he says, 'You know, my real advisor was the chairman of the chemistry department at Penn, Alan Day, he was the one that really got me through cos he understood what I was doing, you know'. And Hiz says to me, 'I studied Polish chemistry'. What's that supposed to mean, what's the difference, like, Polish notations supposed to be something different? But, that was how I got my doctorate while I was developing ISI.

We produced three experimental indexes, we wanted to see the effect of chronological depth. So, we had one index that was 15 years of one journal, I think the American Journal of Human Genetics or something, like that, or a few journals. We had another index that was 5 years of genetics-related journals and then we had 1 year of the science citation index, which covered 600 journals. And, we then created a profile that would match that big file and pull out of it those things that were deemed to be relevant to the genetics portion of it. Not an easy thing to do, in fact, it was the project, in a sense, expressed indirectly the incredible changes that were taking place in molecular biology which is a very multi-disciplinary topic and some of the critical literature was appearing on a double helix in those days and related topics were in physics journals, Reviews of Modern Physics and so on. So, the multi-disciplinary nature of modern molecular biology which was being catered to, so to speak, by our taking the multi-disciplinary approach. But that was the whole problem all along, as I had said that in a 1958 paper that I presented at the International Conference of Scientific Information, you needed a unified index, not... separate disciplinary indexes. Now, in a practical sense, Chemical Abstracts may have boasted that it was a chemical abstracting service but the fact is that they stretched out their interpretation of chemistry into so many different parts of the literature that you, you couldn't, you could argue that in a sense they were multi-disciplinary. They never were complete in any different field other than chemistry. And the way in which they did their abstracting never ensured that they were absolutely complete even for the best chemical journals because they were individual abstracts that were assigned to people, not journals, it wasn't a journal-by-journal approach. Anyhow, the indexing project produced a very interesting product and we... part of the grant included the distributing. I believe it was 1,000 copies of the Genetics Citation Index which we have, I still have one or two copies of it on a shelf. And, I then, we then proposed to NSF that they, you know, would publish it, you know, with sole house support publication of the SCI. And they wouldn't hear of it and I had been trying all along to get other groups to, to, get involved and we then decided that we would, and NSF agreed to it, take the 1 year index that we had produced and, and only one copy of course and print it. And we offered it for sale and when we did sell that, it came out to be a five-volume set. Five-volume and we sold it for $500, which in those days seemed like an outrageous price to people.

We took the chance that we could finance the project ourselves and it was a, a decision that almost bankrupted us because the response to subscriptions selling was a lot slower than we ever anticipated. And people today who take the SCI for granted, forget how conservative a lot of people were. Not just librarians, but even scientists, who many of whom, to this day, have never used the SCI. I mean, it is not a necessarily an obvious thing for people to do, even now and if you don't teach them to do citation searching, they don't learn it by default or somehow. Even if they use Google, I imagine you would think that people would understand, I don't even think some of them understand how it's done. So, anyhow, we got to the point where we thought we were going to be under-financed and that was when somebody on our board suggested that we bring in some outside investors. Now, the company had actually tried to go public a couple of times, at least one time before that. Each time it happened it was the, the, like Wall Street; it's like trying to go for an IPO last week when the market hit the bottom. And we did that on two different occasions and it just was incredibly bad timing so, we never worried about going the public route. We got this group of investors and I don't remember who lined them up but they were... what happened was that somebody at the, one of the investment banking firms in New York had a bunch of cronies who thought this was going to be a good investment. Each bought about $50,000 worth of what they called convertible debentures and invested half a million dollars for about, I think they got about 20% of the company for that. And it wasn't 6 months or a year that we paid off the debt. You know, a debenture is just basically a loan, which is secured, and the investors get the stock free. So, you pay them off the money they loaned you and then they get the stock left over as their, as a bonus. So, that's how we got all these outside investors involved, okay. Well, one of the events that occurred, after we got the investment, was the year, a year or so later was it, four of my vice presidents decided that I was not interested in making money for the company. That I was only interested in academic ideas and that I didn't behave in such a way so as to guarantee that the company would become profitable. Especially with regard to chemical, the chemical indexing product. So, one of the first things they tried to do was try to change the Index Chemicus into a glorified version of Current Contents and that bombed. And then eventually, the, they decided that the only way that the company could succeed was if they took over the management of the company and eventually kick me out. So, I got [unclear] from, the four people involved, I don't think I need to name them now, but they were all officers of the company and I told them to take a flying leap and they all left with the exception of one who stayed on ostensibly, but only to hide the fact that he was planning to join them after his stock options or his ownership in the stock, was final. He had a piece of the company but he wouldn't get it for another year or so, so he waited and then he announced that he was leaving. Well, they did leave and they formed this company called Information Company of America and they started some service, I forget what it was, and I think we filed a lawsuit against them for whatever, I don't know what the grounds was, for unfair competition or whatever. Current Contents knock off I think?  They started something similar, but different and they eventually went under. It didn't take long, and I convinced Irv Sher to come back, and he had regretted that he had done that and went on, stayed on and did a lot of great things for the company afterward.

I had the idea that, you know, the function, people forget that the two functions are pretty much, we stress so-called current awareness functions that journals and abstracting and other things play which today you can get so easily by, you know, just getting so many different things free on the web, you know, you find out, you could put together a contents based service yourself, you could put together getting free downloads of the contents of individual journals or whatever. But in those days it was, you had to go through individual journals, you had to do those by yourself. And there was also this business of this amount of money that was spent in publishing papers. So, the idea I had was, why not, the expensive part of all this it seemed to me was the way in which these things were produced, the printing and other costs. So, I had the idea to produce what I would call them, like The New York Times. We had, the idea was a tabloid format that would be a daily newspaper of science in which people could publish their results, just the way they do in Nature and things like that. And we did calculations to show that we could produce a paper approximately the size of The New York Times that would accommodate 25,000 articles a year. Well, that, that's more than critical mass for the most important part of science. I mean, how many articles a year are there that really report something all that new? So, that was the essence of my idea for the newspaper of science. We produced mark-ups for it, something called The Daily Scientist and we still have samples of that around here somewhere. But, clearly that, NSF wouldn't go for it. I could, in hindsight I can understand why they could never, just like they wouldn't go for open access even if they could because all the societies would be opposed to anything like that, you know. So, and how, if you started something, unless you were extremely well financed, how would you get something like that off the ground? The other factors were, would people be willing to publish in a thing like that, if they didn't have the, kind of, peer review they expect and the sociological issue of why do people publish where they publish, you know. Now, Josh Lederberg also had ideas for a system he called Citel, that's available in his archives. So, the idea of communicating what was new in science in efficient ways has been around for a long time. A lot of different people had a lot of different ideas. I know McGraw and Hill had talked about doing a newspaper of science and it was only after, it was in 1986 that we launched The Scientist, I did that, that was probably one of my big mistakes. What happened was a very sad thing that occurred here in ISI was we had made an agreement to launch The Scientist with great encouragement from a guy named Nicholas Wade [sic - should be Valery] who had been one of the editors of the New Scientist in England and he was working for The Economist, okay. You, and you were here at the time and The Economist wanted it to be, it would be a joint venture with The Economist and they knew all about publishing a publication of that kind. And what happened was, this incredible thing where the guy who was the disgruntled former vice-president of Data Processing, that guy Campbell, he planted some software around the company and then he called the FBI. The FBI came in and closed us down that day. Do you remember that day?
[Q] Absolutely.
And as a result of that, the, The Economist backed out. That was the night that we had signed the agreement.  I didn't know that.  Yeah. And then, when they did back out I said to him, 'Well, look, they backed out are you still willing to be go ahead with your plan?' he was going to move to Washington be the editor on, oh, yeah, yeah, go ahead. So, we ridiculously agreed without any formal written agreement and rented a space in Washington and opened up the office and hired Tammy Poweledge and all the others and there we were, and he'd backed out. Said he didn't want to leave The Economist that they were not going to support the project, they had told him they weren't. So, I had to make that decision, a critical decision which every financial advisor I had told me not to do it, but I went ahead and I supported it. Now, later when, when we sold the company to...  JPT.  JPT, cos they, they lied to me when they said that they intended to help support, get The Scientist going, they would give it a real shot. They knew in advance, what they were going to do. It wasn't 6 months, not even 6 months that they said, we're closing it down, you can either close it altogether or you can have it... take it for $1, and that's how I come in to it. I supported it all those years until Vitek  became my partner.

You know, people think it was always, always easy to get where we were but it's a lot of ups and downs in this company. We had a lot of successes, we had a lot of failures too, you know, nothing ventured, nothing gained. We've, at some point after a while I just felt, I just felt being a manager was not what I was cut out to be and the company got so big there were personnel problems to deal with and very hard. So, now it's always been very intellectually stimulating to be, you know, working with scientists and providing a good service and I think the people in the company enjoyed working here because we, we tried to have a, you know, pretty open, kind of, collegial atmosphere. I just think we were always, we managed to get... most people worked hard without having to be, you know, watched day and night and I think that's generally paid off. I mean, it's not the typical corporate way of doing things, but I think we've had a very good family life here.

What's the value, the impact of scientific information systems on the progress of science. How do you demonstrate that? I said that it's similar to the difficulty of measuring the economic impact of basic research. It's, it's a truism, everybody believes in it, but proving is something else, you know. When you're a chemist, you're trained to use literature, right? They take it for granted that your time is well spent if you spend time in the library. Wasn't always true that way, you know. There were times in the past, especially in Germany and other countries, a scientist could, had to have permission to go into a library. He couldn't be wasting time out of a lab; they wanted him to work in the lab. As though every minute of the day spent in the lab could be, you know, productive. I guess you could watch the bugs multiply faster. But, I can't... anyhow, it turns out that there are people apparently now who are trying to, in terms of science policy analysis, to demonstrate the value of information systems. I mean, we, we take it for granted that the marketplace determines that. If it wasn't so important to industry and academia why would they be spending all these billions of dollars in paying for information systems, you know there seems to be some value there.
[Q] It was important to scientists' careers to have the citation index. I mean...
Well, it's important now because using citation, frequencies and measurements have begun to be incorporated into the, the evaluation process, the tenure process, the research assessment exercises and so forth. But it wasn't always that way. I mean, in the past they just relied on subjective opinions and that's a, that's a, you know, I keep getting confronted with this idea that I'm responsible for a Frankenstein, you know, that we created this thing and there are a lot of people who hate us for it.
[Q] You're being imitated, you're being imitated by all these other players. 
Yeah, but I mean, still you get all these, what's the word, critical remarks and dig out the latest versions of... editorials by people who are so upset by the fact that numbers are being used to evaluate people, as though they were never used before. And as though peer review was a far better reliable, you know, subjective views are more reliable, maybe in some cases they are better. Somebody has an intuition about somebody, somebody who has got high numbers, but you think he's a jerk and other people who have low numbers, you think they're brilliant. I mean, that's a personal opinion. But what's the collective opinion? You did that study on the collagen thing which was a classic which shows that in most fields anyhow you probably find that 95% of the time, the people that turn out to be the most respected are the ones with the highest citation counts or certainly among the top five or ten, right?
[Q] They'll be perceived as the leaders in the field.
Well, all these snide remarks that people make about citation analysis, I always tell them at the meetings, I never encountered a Nobel class scientist who hadn't published a citation classic. You know, you look up their records and in fact, more than one, several, frequently. And if they haven't there's always a very good explanation for it, that in fact, you could then use the citation history to trace the reason why there was no citation recognition, it was a long-term delayed recognition. So, on the one hand people are always citing examples of delayed recognition of which there are very few, by the way. But Wolfgang and I did a paper in Scientometrics a couple of years ago, we did that study of how rarely you can find them yet people have this impression that it's a widespread phenomena and therefore you can't use citation analysis frequently. If it was very common the you wouldn't want to rely on it but it's really such a rare thing.

Irv Sher and I when we did the genetics project we created the initial... we had the journal list of really important biomedical journals from Current Contents. We couldn't have published Current Contents. At that point it was, let's say, 4 or 5 years old. Medical librarians, Charles [unclear] all those people said these are the 100 most important journals that we were covering, all along, okay. Now, would there have been a really significant journal that they would have said, don't put it in there. So, it's kind of almost silly that they would think was such a huge exercise to get the most important journal. We all knew what the journals were, whether we were called subjective or not. Now Estelle Brodman who was a medical librarian and I loved her as a person and as a historian, had this, she didn't like the numbers game either. She thought that, she did a paper on choosing physiology journals and she objected to the fact that our ranking gave too much weight to certain types of journals, I guess review journals because of the, you know, their inordinate citation. Well, they're still important. Beyond that, anybody knew what the leading hundred... I guess once you get past the first few hundred titles then you can get into these squabbles about what is or isn't the next journal to add. So, Irv and I said, what are we going to use as the criteria. We know what we start with. And then we did this journal citation analysis, the primitive JCR and we called it, it was the Journal Citation Index when we first did it and we did it because we thought it would better to maybe publish the citation index, not sorted by author but sorted by journal. Which, in a sense, was the way Shepard's Citations was organised, you know. They put more emphasis on the vehicle rather than on the individual, the individual case or whatever. So, you'd have it by journal. Well you could of had that. So, we did a journal sort in order to see what it would look like. There were a number of advantages to the journal sort if we had done it.  We could have eliminated... at that point, we recognised that if an author had his name spelt differently, when you did a journal type sort, it would be brought together regardless of the spelling of the cited author, okay. But, we had to say well, most people were used to citing author journals, that's why we went that way. And then it was just a trying to make a decision between these small and big journals so, this was a way to normalise size, okay. Now, we did think about the concept of impact, even in 1955, we mentioned that in our paper but it wasn't the formal impact factor. Today when people talk about impact factor, they don't always mean journals, they're talking about an author's impact, which is a very confusing thing to do.
[Q] Or institutional impact or country impact, all sorts of things.
And no matter how you slice it, there's always going to be somebody who's got an objection. All along there was always the criticism that it was mostly English that we're biased the game in favor of the English language. Then, whenever you did a study to disprove that, they'd find some other objection. When it wasn't, you should be comparing European journals and now the Germans object when we evaluate their journals. Then you tell them, if you were a German scientist, where do you think you're going to publish a really hot paper? In the German journals or in the international journals? It's the authors that really determine the game, not us. So we are selecting where the action is so to speak. In the beginning, we were emphasizing the fast moving fields, molecular biology, biochemistry and so forth and so there was somewhat that bias. So, what we maybe didn't do from the early days is quickly enough pick up on the slower moving fields. I mean to this day, I question whether we have too many, let's say, taxonomy journals missing from the ISI coverage but there may be some more fields like geography, but how you would pick up that stuff I don't know, there's so much low impact material that after a certain point, you can't even discriminate. You know what's the difference between something with an impact of point one or point two? Yet people will make a big thing out of that.

I believe that Bernal himself did some kind of a historiograph, you know, he didn't call it that, they didn't create it out of citations, they just created a genealogical... that was just a genealogical map of the field. Now, Gordon [Allen] when he was on the committee had this idea of tracing the citation, the history of nucleic acids, that's what he did at that time. I believe that those kinds of genealogical maps existed before and I believe Bernal did one and I couldn't remember where I saw it, you know it's something you can't ask an index to find, how the hell would you look for it? They don't index graphs as they might, but even if they were indexing how would you look for it?  You might have to look through all his papers.  So, it's, sort of, like saying, find me a paper that contains a structural diagram. Other than that, I don't know. To me, when Irv and I were talking about this back in '64, when we did that DNA thing I just, my interest in this whole thing, was in a sense I thought that the citation indexes would be incredibly valuable to a historian of science, you know. I hadn't thought about going into that field. When I was at Hopkins I wanted to take my degree in the history of science and they had a major out there. They also had the Institute of History of Medicine right there at the Welch Library, top floor so it was a topic that I had been interested in. And then, I don't know what the evolution of the project... we got to talking to Harold Wooster at the office of naval, no, air force research directorate and he, kind of, liked that idea. I said let's investigate what would happen if you used citations to track the history of a topic. That's how I did the DNA thing. Now I realised, when I was down at Oak Ridge last week and I showed that... historiograph of the... from Mendel to Nirenberg is still the most interesting picture we've ever done. But, you really have got to go into that report in detail to appreciate what it's got there because Irv with all those overlays... I don't even know how the hell you would produce it by a computer if you had to do it, if you took those overlays, photograph them separately on a computer, how would you merge them. It would be quite an interesting thing to try to do and I don't know what he thought was so interesting about well discovering which overlap the... weakened the links and the strong links. It was just a kind of an intellectual exercise. Then the ability to generate that map algorithmically, it turns out to be not so easy. You take, cause you know you got the problem of how do you filter out the noise that develops in those things, you know? If you were to go to the... we got a demonstration of the spallation neutron detector or producer, you know about this facility at Oak Ridge? It's, like, they spent about $2 billion to build this thing and a guy by the name of Ian Anderson gave us a tour, personal tour of this thing and it was unbelievable how he explained that. But they have a map on the wall, if you could do your mapping exercises on there, all the ovelapping and lines, you could do a map of 1,000 papers up there, would be beautiful.  It's what Derek Price always wanted?  That's what you need, a real command and control map.

When I started to write the paper I could see, I think I made a statement, how valuable it would be to historians to have this, kind of, information to be able to trace these developments. Today, now even as I work with the HistCite program, you get this list of the... you essentially create a citation index of the field you're looking at, you get this incredible time line. This is great for you. You've got a record of everything that historians or whoever has written on the subject have cited and that gives you an immediate rough... quick and dirty time line on the field. Now, it doesn't necessarily mean that you have to assign a greater importance to the more cited stuff because what you're looking for is the chronological development in the field. What Irv and I found in the Asimov thing were certain papers that proved to be what we call important links that Isaac Asimov had overlooked, that he agreed that he had overlooked, couple of papers, not very many. So, I think that's one of the weaknesses right now in the early stages of SciMate that unless you apply subject criteria, you're going to always, you're going to always over emphasise what gets highly cited versus the appropriate link, you know. And I saw that when I was trying to show, when I did this paper for the Bernal Symposium in Dublin. We showed linkages between JD Bernal and Watson and Crick  and Rosalind Franklin and other people, but there weren't as many links as I expected to find. But it's just, it turns out to be a very interesting tool to be able to take two people's personal bibliography and just run their two HistCite files together. You know so you take my records and your record, you run the two together, who do we cite in common, how are they linked?
[Q] You, you pointed out that some people have neglected to cite people that they should have, like Watson. 
Yeah, Watson admitted to that, eventually. Even Einstein was probably a, I don't know that he forgot, he just didn't formally cite them, you know. Who knows what the reasons were, but he hasn't got very many references in his papers. They're probably implicit, you know, we used to call them the implicit references. So, if you were going to trace the genealogical tree of the field, you'd have to go in and add those, we call them 'pseudo citations'.
[Q] He claimed that he didn't know the literature that well and he would have cited them if he had known about it. 
He didn't know the literature, Einstein claimed that?
[Q] That's what he said, back in 1905, he didn't know. 
Well, Medawar would have said he was smart to have avoided it.  He didn't know it but he'd learned it, somehow, right?   He got the ideas.

If Bernal had... by the way, did you get a chance to look at the biography of JD Bernal? I had the book. It's really wonderful. I met Andrew Brown in Dublin and he's a wonderful guy. But, if Bernal hadn't been so pro-Stalin, he would have probably won a Nobel Prize, I'm pretty sure of that. Do you know that Churchill, he was an advisor to Churchill? And Churchill knew he was a communist, it's an incredible thing. I guess it's how people felt about Oppenheimer, you know. General Groves was not stupid, he said I don't care if he's a communist or not, he's a great physicist. That's the way it was, I guess. I suppose that Einstein was probably accused of being, if not a communist, a Marxist, I don't know. And, as I mentioned, Bernal was also a Sephardic name. So, I tried to find out if Derek [Price] had ever had any personal contact with Bernal and it turns out he was not, he didn't get his, he went to the University of London, but he didn't get his degree under Bernal. He just may have known about him.  He knew about him.  But, he didn't actually have any dealings with him when he was younger. I don't know when he first encountered the Social Function of Science but I encountered it early on because my uncle had given me a copy of that book and then when I went to the University of Colorado when we were talking about science and the war and everything, like that, Bernal's name came up. People knew about him then but only from that book because nobody was hearing about him during the war, he was working probably secretly. I don't know how open he was during the time of war, I guess he was just too busy.

In my talk I found I was able to trace down the evolution of, of scientometrics, you know, the business of science of science. Derek, in his book, used that term, 'the science of science'... 'prologue to a science of science', which is the term that Bernal used. By the time, another 10 years or so had gone by scientometrics got into it becauase of Nalimov. Not clear to me when that precisely occurred but the journal came in and Tibor Braun was more susceptible to, you know, Russian influence because of the Hungarian location. They knew about scientometrics but when did you first hear that term, can you remember?
[Q] I guess it was 1970, I don't know. 
I don't remember when I first saw his, you know the CIA translated his book, it was free, it was available but it wasn't talked about much, it was a government document.
[Q] I wonder if science of science was somehow a Marxist idea or a Soviet idea? 
Well I'm pretty sure that's the way it was considered, it was, they discussed it. His concept of... they gave him credit for, and I said about Alvin Weinberg who became, you know his greatest exponent, big science is what he called it. And Derek was talking about little science. It was Weinberg that made that distinction being at a place, like Oak Ridge, that's big science. And he talks about science the way that Bernal did so I said, it was implicitly a Bernalian, Weinberg, criteria for scientific choice. Did you know he wrote two commentaries for us in Citation Classics?
[Q] I remember something. Yeah... I never connected the criteria for scientific choice with Bernal, but now that you mention it.
Yeah, he doesn't say it. I don't think he ever, to my knowledge, cited it. I don't think he did but I'm sure he must have known about it, I'm not sure. So, fascinating how all these things interact. Josh Lederberg, he's very familiar with his work. Did you know that he wrote this paper in the East German academy, he was invited to write a commentary about Bernal and the 50th anniversary of The Social Function of Science? When I went back and looked it up it, turns out Josh wrote a paper in that called The Social Function of the Scientist, based on using that 50th anniversary. And then, that paper was republished in an American book. I mean, American based, I don't know who the publisher was - it might have been [unclear] or somebody. I couldn't figure out what, you know, I saw the paper listed in his bibliography and then I realised we had, Meher found the book in my library, on the shelf, it's sitting on my desk now, it's a collection of papers. It's called Science and Society, something, like that. If you've never seen it, Josh's paper is in there and it has to do with the whole concept of what he calls, truth telling, you know the ethics of science. So, Josh has some interesting comments. He said basically if the guy, his Marxist... the Marxist influence on his work he was blindsided by Stalin and he wouldn't actually criticise Lysenko - that was the biggest mistake he ever made. I think most people feel that was clearly an emotional bias although he had shaky feelings about it.
[Q] Were you at all... did you know about Vannevar Bush? 
I remember reading that.  When I was at the [unclear] project I remember seeing an article by him in the Atlantic Monthly, there was a, but that occurred much earlier. I think his original, I'm trying to remember, there was something he wrote in the early '50s that I'd read but before that, I had not know, I didn't know about Vannevar Bush before that. I heard about him through the rapid selector work and all that, you know, later. Essentially, up to 1951, till I went to that project, the only thing I ever knew about, I didn't, I didn't relate Bernal to this at all. I mean, to documentation. When I was reading it, it was the social... science and the state so to speak, you know, and that's what Weinberg was talking about, the government is giving great support to science. Before that, science was private, you know, the upper crust, elite and industrial, it wasn't government. The war is what really produced the connection between government and science.

It was Ted Herdegen, who later on became one of my closest friends, and to whom the first issue of the Index Chemicus is dedicated, if you went back. I guess online it wouldn’t be possible for people to see those things quite as easily as when they were in print. Yeah, Ted Herdegen had come to visit me, and only very briefly from having visited the Welch Medical Imaging Project, and when Smith, Kline & French was a relatively small local pharmaceutical company, and the president, the owner, the leading executives at the time were typical mainline Wasps, you know, and Smith, Kline & French was basically a Waspy company, although I later found out that they had one other guy by the name of Greenberg who stayed there quite a while, but he was a rarity. Anyhow, they started to become a larger company. They were the ones that sold Dexedrine and products like that. I think at that time Dexedrine was used for people with colds, it was like a nasal spray. So, they were very big in the over the counter market. I don’t know how many prescription drugs they sold. Ted Herdegen had worked as a chemist for them many years before in the lab that apparently was located downtown, in Philadelphia somewhere. But when I came to Philadelphia, when he... when I came to work for them, they had a brand new building that is still there, 15 Spring Gardens. It was, you know, like a four or five storey building, and they had tableting and  manufacturing in their offices and so forth, and in the labs. So they had a man by the name of Wes Scull, the director of chemical research, one of the medical research directors, had gone to Europe to find potentially new products, and they found this drug which was used for the treatment of nausea in pregnant women. It was a, I believe, a CNS depressant. But somehow when they did some testing and they found out it was a very effective antidepressant drug, which was peddled under the name of thorazine. And thorazine is even used to this day for a variety of conditions, I think it may be even like a mild sedative, relaxant, CNS, relaxant or whatever. The year that I came here, 1954, the drug had made the cover of Time magazine, and this company suddenly became a superstar pharmaceutical company. I didn’t have any stock or anything, and I don’t even know if it was on the, you know, stock market or not. This drug made them a fortune. And apparently what had accumulated was a large number of kinds of informal, formal case reports on the drug. And what they wanted, Ted and the head of the department at Smith Kline was a fellow named Henry Longnecker, who was from the mainline family, as I recall, and they realised that they needed to have a more efficient way of processing all of the reports they were getting on the use of the drug. So, Ted had known that I was considered as the punch card guru in those days, and he had called me when I was still at library school. I think I said yesterday that I was planning to go to Georgetown with Casimir and Léon Dostert, but that fizzled, and so he hired me and I came down here. And what we did was we set up a pretty straightforward coding system where each position on the card represented some particular side effect. And what they wanted to do, basically, was to do statistical analyses to see how often certain side effects occurred. There were things that apparently...  you couldn’t draw those conclusions from just working with the drugs, some doctors might have noticed it. But it turned out that there were several significantly frequent side effects, like dermatitis and so forth. So, that was one of the reasons they brought me down, as somebody to set up this punch card system, so we had these coding sheets. And what we did was first of all we got all these individual letters or documents that were given to the detail men who, you know, sold the drug for the company, the doctors gave them these reports, and then furthermore there was a lot of literature that had been published on the drug, even before it was marketed for the purposes they were selling it, you know, to treat nausea and vomiting. And so we went into the literature, and whenever there was a case report in the published article we would treat that as though the doctor had submitted it, and that was how we used the published literature to build up sort of like an early evidence-based medicine, you know, to analyse the effects. Also they used it to determine whether there was anything else they could do to market the drug for other users. That’s one of the big payoffs for these companies, that they market for one thing and then they find out it’s good for something else, so they make more in the by-product use than they do on the original. So, that’s why I came to Smith Kline. And while I was there of course they got me involved in other things.

They had a group which included a fellow by the name of Leo Stevens. I mention Leo Stevens because he was an Austrian who had been in the ski troops, in the same 10th Mountain Division that I was in, but he was one of the original people who were brought over as ski experts. And also he was a refugee from the Nazis, I guess. The reason I remember Leo so well is because later, after he retired from Smith Kline, he came to work for ISI, and he and I went on lecture tours where he would take over answering, giving lectures in German and answering questions in German and so forth. He was in the translation part of the literature section of Smith Kline, so his knowledge of languages was very helpful. He was a very, very nice and funny man, who was extremely Germanic in his ways. I mean he was so disciplined. When we went travelling he had a routine that he followed to the letter: as soon as he hit the hotel room he was on the phone telling the laundry or the housekeeper to come up and get his laundry and that, and we would have that taken care of right way and then he’d take care of other things. So, anyhow, he was in the literature section but also was a doctor in organic chemistry, I think. They had a group that was doing structure function analysis, that were hoping to... it was really early on, and there was a fellow by the name of, who had been an academic, by the name of Heger, George Heger, I think his name was, doing that kind of work. That’s how I sort of got into coding of compounds. We had pretty primitive coding systems then. We weren’t using any kind of line notation or anything like that, or not even attempting to search structural diagrams or... what do we call those things?   Molecular formulas?  There’s a term for the basic coding structure. Anyhow they also had in that group a natural products division. I think they talk about going out and looking for plants, a fellow by the name of Bob Raffauf, I remember. He later on went to work as a professor at New England University, was in charge of going out throughout the world, looking for exotic plants that could be turned into potential natural products. And they called it the natural products section of the literature department. So, there were a lot of interesting things going on. Also when I first came there I was living alone, and I’ll never forget when I stayed at the Broadwood Hotel, and when I filed my income tax return I claimed my hotel expenses, you know, as a deduction.  Several years later, while I was on a trip to Paris, I get a cable or telegram from my wife telling me the IRS says you owe them $500, something like that. It turns out that the tax accountant, the CPA in New Jersey, had filed my return and it turned out he illegally claimed my hotel expenses as a legitimate expense. I said well, I lived in New York. And the IRS said you are spending 4 nights a week in Philadelphia, therefore that is your residence, and whether you keep your apartment in New York is none of our business. So, I had to pay them all these back taxes plus penalties. And I found out that you can’t use your accountant’s stupidity as an excuse. It was pretty traumatic at the time, because that’s when I first encountered having to borrow money to pay off debts.

I was there for a couple of months when I got this call from my sister that Stefan... I had to do something about bringing Stefan down. Ted had set me up in near Mullica Hill, and that’s how Stefan came down and grew up as a country boy. And he has never... that impacted his life forever. He hung out with all these farmers and mechanics and so when we moved and I got married to Winnie, we moved over to Swarthmore in order to get, have a much more academic preparation, you know, because we wanted the kids to go to college. And it was a disastrous decision in Stefan’s case, because he was always a very mischievous kid, and he had been hanging out with all these farmers and mechanics, and he just liked to fool around and went out hunting. We had a stream right near the house where we had this big log cabin that we lived in, and out in the Thorofare to New Jersey, and he, when we moved to Swarthmore, Pennsylvania, he never could adjust to the academic. You know, these kids are all 90% going to college in Swarthmore, that is what you can imagine, and where he had gone to school down in Mullica Hill, it was probably just the opposite, 10% went to college. So, by the time he was about 14, I think it was, he’d had it and he ran away from home and went to live with his aunt in California, that’s his mother’s sister, and he grew... spent the next several years living with her. She was married to a black man, so he was living in a, you know, black neighbourhood and getting exposed to the civil rights movement and all that sort of thing. She was very much involved in that sort of thing. He then participated in... I don’t know if you’ve ever heard of a CORE? They had a demonstration at the Cadillac car agency and I think they were protesting at the fact that they didn’t hire blacks, or whatever it was, and there were dozens of them got arrested. They were doing a sit-in or something like that. And Stefan was brought before a judge and they were given a choice, you can either join the army or you can go to jail. So, that’s how he got in the army. And from there within 6 months he was in Vietnam. He had signed up for a regular 3-year hitch. And I think I mentioned before that when he got wounded in Vietnam he... I couldn’t get there for some reason, I wish I could remember the reason why, but Ralph Shaw went to visit him. Now, what that does remind me, because I just came visiting Stefan in Florida, when... I don’t know if you remember Mel Weinstock... Mel and I, you know, lived together for a while and we shared an apartment at Society Hill Towers. Mel was a guy that never went to sleep. I mean, he claimed he could deliver on 4 hours sleep. Of course, when you were working with him, you would notice that he would doze off in the middle of a conversation. He used to hang out at the Middle East restaurant because he knew all these women who were belly-dancers and so forth. It turns out that most of the women who were doing these exotic dances were... housewives with kids who would support with an extra job. And when Mel... Mel was a very funny guy, great musician, he played a beautiful French horn, he played in the Haddonfield Symphony Orchestra. And so I went over there a few times. One time I was in the Middle East restaurant, and the guy who owned it was this fellow Tayoun. I don’t know if you remember but later on he was sent to jail for getting involved in some kind of maybe murder rap, but definitely corruption of some kind. But while I was there Mel introduced me and he said his son is in Vietnam, and somehow he said he likes baklava, which Stefan had had, I think, at some point, I had gotten him some baklava. And Tayoun says, 'Oh'. A couple of months later I get a letter from Stefan, I probably still have it, Tayoun had sent him in the mail a huge baklava in a round tin, and he said when he received it they hadn’t eaten for a couple of days, they were almost literally starving, but the mail was delivered even though they weren’t getting any food, and they ate that whole baklava in one night, him and his buddies. You can imagine the amount of calories that there was. And Stefan still tells that story gleefully. But Vietnam was not a great experience for any of them, I guess, and when he came back... he was wounded twice, and then finally he was transferred, when he finished in Vietnam he was transferred to Germany, and then he was in the tank corps, I think, in Germany. Stefan had, you know... he knew some German, he had spent the summer... I sent him to stay with a friend of mine that I knew in Munich for the summer and he learnt to speak German. To this day he still speaks to people in German. And also when he meets people who speak Yiddish he uses German to speak Yiddish. That was a by-product of moving to Swarthmore.

My son, Josh, who I just visited in Tampa, was born in 1958 or '59, and he played football for Swarthmore. His mother was about 5 foot 11, so Josh is very tall, although my daughters were not so tall, surprisingly. But he’s 6 foot 2. And he went... he did go through the academic programme very well and went through Trinity College in Hartford and graduated. He got his first degree in marine biology, and that sort of accounts for his interest in water sports. And then later, after he graduated from college, at some point he came to work, he and Stefan... you know, Stefan always, after he came back, never went... he tried to go to college for 1 month, he went to Cheyney, after he got out of the army and Vietnam, and he lasted about a month, he just was not suited to an academic programme. And... but Cheyney was basically a black college, even though it was a state university or something like that, and he said he knew what reverse discrimination was there, to be a minority. He then became a truck mechanic, and eventually he convinced me to get him a Peterbilt truck, and he and Josh drove this truck across country. And it was an ISI truck, we had the idea once that we were going to use this truck to have a... also get a... sell our products in a, you know, like a library on wheels. I don’t think we ever carried that out. So, that’s how Stefan happened to work for us for a while, but... And then Josh came to work for us for a while as a salesman. He worked on the sales force. And even though, if you meet him today he would make a fantastic sales person, he hated it. And eventually he went to a... they had a, Minneapolis Honeywell had a computer school here, do you remember that, that was down on Market Stree, took... kept programming, and then he came to work at ISI and he reported to Phil Sopinsky. I’ll never forget when he came to me, and he was here I don’t know how many months, and he said, 'Listen I’m not making enough money, you’re not paying me enough'. So, I said to him, 'Why are you telling me? You go to your boss and deal with him about it, I’m not going to -  this is not a system of nepotism, you know, I didn’t hire you because you’re my son, I hired you because you’re qualified for the job'. He didn’t buy into that, and he said, apparently he went to Phil, and Phil didn’t think he warranted a raise, so he quit and went and found himself a job at Shared Medical. Do you remember that? And when he got to Shared Medical he wasn’t working for them, they were just at the beginning of this big boom in hospital information systems, he wasn’t with them for more than 3 or 4 months when one of their clients, Tampa University Hospital offered him a job. I mean, when I saw him just last week he took me past where they had brought him down and put him up at the Holiday Inn, and he had this wonderful... he had the combination of working in a computer center and also being near water sports which, you know, he does scuba diving, windsurfing, snorkeling, everything. So, it was like he’d found heaven. Well... but at the same time when he was 17 or thereabouts he and I went for flying lessons. That’s when I found out, did you know when you fly one of these old planes they use mechanical brakes, just like a, like an old-fashioned car. When you are taxiing the way you operate the brakes is just like a car. And I had this problem with my, with my injured leg, and I found that I just could not use that brake without, you know, causing the pain to come back, so. He continued taking the lessons, and then the hardest part was not learning how to fly, which is relatively easy, it’s all the weather and the mechanics and the rules and the details, it’s like going to school and having to learn all that stuff, and he ate it up, so. He became a flying fan and passed right away and got his solo licence. And when he got to Tampa he eventually bought his own Cessna. So, when I was down there last weekend he flew us from Stefan’s house in Jacksonville to Tampa to go to stay with him. And as a result of that, even after he worked in the university computer centre in Tampa, he got fed up with the computer business and decided to go back to school and got himself a commercial pilot’s licence. So, when he did it I remember I said, 'Josh, you know, you couldn’t have picked a worse time to be looking for a job as a commercial pilot', because you know... they were laying off all these pilots from all the airlines because there was a glut of them, and besides the Air Force had been turning out all of these guys. Well, he said, 'I don’t care, I’m going... I like flying, that’s what I’m going to do'. So, he went and spent the year and got himself a commercial licence, and then he started working for Mesa Airlines, which is a commuter airline. They actually do the flying and supply the pilots for US Air and these other commuter airlines. He worked for them for a while, and then a friend of his got him this job with this timeshare company, which is what he does now. So, every time he calls me up, every few days, he’s in a different place every day, flies around executives and the movie stars and what have you; they all each buy a piece of the plane. The reason all that is significant is that neither Stefan, Josh nor any of my other kids really were interested in the company. I mean, maybe if they had been, things would have gone a little differently, I would have felt well, let’s let one of them take over, but that’s the way it was. So, I have no regret about that. For a while I thought Josh might be interested, but he’s a very different guy; he’s interested more in football, I think, than he is in information science.

I always say a consultant is a euphemism for unemployment. Have you ever noticed that a lot of people who get laid off suddenly become consultants? They are available for whatever. I’ve known quite a few consultants in my time, people who, for whatever reason, find themselves without work. And I always found it very amusing that people who worked at Smith Kline made fun of me because I refused to take their offer, take their, not a tenure job, but a permanent job with them. Because most of the guys I knew there were out of a job within 5 or 10 years, maximum 10 years after I had left, you know. The companies either get sold or their jobs get wiped out or there’s some reorganisation. And we even know at Smith Kline - I mean at ISI - how often that happens. Including even when I brought... you remember Dick Kollin when he came in, and he said we should cut down the expenses of the company by 10%, just like that. And they tried to have an across the board 10% cut in the budget. You can’t necessarily take 10% out of the computer budget the same way you could take it out of the marketing or any other budget, you know, it’s... but that’s the sort of thing that happens when you get a corporate mentality, that the bottom line is the only thing that counts. And that never was the case with me and ISI, you know, we were worried about the people that were going to be affected by trying to do something like that. But today, as you can see, it doesn’t matter whether they take the jobs; we originally get set up in Ireland and then move to India. Our, our reasons for... we didn’t really, in the beginning we never outsourced. What we did was when we started in Philadelphia it was very interesting, once we got into doing the SCI, I had to hire a slew of key punch operators, okay, and it was no easy task to find in the city of Philadelphia key punch operators who were both technically qualified and literate. I mean, all we wanted was, you know, bright high school graduates to do the work. It was a challenging key punching job, and the ones that got it loved it. But we just could not hire enough people, and for a long time I tried. This is how I got to meet, what was his name, Leon Sullivan, was the guy from the black community that tried to develop opportunities for black people. And another reason why this company, we never had any... we were always open as far as equal opportunity employment, long before there was a law. And I... we really tried valiantly to find sources of local people who could do the work, but we just could not find enough of them. So we had... somehow we finally decided that we had to open up a branch and what we would do is go to New Jersey, which is today like going to India, okay; it was almost a betrayal of Philadelphia but we just couldn’t do it. And that’s how we got in. It was, I think it was Cherry Hill from the beginning and then it was Pensauken who was there first. And then what we did was hire people who worked... we had a night shift in Philadelphia, but then we had problems in Philadelphia because in a night shift you had to provide escorts at night; you worried about people coming out of the building at midnight and the streets were full of drug addicts or whatever, you know. In New Jersey, on the other hand, we were able to hire a lot of married women who could work. It was good for them to have a job like that. And Irv and I were always in favour of flex time. I don’t if you remember that. People used to object to Irv coming in here... he used to come to work at like 5 or 6 o’clock in the morning and go home at 3. And I remember when people said how come that guy can go home at 3 o’clock, and I said if you want to go home at 3 o’clock you can come in at 5 o’clock in the morning, too. Irv, whenever he left here, he always had a briefcase full of work. He’d come back and he’d done a day’s work at home at night, which his wife did not appreciate.

You could spend hours talking about Irv; he was a character, a real character. I never got to know him completely, but part of the reason for his strange hours was his religious habits. I think he was an orthodox Jew, but he also did other things that you would not expect. He was an expert in Chinese, you know, and loved to eat Chinese food. Larry Hackett could tell you more about him because he worked with him, and Caroline Finn.
[Q] When did you meet Irv, do you remember?
Irv, I, I met Irv at Smith Kline French. That’s how I met him. And he was working there and I, when I set up, finally set up the company we met somewhere and decided that he would be better off coming here. I know the guy was bright when I first met him. He was an unbelievably irritating person. He believed in the principal of... what is it he used to say... the bigger they are the harder they fall. He was totally defiant of authority, so if you ever introduced him to somebody who was the expert in the field he would, he would give them a hard time, you know... but in a very clever way; he was incredibly smart. I’ll never forget the time when he tried to provoke Josh Lederberg, who is a guy that just cannot be provoked, you know, and he kept on going after him, and finally Irv recognised that this guy is not only smart but diplomatic, he just wasn’t going to get to his goat. And a similar experience with John Tukey, and Irv really knew his statistics; John Tukey was the world’s authority on mathematical statistics. And Irv, he would take anybody on. He was a biochemist, he was just... anything, a linguist; he was really a kind of genius in a strange way, but he had this incredibly nasty habit of using four letter words that were unbelievable. You’d be sitting having this conversation in the office and he would say, 'Fuck that and this'. It was just weird; it was almost like he had Tourette’s syndrome or something. But anyhow... so a lot of things we did were kind of bizarre. Once Irv made up his mind about something you could not change it.

I think, if I’m not mistaken, he [Irving Sher] may have come to work for us after Bob Hayne. Bob Hayne also, I think, had been at Smith Kline, too. I introduced Bob to Ted Herdgen so that... they had, both of them had been at Smith Kline. But I knew Bob from before. I think I got him the job, introduced him to Ted Herdgen, and so they moved up. Irv was a graduate; he had a DSc, not a PhD, Doctor of Science, which you get when you graduate from Johns Hopkins School. He went to the School of Hygiene at Johns Hopkins, which had the bio statistics program, so he was, he was both biologically and statistically trained. He was, he was just an unusual guy. So, as you know, he taught himself programming. He had his own system for shorthand. Anything he touched it was different. Now, on the other hand nobody else could replace him. If he did the program nobody else knew how to program it. So taking his stuff and modifying it was not easy. Anyhow he was, he was a very important step in the growth of the company, I think. He was very, very weird about different things, you know, he absolutely would refuse to put his name on papers. I would say, 'Irv, we’re doing this paper and you’re part of all this'. He wouldn’t care; I literally had to force him to put his name to a paper. I just put the name in and he wouldn’t argue anymore. But he would edit the paper, you know. He would do an incredible refereeing job. People hated him when he was a referee because he’s one of these kinds of referees that not only said... he’d say things like, 'That stupid ass'. It would be a personal attack of four letter words. But you couldn’t have got a better analysis of what was going on. He just was a very odd, strange guy.

In hindsight, if it hadn’t been for JPT we might never have done abstracts, because I tried to get Irv... I said, 'Irv, there’s a reason we can’t compete with BA and CA and all these other abstracting services on an equal plane, it’s because we don’t use the abstracts'. Now, in the early days we used to think well, you’d have to create the abstracts, you couldn’t just take them, but the author abstracts were available; it turns out nobody ever cared if you used the author abstracts. And he said you don’t need the abstract to retrieve the information. He would not see the importance of that. I think it was only, it was within 3 months or 6 months when Paul Neuthaler came here that they added abstracts, and Irv figured out of course how to do it. Once you told him, once you told him to do something it was done. He would fight, he would fight, but if you said, 'Irv, I’m overruling you, forget it', once that happened... but he was just that way. But he would fight and fight and make life so miserable for you until you’d convinced him. That was the sort of thing he did. The same thing with the...  we couldn’t convince him about getting rid of the damn truncation. When we started out,we had a punch card and we were limited to it, but he kept on delaying the inevitable change so that you could accommodate the whole name. So, when you look at it there were still records with those damn truncation marks. Similarly in some way I regret that we used to have this non-journal code. How many times have I regretted that we don’t have that still? If that had been left there it would have been a hell of a lot easier to do various kinds of bibliometric studies in the records. Because in the early days we had no trouble differentiating the book citations and journal citations. But those kinds of compromises were eventually made. The same thing with, I don’t know whether I regret that we didn’t keep on doing patents. When we first started the SCI we did 2 years complete US patents. Nobody saw the value of it, say well think of all the journals we could do, so we dropped the patents. Eventually somebody else picked up the patent citation index. That’s a story all on itself.

Index Chemicus started in 1960, but the way that happened was that there was a fellow named Bob Hart. Robert Hart was manager of some information department at Merck, and he was chairman of a PMA committee, Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association committee, and at that time, as they were always are, but particularly at that time the patent office was years behind processing patents, and so they convinced the then patent commissioner that the patent office would agree to use information that they would pay for compiling, in order to process patents in certain classes of chemistry. And at that time the steroid market was just opening up, okay, there were thousands and thousands of new steroid compounds being synthesised, okay. And people like Carl Djerassi became famous for the birth control pill, and all these other drugs. So, they formed a sub-committee of the PMA and they put up the money to form a project in co-operation with the patent office. There was a fellow by the name of Andrews, I believe was his name, the head of this patent office section for investigating machine methods, punch card methods, and there was another guy who was a very active ASIS member, a short fellow by the name of Si Newman, I think his name was, from the patent office. And what they did was we designed, like I had done at Smith Kline for the drug thorazine, for steroids we had again a card that had a direct code that you could search structural groups, it was not a Wiswesser line notation, it was just a straightforward coding system, and the amino group was one code and the hydroxyl group was another code, and it was a very simple-minded kind of coding system, but it was effective in terms of searching for these compounds. And, among other things, we were... we got a contract, Eugene Garfield Associates, to scan the literature and pick up new compounds and create a punch card for each new compound. We were doing this scanning of the literature for the patent office for a couple of years. And it was as a result of that work that I became aware that you didn’t need to do all this stuff that Chemical Abstracts was doing in order to create a molecular formula index, because all we did on the project was to look through a paper, and whenever they do the analysis they do the molecular formula, empirical formula, okay. And so, that was a sign that you had a new compound. You know a child could look for it and find them; you didn’t have to be a chemist in order to know it was a new compound. That was the definition of a new compound, as it were, you know. There were occasional times when you would scan the rest of the paper and you might have found something mentioned which would have been considered and mentioned in the literature book had not been analysed for. So, only the compounds that had been subjected to a molecular formula analysis were listed. So, you might have 20, 30, 40 compounds in a paper, but they were all there, clearly identified. So, that’s how I realised that... why do we have to limit ourselves to steroids, you can do the same thing for any other compounds too. So, at the end of that...  then at the same time there was a fellow named Dr Max Gordon, who was at Smith Kline also, a well known organic chemist, who had gone to... who was a former student of Alan Day at Penn, he had got his degree at Penn, I believe, and Max Gordon was head of a group, he had a local group in the American Chemical Society, who wrote a letter, you know, got together and wrote a letter of protest to Chemical Abstracts and said, you know, we’re all members of the American Chemical Society, why the hell don’t you get yourselves together and put together a current index to the literature, this is costing us a fortune because you are doing it the way you did it 50 years ago. And the CA, of course, the American Chemical Society typically would not pay attention to these guys. And the situation...  then Max, we got together all the people in the various drug companies, and we all used to meet in the ACS meetings, and we formed this group. To make a long story short, they had seen what I had done on the patent project, and I said to them I could produce this index for you for a cost of about $25,000. At first I went to Max Gordon and tried to get Smith Kline to do it just for itself. And Glen Ullyot, who was a super CA fan, said, 'You’re out of your mind, you could never do that for $25,000'. He wouldn’t believe it, even though Glen is a wonderful man, we became good friends. His wife is still, by the way, active in the Chemical Heritage Foundation, I see her from time to time. But he and a lot of other people absolutely refused to believe you could do it. So, I said, 'Okay, Smith Kline, you don’t want to do it, is it okay if I go and offer this to other people?' So, that’s how the Index Chemicus got started. There were 12 companies that initially agreed that they would buy - I forget how many copies of the Index Chemicus, let’s say $5,000 or $10,000 a year, I don’t remember the amount, and that was not enough to cover the cost; it was still a high risk venture for us. We would then be able to sell it to other people who wanted to buy one subscription or whatever, and I forget what it cost in the first year. But that’s how we got started. And by the time we got started it had been converted from a purely molecular formula index into a current awareness service with, with structural diagrams, and that was the key factor as far as organic chemists were concerned, that was the thing that was missing from everything else that was being proposed. And that’s why we cut and paste. We used to go into the journals and literally cut out pages of the journal and paste them down and make the abstracts and so on. So, that’s how it got started. It was later on that we began to get involved with the Wiswesser line notation, which was another step.

Index Chemicus was launched in 1960, okay. The contract for the genetic citation index, the grant was like maybe the same year, '61, '60 or '61, and then it was for a 3-year period that we did that. So, SCI, the '61 SCI was published in, what, late '63. And then we decided, on the basis of that, that we would launch a quarterly service, which started in January of '64. Index Chemicus by then was in its fourth year, and still hadn’t made a profit. It was at some point in the next few years that the four of us of the four horsemen of the apocalypse decided that you’re never going to make any money on this chemical information stuff, and we think you would be better off getting out of the company, and we’ll run it and we’ll make a profit. But, as you know, it took a long, long... they still have, I don’t know, they probably still now make money on it, but nobody ever tells me about it. I’m sure it wasn’t making much money at the end of my tenure on Index Chemicus. But the organic chemists loved it, and probably still do.

It was evolved you know, first it was just titles and lists of compounds, and then later they added diagrams, and then we added the author’s abstracts, and then we added the indexing, because we also add... the most, the critical thing was the updating of the formula indexes, being able to retrieve... because you know what I recognised, found out when I was still at Welch Project, people did not use the name of a compound to find it; they never searched that way. They might sometimes, but the main way people found compounds was to go in by molecular formula, you know, the empirical formula, and then they would see the list of compounds that were isomers of that empirical formula and that was how you found the literature; you didn’t try to name it first, because 50% of the time you wouldn’t think of the right name anyhow. You had to have a special knowledge to be able to name the compounds with the system. So, that’s how I realised that the molecular formula was the key to retrieval rather than the name. So, to this day I think CA still regenerate the structural diagrams, and from there they name them according to the rules they create. The molecular formula is a by-product. And they can do all sorts of things automatically now which couldn’t be done back then. But I always say that’s a good case of one of my least cited papers having the highest economic impact on, on, you know, science. It was the algorithm for translating chemical formulas into... I mean chemical names into formulas, that had... that is the heart of searching chemical compounds these days, but very few people are writing papers about it and citing that algorithm. Which, you know, I not only had my thesis, but I published it as a paper in... well, first it was a brief, I had a brief half-page letter to the editor of Nature about my algorithm, it was called Chemical... Automatic Translation of Chemical Formulas. When I published that paper in Nature, that letter, I was taking a calculated risk that, in order for us to establish priority, that they wouldn’t prevent me from getting my degree. Because technically speaking, in those days, if you had published on it you couldn’t get your doctorate, you couldn’t use it as your dissertation any more. So, I published it but I knew that my dissertation advisor or nobody else would ever read Nature so nothing ever happened. So, that’s the original reference, that paper in Nature. And then the dissertation is the other reference on it. And then, I think, later on I wrote another paper in the journal Chemical about it. But a lot of people forget that even my 1951 paper about SCI, about the citation index, that’s not my most cited paper; the one that came later, in '72, I think it is...
[Q] Oh, you mean the '55 paper?
Yes, the '55 paper is not my most cited. You’d think that. It’s because of the journal evaluation thing and the impact factor that... and of course the book is cited a lot. The thing I find amusing about the book is that it doesn’t... people still cite chapter, chapter... Tibor Brown was desperate, I think, for articles for his new journal in the first year at Scientometrics, so he asked me if he could publish I think chapter 10 of my book as a paper. And that paper gets cited...  it’s one of the most cited papers in Scientometrics. But nobody... they don’t seem to realise that it’s a chapter from the book, even though I think it says it, but it still gets cited separately. You have to count that in. The book is probably cited more than any of my papers, I don't know how many times.

You know, in those days when we started Current Contents we were very, very, very conscious of biochemistry and molecular biology; that was our focus. Anything that was in current... if it was anything at all related to biochemistry or molecular biology they were our target, okay. That was the reason why we did the impact factor based on 2 years, everything was centred around what is the most important in serving that audience. And so I attended the International Congress of Genetics in 1960, in which Irv and I gave...  there was an abstract of our genetics project. It was '60 or '61, I’m not sure. I remember going there, in Schreveningen, you know where that is, have you ever been there, near The Hague? They had a lot of conventions there. I got definitely sick there. And whenever I go to Holland I get this kind of nasal infection of some kind; it’s happened to me every time I’ve gone there, except, I think, when I went to the International Conference for History and Science. Needham, Bob Morton was there, I think, and you were there, right? But in '61 I went to the International Congress of Biochemistry which was attended by 500 Americans, in Moscow, and I vaguely recall I met some of the people from the VINITI there that year, but it seems to me it’s a little  early, because SCI certainly was not in existence as SCI. The genetics citation index was still not very complete in '61. So, it was Current Contents that was being promoted, you know, it was pretty much my life. We used to go to the FASEB meetings in Atlantic City. You know why the FASEB meetings were held in Atlantic City? There were only three places in those days where you could have a convention that was big enough to accommodate FASEB, which had over 20,000 people at a meeting: Atlantic City, Chicago and New York were the only places that were big enough. And I think there were similar circumstances in the American Chemical Society meetings, but now there are much more places were they can have these conventions. I think it’s because of the hotel space; it’s not just the convention hall. So, when we went to the Atlantic City convention we had exhibits; we bought exhibit space for our products. I’m jumping ahead now because I’m thinking of one particular meeting at Atlantic City with FASEB, we had already started the SCI, so it had to be a meeting in '65, let’s say. Well, that year we decided to buy exhibit space at the FASEB meeting. Irv has this brilliant idea that we will promote the SCI by having a booth with a Chinese theme, with all these red posters, and he had written different slogans in Chinese. And the other finishing touch was that we were going to have fortune cookies made up which had little slogans, you know: 'SCI making successful scientists', or something like that. We ordered 5,000, 10,000, I don’t know what the minimum order of fortune cookies we had made up okay, we bring all these things to the convention. And apart from the fact that the earlier days I was there I used to promote Current Contents by going on the boardwalk, I would give out copies to the guys on the boardwalk, they couldn’t stop you from you from doing that, because in the early days I couldn’t afford the booth. So, anyhow, we got this booth, we’re giving out these cookies, people are coming around and we’re giving out samples of Current Contents and the SCI literature. I think it was the second or the third day, it was a 5-day convention, there was a committee group of three or four guys come in and they say, 'We’re from the FASEB exhibits committee, and we have to inform you that you are in violation of exhibitor rules, which are that there are to be no free giveaways'. What are you talking about? 'You are not allowed to give out free cookies'. So, we had to take all those cookies back. We were eating fortune cookies for months. I’ll never forget that. Of course, later on it turns out that giveaways are... now they give you all kinds of stuff.

There was an incredible anti-private enterprise sentiment. I mean, there were... these non-profits had their own way, everything they did, it was always holier than thou attitude that, you know, we can only do things right. That’s why the American Chemical Society never wanted to do everything, because they thought whatever they did, that was the gospel. So it even carried over, that's right... when I was at Oak Ridge I reminded them last week about the fact that the Federation of Abstracting and Indexing Services, when it was set up it was purely for non-profits and the government; you could not be a member if you were... ISI could not be a member; Roy Hill [of McGraw-Hill] couldn’t and so on. That’s why we started, me, Boris Anžlovar, Jeff Norton, Bill Knox and Saul Herner were the five guys that founded the Information Industry Association. And not only that, that IIA has become SIIA, the Software and Information Industry Association. Today, of course, it has changed; ISI is a member of NFAIS and so on. But in the early days, the government would not give any kind of grant to us. If they gave anything it was a contract, they set the terms. And you know how often NSF tried to screw us out of our own data. Because Mort Malin had worked at NSF and he had negotiated some kind of a scholar's deal with them, and they used that, scholars were allowed to use our data for, you know, their own personal research, but they use that as a way to give the information to Francis Narin, give him the contract to do the work. That’s how it all happened, and it took us years to get out of that bind

I went to the biochemistry meeting to promote Current Contents and to talk about the genetics index. Well, they had...  these 500 American chemists were there, including Dr Greenberg from Smith, Kline & French and many other friends of mine who went to that meeting, and the year I went to that meeting, it was '61, the summer, I had my son Stefan with me. I’ll never forget that year because that was the year when we got... when we had travelled to Moscow, when we came... on the way back we went and stopped off in Leningrad and we went to the museum, the Hermitage. The day we were at the Hermitage, Yuri Gagarin and his family were making a tour of the museum, and I’ll never forget it. Can you imagine an American astronaut visiting the Metropolitan Museum of Art the day after he gets off the space shuttle? It was an incredible contrast in culture, right? So... but at the biochemistry meeting we were promoting Current Contents. And my Uncle Sam, that I had mentioned to you, had retired by then, at a fairly early age actually, and he was travelling in a private automobile with a friend of his, they had gone to Poland and they knew I was in Moscow, and they came to Moscow by car. How they managed to do that I do not know, but they did. He was an incredible guy. He stayed at the...  he was staying at the Hotel National, which was where Lenin had stayed during the revolution, and there was a special room that was kept as a kind of museum, but you couldn’t go in and you couldn’t use it. And he tried to book that room. The way he did it, being the drinker that he was, he’s gotten involved in these drinking sessions with these Russians; he would out-drink the Russians, it was just incredible. So, he came over to visit me at the... I was staying at the Hotel Metropole with Stefan. And all these Americans were there, and when you went to Russia in those days the in tourist agency would... you would have to pay for everything in advance and you had to buy coupons which were used for your meals and for your buses, and for whatever you were going to do at the hotel, and you got one for every meal. So, you had a breakfast thing, you had a lunch, you had a dinner, you had a tea; so you get these coupons. Well, Stefan, he was 14 years old, being the kid that he was, he went around, mostly Americans couldn’t eat that many meals a day and use all the coupons, he went around and people were giving him coupons that they hadn’t used. He would just collect them like a kid collects baseball tickets, you know. And he was sitting at the table with us and my uncle came over and he orders a bottle of Russian champagne. So, the waiter, we thought he was going to have to pay him in rubles, you know, because it wasn’t a part of the usual meal, and we were not vodka drinkers so we had never ordered any alcoholic beverages, you know, so the waiter is hanging around, he’s getting a little impatient, and he sees Stefan playing with these coupons, and he walks over to Stefan, instead of waiting for my uncle to give him the rubles, and takes a few of these coupons for the champagne. Then we figured out... that was the realisation that the Russians considered these coupons had a certain value in rubles, so you could buy anything in the hotel with that stuff. So, we said okay, we ordered champagne for the whole room, because he had piled up all these coupons, we used these coupons to buy champagne. There were guys who spoke to me 20 years later who said, 'We’ll never forget when we got the champagne delivered to our table from ISI'. Because remember, ISI was changed, it was named in 1960, '61 is the meeting. So, those are the little things... it was incredible, the stories you could tell. Stefan was amazing, he discovered the flea market on his own, he was a 14-year-old kid. Nobody ever questioned where he went, and so on.

I think I had somehow gotten over to VINITI to meet the people there, Nalimov may have been there, but George Vladutz remembered me from that. He didn’t introduce himself, but he had been there. Later he wrote to me. When he emigrated from Russia, which was a difficult thing for them to do, he wound up... the Jewish people who left Moscow went through Rome, and from Rome he called me or cabled me that he was there and we tried to help him out in some way, and eventually it worked out he came here, he worked for us. But he was the Russian authority on organic notation systems, research in literature and so forth. He remembered my visit in '61, I remember that; so, that’s how we got to know George. And he was a character in himself too. God, he was weird. When Beta Starchild was working here I had people say, 'Do you think George Vladutz is a KGB agent or something like that, you know he’s such a peculiar guy?' Because the way the Russians, if you live in a society like that you become so paranoid, I think, about the way people behave. He was so political, you know, everything he did was manipulative. There’s a certain bureaucratic approach to things he has, and other people I won’t mention that we know that behaved that way. So, anyhow. But I think Nalimov had worked at VINITI at some point. I don’t know the exact sequence because he had been in a gulag for about 15 years as, I think... his family had a history of religious protest and what have you. It’s all, it’s all documented. And his wife is, I think, publishing a translation of his autobiography, or something like that. He then, being a polymath, and being a brilliant statistician and mathematician, quickly caught onto the idea of, you know, the use of measurement in science policy, and that’s how he invented the word 'scientometrics'. As we’ve mentioned many times, it was eventually that document, that book was translated by some government agency, I don’t know whether it was the CIA or whoever, they never put their name on anything, but it was available free as a document, a technical report. It was not cited all that much because it wasn’t being disseminated widely. But because of the east-west connection in Hungary, Tibor Braun picked up on that, and Nalimov was an early member of the board, and you and I were on the board early on, and Derek, and that's how he picked up the word scientometrics, directly taken from the title of the book. So, it’s, it’s just basically it was an appropriate synonym for science of science, which was a very awkward term, I think. That would never fly in English; it’s just too repetitive to say science of science. What the hell does that mean, you know. It’s just the application of measurement to social science policy, science policy studies.

I met him in...  I went to Kiev at one point. You know he died because of the... Chernobyl. He died of cancer. He was out taking a... he was in Kiev, but he was apparently taking a sun bath or something like that, and they had not told anybody about the explosion, the meltdown, and a lot of people died of exposure to radiation that could have protected themselves if they’d known. I never got the full details, but that’s what I found out later, because I don’t know who found out for me or told me, but my friend... have you met Victor Vaskovsky? Do you remember when I went on a tour on the Trans-Siberian railroad with him? Well he was born in Kiev, so he goes back... he had gone back to Kiev. I’m sure he knew about Dobrov. So, that was a tragic outcome of that. He would have been a brilliant contributor; he was smart, Dobrov. He had...
[Q] Did you ever run across Mulchenko?
I don’t know.  That’s the guy who wrote... whose co-author was Nalimov. Did you meet him?
[Q] No.
I don’t know who that person was. I never did meet him.
[Q] He was a politico or something. 
I imagine we could ask Valentina, she probably knows who it is, or Jeanna, his wife. I still have contact with Nalimov’s wife. It was in the...  it wasn’t until, I think, '65 when we went back to Moscow, we had exhibits at the Moscow book fair in order to promote sales in Russia, which didn’t turn out to be all that productive. The Russians had their system of controlled distribution, and they, they were not going to ever buy more than three or four copies of the SCI, come hell or high water. And the guy who made that decision, his name was Aritunov, and we knew him because, I forget what the occasion was that brought the Russian delegation to the US, and they all came to visit ISI, and in fact I had that whole group of Russians came out to my house in Swarthmore, and it was a snowy night, and because of the snow... we couldn’t get a car to take away, we had to march them through the Swarthmore campus to the train station to get them back into Philadelphia. I don’t know if those people knew they had all these Russians trampling all over the place, but Aritunov had been, spoke very good English, and had been a member of the Russian trade delegation during the war. So, he knew America very well. And he controlled, he made the decisions of how many copies of any journal were bought in the entire Soviet Union, scientific stuff. And I remember there was a library subscription at the Lenin Library, at the Moscow, what do they call it, the Moscow Public Library, and a third one at some other place in Moscow. And then later on there was an exception made... the library of the Academy of Sciences, was another one, and then Victor Vaskovsky got, he was secretary of the far eastern branch of the Academy, got some kind of special kind of dispensation to buy the SCI for their far eastern branch. That’s why, when he wrote to us, we put him on the board, the editorial board. And eventually he... he set up this tour. He took me on a tour to give a lecture about the SCI, the story, in Moscow, we went to Novosibirsk, and then we went to all these other places on the Trans-Siberian railroad. It was very fine. That is how I got to meet Pudovkin, he worked at the same place that Viktor did, at the Marine Biology Institute of Vladivostok. And when we got to Vladivostok I actually didn’t go into Vladivostok, because Americans couldn’t enter Vladivostok; you could go to the airport or they had a separate station, about 60 miles north of Vladivostok, I forget the name of it... Nahodka was a special place where all foreign people were taken, and then from Nahodka you could take a boat out of there to Japan. But you could not go into Vladivostok per se. You might... I don’t know if you could fly in there. They once took me to the airport, where I conducted a seminar at the airport actually. Later on... because you know what the reason was, we wouldn’t let the Russians in San Diego, so it was a reciprocal thing. But even Russians couldn’t go to Vladivostok; you had to have a special passport to get there even if you were Russian. It was like a secret city. The Russians are totally paranoid. I mean, everything they do has got to be veiled in secrecy, it’s just incredible. And they are used to it, and it’s amazing to accommodate to that. But it’s a little like the way of being with, having just visited Oak Ridge thinking about the Manhattan Project, can you imagine that town, what it was like. They’ve got a museum where they show some of that stuff now, it’s quite interesting. Amazing what was going on and nobody knew what the hell was going on. Very few people knew they were building a bomb. It’s incredible when you think of how many people worked on it.

We had a lot of friends in Eastern Europe, as you know, because the interesting phenomenon was that... maybe it was a quirk of the censorship system there, while Science and Nature magazine were highly censored, Current Contents was not treated like a normal journal; it was just like a bibliographical tool. Who would have questioned... like you didn’t have to censor Chemical Abstracts, right? All they had to do was copy it. But in the case of Current Contents they apparently ignored the fact that upfront they had these editorials. And so, it became a window on the west for the people in Russia who read, and other countries, especially in Eastern Europe, like Prague and Hungary. Those guys... and whenever I would meet those people I would always say, 'You know, I feel a little strange; do you think I am not behaving morally because I don’t comment on the fact that things aren’t quite the way they should be for East European scientists?' And they say you don’t have to tell us what’s going on, you know, just tell us what is going on in the west, we don’t need to know about what’s going on in Russia or the east. That’s why we were so well known to so many different people, that was, that was the only stuff they could read every week. Now, I was only on certain occasions I’d be conscious of it. That was another reason why I thought it would be interesting. We had the press digest, that was another. We could always pick things out of there of interest to them to give them some kind of a view of the culture. And so, you know, we were very well treated in all these other countries whenever we went there. Many places I never got to, like Prague.
[Q] Do you think they used the data to do science policy studies?
Where?
[Q] In Russia, Eastern Europe.
It’s hard for me to know. I never did specifically ask anyone did the KGB use it, you know. It’s like saying does the CIA use it? How would you know? I can tell you this, it would have been nice if you could have been there when we gave lectures on the mapping of Russian science. When I gave these lectures in Moscow it was clear that we were telling them something about Russian science that they had never heard before. So, if they were using that data they sure weren’t telling their own people about it. So, it was very enlightening for us to point out well you guys are... here’s where your activity is, as far as the western literature is concerned anyhow. I never got the... nobody, I guess, would have ever disputed it, no matter what I said; they wouldn’t have agreed or disagreed. They’d be like... let’s say we’re completely wrong about what we’re saying, are they going to tell us? But nobody ever questioned it. And we identified... I mean, it was pretty accurate. I think it turned out to be a pretty good window on what disciplines they were really involved in. You know, it turned out... all the leading scientists were well known to our leading scientists. And when I went there I was always... this son of the Nobel, Kapitsa, and he knew me and came to different events we had, or lectures they would show up. Ovchinnikov was a leading molecular biologist, he died at a relatively young age later on, and what’s the other guy... there was a guy, Josh Lederberg knew him Spirin, he was famous, a Russian biochemist; all the leading Russian scientists were, were identified by us in one way or another. They may not have shown up as well compared to Americans, because of our bias, but still they were publishing and their work was known, especially the guys in physics. The secret work... we wouldn’t have identified Americans doing secret work either.

I was thinking the other day when I was in Oak Ridge, you know, somebody said Alvin Trivelpiece is coming to the celebration and he is going to attend your talk. I don’t know if you remember him. He was the guy that became executive director of AAAS for about a year at one period; this was about 20 years ago. I met him in 1987. And he was the successor director to Al Weinberg of the Weinberg Report. And so Bonnie Carroll said to me see if you can find out anything interesting to say about Alvin Trivelpiece, so I looked him up and he was the author of a highly-cited paper published in 1959. Well, I referred to it as a 'citation classic', but it was not one which we had invited him to comment on back then. I would have to look at the period of time, and so forth. But anyhow I keep reminding, we published 4,000 commentaries by authors of citation classics, so that meeting in Oak Ridge why... you know, the reason that we stopped doing that was because of the stupidity of them wiping out that editorial group that we had. But in particular the stupidity of wiping out... remember the fellow, I forget his name, we had one guy who was able to get seven commentaries a week published, six or seven.
[Q] Is this Eric [Thursweil]?
Eric who?
[Q] Eric...
He had some sort of a mathematical background, right?
[Q] I think his name was Eric, but I can’t remember.
Well not one person... now, today - I could understand the excuse that well, you had to print it and everything - but today you can do it online. Why doesn’t... why don’t they do, they do these hot papers, why don’t they do these citation classics? Who does it take to... so I’m going to write a note to Keith McGregor. And the reason, I’ll tell you why it comes up: you know we have these 4,000 thing, Meher Mistry put up... scanned those 4,000 classics, we had that work done at our expense in India, I believe, and put them up. They were not perfectly scanned, because the resolution at the time was like 98% and you really need 99 or something like that. And it is publicly accessible, okay. Why couldn’t... why don’t ISI continue to do it? I’ll be glad if we could turn that file over to them and put that. People refer to my website; why don’t they refer to the ISI website?
[Q] That’s a great idea. We should keep doing it. 
So, if you get one person doing it it could take care of maybe even more than six or seven. I’m sure a procedure could be set up where it’s almost like a journal. In other words, ISI could do a journal citation. I once wanted to do a journal Citation Classics, and it’s kind of an autobiographical thing. You wouldn’t have to limit it to one page, as we did.

I think it was the new president of Drexel at the time, was his name Hagerty, they wanted... they asked me if I was interested in becoming dean of the school library information science.  I didn’t know that one.  Yeah. And I said well I might... it turns out he... I said to him, 'Well, that would be a part-time job right?' And he said, 'Oh no, no, basically you’d have to give up your company to do it'. I said, 'When Carl Djerassi was asked to be chairman of the department they didn’t ask him to give up his stock in his company, and I don’t intend to give up my, my work at ISI in order to do this, but it’s a job that I think I could do if you were interested in talking about it as... I wouldn’t consider it a full-time job, but certainly I could handle it'. And he never... it never occurred to him that I might not be interested in just leaving the company. It’s just another job, I guess, to him. But I guess, you know, the teaching part, they never did... during the times when the other, some of the other more conservative deans never asked me to come over there and teach. It’s very strange, I thought. Later on they gave me an honorary degree, but they never thought it was important enough for me to go over there and do any teaching. But there’s some kind of a mindset there, I guess, about that. Now, the people at the Moore school, when... they were interested in getting these government contracts in the early days, and they wanted to know what information retrieval was. There was just a good coincidence that Saul Gorn was an old friend of Sam Lazerow that I had met when he was, when I was still in Baltimore and he was working at the Aberdeen proving grounds, I think. He was a brilliant mathematician and basically the father of programming languages, I think is what they considered him, you know; he was a guru of that sort of thing. And he spoke to Morris Rubinoff at the Moore school, and said, 'Oh gee, why don’t you come over and give this course at our graduate centre for information retrieval?' and that’s how I got to doing the teaching at Penn. I think I mentioned that when I was telling you about the business about the information engineers: it’s okay to teach but it was not okay to practice. That always proved to be an interesting experience.

Brett had picked up on the idea that I had talked about in library school, I wrote a paper about what I called the librarians’ encyclopaedia, and basically what it was was a system for getting reference librarians to co-operate in sharing their FAQs, they call them today, I don’t know what they call them, frequently asked questions. So, the idea was that instead of people constantly looking up the same reference questions over and over again and doing the work, share the information. Well, back then in 1953 or '54 it wasn’t all that easy to share information, and today it is. And so, then Brett came along and wanted to start kind of an online shared reference service, I think it was called, I forget the name of it. I actually invested in it, and before it even got to the point of losing all the money, which it was about to do anyhow, he died suddenly. Brett was, was a partner, I think, with Dick Kollin in starting Management Contents...
Magazine Contents.
Magazine Contents.  I gave him the name. I said what are you doing, he didn’t have the right name, I said what are you doing, it’s the Magazine Index. That’s what they wanted and they got it. Somebody else had given me the same kind of break with Current Contents when we named it, you know. So, anyhow, encyclopedism has always been kind of an interesting project. I wasn’t aware, fully conscious aware, of various people who have written and done research on that: Paul Otlet and La Fontaine. I was just reading about this the other day; somebody has done that sort of research. You know Boyd Rayward, I think he’s one of the people who has done a sort of biographical account of his work. People forget how old some of these ideas are. When I was at Oak Ridge I told them that it was Henri La Fontaine got the Nobel Prize for, peace prize, for his work with the International Institute of Bibliography. He and Otlet developed the system that was supposed to, you know, bring peace and humanity to the world. It was part of the League of Nations. Otlet did not share in that prize, but I think he was recognised when he got the award that he was a contributor. And they were, I guess, early predecessors to the idea that HG Wells had put forth, the world of the encyclopedia, and then all these other people picked up on it. So many people, like the guy in Canada, Goodman, he was an encyclopaedist guy. And then our friend Manfred Kochen, he was, Manfred was a wonderful guy, and he was obsessed with that too, I think, the world encyclopaedia idea. There were so many different people. And then there was the other encyclopaedist work, Neurath - remember that?
Hans Neurath.
Hans Neurath had this idea of the unified encyclopaedia- I forget what they called it.
Index to science or unified encyclopaedia. 
We used to write about some of those things. We cited some of that work long ago. So, all of these things are now coming to fruition with this, Wikipedia. And now I understand the founder of Wikipedia is going off to do, now they want to have more of a peer reviewed kind of Wikipedia because Wikipedia has got so much junk in it that people are upset about the fact that it is not really authenticated. I don’t know how much you’ve... I know that when they first started that thing I put in a couple of paragraphs about citation indexing, and the last time I looked at it I couldn’t recognise what I had written; so many different people had made changes in it, which sort of took away what I thought was the thrust, the important stuff.

When I made the move, when I decided to go with JPT, I did realise what their game plan was going to be. When they came in The Atlas of Science was jus being launched more or less as Research Reviews. Sandy Grimwade was the editor and we were getting these reviews written. And if we had held out for 5 years I think it would have been a very useful, profitable set of review articles that would be issued based on the concept that we'd evolved of identifying the emerging fields and disciplines of science through co-citation analysis. Well, naturally in the first year or two... it wasn’t an instant success, nor was SCI. If they had been here when the SCI started they would have killed it before it got off the ground. So, they killed that product as they then killed The Scientist. In the case of The Scientist they may have made a wise financial decision, but that was an entirely different kind of a story, because of the difficulty we had that time when we had that FBI problem with the guy that planted the...  was it Microsoft stuff where they said?
Word Perfect.
Word Perfect? I didn’t even know how to use this stuff! I probably paid the largest price for Word Perfect than anybody in the world just to get them off our backs. So anyhow, The Atlas of Science, now you hear people talking about it like it’s a natural thing to do, but...  especially when I saw the work that they were doing down at Oak Ridge on it with this huge mapping thing. You ought to go down there and see that sometime, that control, command and control map... unbelievable. That thing... it’s bigger than this wall, huge thing, I don’t suppose the average user is going to be able to afford that, even with HD TV. it’s probably like a 30 foot HD TV screen. But I guess people buy them. They have them outside the tennis matches, they have these huge screens, I don’t know if they are HD, but they have them.

A dynamic Atlas of Science, meaning that it would generate the usual co-citation clustering maps, but you would re-cluster the file based on every week’s accumulation of data, let’s say, and then you would generate a new map every week, and then you could project the image of that map as a moving target so that you could see how new fields were emerging, in a very visual, dynamic way. Whereas now you’ve got a kind of extrapolate visually from one year to the other, you can cluster every year but the changes are significant because of the way in which the clustering occurs, whereas on a, on a week-by-week basis you probably wouldn’t, it would be not as sensitive to the changes, right. So, that’s an experiment that still ought to be done. I think it would be fascinating to see it. Hasn’t the memory changed in such a way that you could do that in such a way?
[Q] Yes. I’m pretty sure we could do it.
Can that be done on a PC with multiple gigabytes of memory?
[Q] Probably.
I think people would love that, and it’s something we've always wanted to do. That’s the kind of visual display we should have had for that thing we had in New York; not this other stuff. They had that exhibit, by the way, down at Oak Ridge at the science museum.
[Q] Very static. 
And your picture is up on the wall, by the way, which I was very proud of. So, that was another interesting project that we didn’t quite complete, and something that needs to still be done, I think; it could be very useful. And I think we ought to get over the hump of people’s resistance to using that sort of thing, you know.

After that we did that DNA, writing the history of DNA with citation data, we always talked about the idea of being able to do that in a kind of automatic, semi-automatic, algorithmic fashion. And about 5e years ago I was talking to Sacha Pudovkin about that project, and I don’t remember the exact sequence, he probably remembers it better than I do, we decided why don’t we... why don’t we now try it because things have changed, we have the computer power and so forth, and so we began to do the programmes for doing that. And as a result of that work...  and then we brought in Vladimir Istomin, his former student from Siberia, who was at the University of...  Washington State University at the time. So, he started to do the programming, you know, all the programming. He was a very clever programmer. That’s how we got into his site, doing these algorithmic historiographic analyses. And the software is now going to be available; I believe next week is the launch, in the next week or two. Because they had done the final touches on, you know, whatever they have to do for a commercial programme. And I think ISI is going to help the marketing of it, so we’ll see where that goes. But basically people are going to have to learn a little about modulating that kind of information because it doesn’t work out as simply as you would like. Some of the things are very straightforward. I mean, you just do a typical search of a subject, like you don’t have to do a complete subject, you just do, let’s say, download 1,000 references from WOS, and you identify right away that sample, the 50 most important papers in the field based on the frequency analysis and so forth, and you get a nice looking little map, depending on how complex the field is. But some of the time you think you’re going to be able to prove a point and it doesn’t work out quite as well because there’s, there’s this variation in the way that people cite the literature that doesn’t always show you the micro links. I think in a macro sense it works perfectly well because the citation frequencies are so large that it doesn’t matter whether you make small mistakes. But if you got something that was linked by one or two references, you know, you could easily lose it. And if you want to display more than 200 nodes at a time it gets to be difficult on that limited screen. That’s why I mentioned that huge screen because, you know, you get a big screen and you can do a lot more with it and see some of the connections that you would otherwise miss. Because whenever I, whenever I go back and try to trace the history of something I learn something new every time I look in the file. And it turns out that what the software now does, in comparison with what it first did, we used to separate what we called inter and outer references, now it just generates one complete citation index for the file right away, and you can separate them, and you can either have both or all, and then you get a timeline right away; there is a time line with a subject. Depending... what happens is you get enough people who have written on a subject collectively they produce a pretty comprehensive history in the field, I mean it’s all there. If these people aren’t going to give you the information, who will? It’s sort of like a given thing, unless you’re going into some obscure subject that nobody’s ever really written about, and in that case you wouldn’t find any references anyhow. So, I think that ought to prove to be of interest to a lot of people when it gets to be more widely used. But I’ve always, I’ve always encountered resistance to this sort of thing by trained historians, you know; they don’t trust that stuff, it’s got to be subjective, the old fashioned way of doing it. You’ve got to read it all first and then you produce the analysis. It’s like when I was at the Welch Medical Library I used to go to the lectures by Oswei Temkin, a very famous historian of medicine who was located there, and one time somebody went to one of his lectures and asked a question which involved... making implicitly... the answer that Temkin gave was, 'The answer to your question is if it was there I would have read it'. Meaning he had read everything ever written on that subject, in any language you could think of, including six or seven languages. That’s not the way it is today. I don’t know if that would have been true if Henry Sigerist or others like him ever meet me, or whatever. Bob Morton was a kind of guy who read a lot, and his recollection was incredible too, memory. Anyhow you would hope that ultimately when all this stuff gets put up on the web and it’s in books and everywhere else is completely visual, we’ll be able to get some very interesting historical analyses, but I guess we’re going to have to modify all the different softwares to take advantage of all the full text that will be available. Because right now we’re dependent on databases like WOS or Scopus or Google or whatever, but when you do the full text you are going to have to have different software written to take advantage of all that stuff, and then do your mapping.  So, there’s a lot more to be done yet.

It will be curious to see how much you really find out when books...  full text of books are available, but maybe less than a lot of people assume you will find out. But it will be interesting, I’m sure. Whether you will ever overcome the objections of people like MacRoberts I don’t know. They always said that...
[Q] You don’t cite your influences. 
He, he just... he must have passed away or something because I never hear anything more about them. They sort of withered away, I don’t know what happened to them. Their field wasn’t scientometrics, their field was really...
[Q] Botany.
Botany. It’s too bad that we don’t know them, probably someone will have written a good obituary if they did die. They were a couple I believe. Did you ever talk to them?
[Q] Never.
He was very strange. But I think they may have gotten somewhere, grants or something; I’m not sure. Anyhow people are... the field is so big now that there are issues that we talked about many years ago, and now people need to... want to re-review. I just got a request to referee a paper which apparently is about the degree to which retractions are reflected in citations. In other words, if people retract their results do the people find... do other people find out about it, to the extent that they stop citing the paper and all about the retraction? And a lot of people don’t even know that WOS does a pretty good job in recording those retractions, you know. I think it was me and Marie McVeigh had to recently publish a rebuttal to something where they weren’t even aware... it was in the Annals of Internal Medicine, and I think they published the letter we wrote pointing out that ISI has been processing retractions as corrections. It’s a question of K coding; instead of calling them erratum, in some of the journals, we index all of those corrections as one code. But they’re all there. They do a pretty good job of that when they find them. But that doesn’t mean that people are going to find them, unless the two are linked, you know. That was the, actually when you think about it, that was the original basis for starting out the SCI, for launching it, when I wrote that paper in '55 I quoted... I think it was Professor Stanley or something like that, from Johns Hopkins, about the fact that people publish errors and they go on being cited, that unwittingly people keep on citing the same errors over and over. Well, that’s because they didn’t have citation indexes to help them. Now, if you have a citation index, unless it’s automatically linked, there’s no guarantee that you’re going to look for those corrections. In the early days you had to teach people that; you couldn’t expect them to find the corrections, although any citation could potentially be thought of as a correction. Why are you citing some earlier work? Hopefully you have improved on it or done something different with it, you know. But if it was a real serious error and it was known, it doesn’t have to be a formal correction, someone just has to say well, so-and-so was wrong or I disagree with it. I remember when... it’s sort of reminded me of when Professor Czapski came to visit, he always reminded us of a paper which he wrote once which put a stop to a field. Everybody had been, you know, citing some earlier work, which it turns out was completely wrong, and he then did this experiment which proved it was wrong, and then presumably citations to that earlier work stopped. But I never checked up on that. A lot of other people might have made the same claim.

They did a study at ASLIB in the UK, back in the ‘60s, and established that, they made an estimate that 25% of researchers reported that... researchers reported that 25% of their work was unwitting duplication. Now, I had to go back and find out what the definition of that was, but this came up last week, in the USA, is that true anymore? To what extent is research unwittingly duplicated today? I don’t know. If you go on the Mertonian principle that all the simultaneous discoveries that go on, it’s some sort of an axiomatic thing. I don’t know to what extent, but I would think that it would be less unwitting duplication today; there might be a lot of deliberate, more deliberate duplication. And the question is, if it’s deliberate, is it moral if they don’t cite what they know already exists? Now, if you’re applying for a patent, then you know that it, previously that you’ve actually violated the law, you know. When you’ve signed your application, you’ve got to, you’re testifying the fact that you think that this is original, and you’ve done your research. But I have always said that it ought to be a matter of... a standard of procedure ought to be that when people publish, or apply, for patents, that they should certify what they have done in the way of verifying that this is an original piece of work, you know. Now, the way things work today, sometimes you could find out if something was reported before easier, by just going up on some bulletin board, if you’re willing to expose your idea. But, you know, you take a chance. If you say, is this an original idea, then somebody else grabs it! Well, it’s tough. But if you’re just trying to establish whether something ever was done before...  I’m always amazed at how quickly people give the answers to, do you? You know, that, like that Chem Info website... it’s amazing how quick I get answers on some of that stuff. And on the other hand, people are always willing to say there’s plenty of examples of research that’s duplicated. When I applied for a patent on HistCite, I got the patent, but when the application was filed in Europe, the same identical application, one of the examiners cited one of my papers against me! I thought that was the ultimate irony. But that was because they didn’t really understand the concept, you know. Not totally without rationale, that, to say, well, you talked about something like that 30 or 40 years ago; that’s not the same thing as saying, actually, solve the problem. Right? So, that was a crazy kind of thing that the... tt was one of the earliest subjects that we... patents were one of the earliest things that we studied in the way of the citation, the value of citation indexing. And back in the early days, I actually published one of my first papers, was published in a journal at the Patent Office Society. And even before that paper, which was about 1956, I think, Arthur Seidel – did you ever meet my friend, Arthur Seidel? – who’s still practising law, by the way, he still goes in. He’s now moved to a retirement community, but he’s still - because his wife was tired of taking care of the house – he still goes into the office. He’s, he’s an incredible guy. He’s a walking encyclopaedia. And, he published a letter in the journal of the Patent Office Society in 1949, on the idea of doing a citator for patents. And, of course, the patent office never did anything about it at that time. But that’s how old the idea is.  And I think that I picked up that letter of his and cited it in my paper later.

Marge Couraine was the librarian of, at Merck, I think it was Merck she worked for. And she had a... gave me access to a collection of 5,000 patents. She and a group of students, I think, coded all this stuff with me so that we could get a large enough sample to prove the point. And in the paper, I had some examples of what you could find by doing a citation-based search versus using a classification system. But the patent office showed that the patents were classified all over the place by individual patent examiners, which... and would have missed various things for a variety of reasons. One of the objections to the use of citations at the time was that some of the examiners cite patents not for technical subject matter reasons, but for legalistic reasons, which brings in, you know, completely irrelevant subject matter. I mean, you could cite patents that have nothing to do with one another, in terms of what’s being invented for some legalistic reason. I don’t know enough about patent law to give you an example, but that was what was part of the problem. But...
[Q] Do, do you think that scientists cite previous papers, in its quasi-legalistic way, to get proper credit to prior authors?
Do inventors cite...?
[Q] No, I mean scientists. I mean, is there an analogy between the way people cite in a patent, the way a scientist would cite in a paper?
I think that they, I’m of the impression, I think it’s verifiable, that the era of biotechnology, that a lot of the biotechnology patents read just like papers. You know, the, the whole flavour of the description of the invention and what went before, and so forth. Essentially, it’s sort of like, it’s almost like a patent application. And in a sense, that’s the way it ought to be. You know, if somebody’s invented something, he’s willing to tell the whole history of the development of that particular field, you know, there are some places where it might not be relevant, but certainly, if it’s something like molecular biology, you want to be able, because they’re going to make... by doing that, I think it permits them to make a very narrow claim. The narrower claim you make, the easier it is to get it patented. And what the patent examiner is really doing, in many cases, I think, is that he’s preventing you from getting such a broad patent, that it prevents anybody else from entering the field, where you have'nt really... not necessarily covered all the fields. So that’s part of the process of how much you disclose, and how well you search the background to the field, you know.
[Q] Do you think... did you see a connection between the, people citing practices and the Mertonian norms of science? Did you, did you?
Yeah, I think that, I mean, I think the success of the Citation Index does not depend on perfect human behaviour. I mean, that’s what MacRoberts would have you believe. Okay? The fact that people don’t cite all the influences, or whatever they don’t cite all of, okay? The collective literature, and especially at the speed of which it moves these days, resolves that problem, I think. Now, there can always be exceptions. But I think, generally speaking, people tend to cite sufficient literature, but there are a lot of people who are just either lazy or ignorant of what’s gone before. I don’t think it’s a question, therefore, of morality, that they deliberately didn’t cite something for whatever reason, or other. It’s not like the case of Jim Watson and Avery-McLeod, right? Where he eventually admitted that he should have cited it, but how often that goes on, I don’t know.
[Q] Well, it could have been a mistake, or just an oversight? 
Well, he, he didn’t make a... they didn’t make a mistake. They, they knew about that work, and as John Maddox said in a subsequent article, somewhere, or interview, that if he had been the editor of Nature at that time, he would not have allowed them to publish it without citing Avery-McLeod.
[Q] So, why do you think they didn’t cite him? Was it some kind of priority issue there, or...? 
Why do I think...? That’s a good question. Yeah, I think that, they were... he doesn’t make too many bones about the fact that they were, you know, out to get, get the, be first. And they weren’t going to let anybody else’s priorities get in their way. Now, I don’t know if that was true for Crick, but it certainly was true for Watson. And he still, to this day, I heard him give this talk, he still claims that, Rosalind Franklin knew nothing about DNA and she pooh-poohed it.

A guy like Josh Lederberg who was a, was an early proponent of open access type of publication, you know, un-refereed publication; so if you want to stake your reputation on publishing junk, without it being refereed, great! It’s your chance, if you’re willing to take that chance, fine. So let the chips fall where they may. But, sooner of later, somebody else is going to call you out. And, that’s one think I have found: if people can find a mistake in your work, they’ll be very happy to point it out. Right? Look at how much, look how much junk was published about all the errors, the alleged errors in the literature, you know, with all that group in Amsterdam taking, you know, and eventually it proved to be 7%, was it, on the...? And what’s the definition of an error? And when I said, what’s... it doesn’t matter how many errors there are, how does it affect retrieval? It’s not how many errors there are, but how does it affect things? So, if somebody misspells your name, did it mean complete loss of the information? And when, in fact, there are ways that we are correcting those kinds of variations, and so on. So the statistics of variations doesn’t prove anything. Do you know the work of this guy, Chaudhry and Simpkins? These fellows that are, I think they’re physicists or electrical engineers, or some computer guys. They’ve published in JASIS recently, a paper about... they claim that errors were being perpetuated, because people were... and what it turned out– I wish I had documented it at the time, I should have been more careful about that... I checked what their statements were, and what they didn’t know, that if you look up a citation in the SCI, that, just because the variant that ISI uses occurs in the list of, let’s say, 50 citations, that’s not the way they occurred in the actual article, because we unify them. So if there’s an error in, in one citation, it doesn’t mean that it’s repeated 50 times. And they make that assumption, that the errors that were repeated were dupes of the authors repeating the error in the, in the actual paper, rather than ISI unifying them under that. So, if you don’t know the intricacies of the way the indexes are put together, you can jump to these false conclusions. So... but I don’t know, since then, I don’t know whether they’ve corrected their work or not, but I see they’re still at it. I just don’t have the time and the energy to go through all the math these guys put up.

Joel Hildebrand was a guy, who was one of the centenarian chemists, he lived over 100. And he... I took freshman chemistry from Joel Hilderbrand, he was the lecturer. Years later, he wrote to me about... he found out about the Citation Index and he wanted to know if I could use citation indexing to prove that the physical chemistry literature had become too mathematical. People have these ideas; they’re looking for some way to, solve, answer to some question. And I never could help him, but he, he had this, he thought maybe it would work that way. But, I think, that in a lot of fields, that happens, that they get so... I don’t know if the word is, obsessed, or carried away with the mathematics that’s behind all these things, that they lose the forest for the trees. And I find so many papers today that I can’t even understand the math at all. You know, it’s just beyond me. Whether that’s good or bad, or not, I don’t know, but that’s not the kind of measurement we were looking for when we first started out. Have you seen that, some of these papers?  Well hopefully someone understands them.  Some of the papers that are appearing in these journals, I don’t know how they can read them.

There are certain discoveries that have a certain kind of simplistic beauty about them. I think that we... the H-index is not really telling you anything that we didn’t already know, by using citation frequencies. It’s just that it’s a more convenient little number for people to use. And it happened because when WOS started to publish the citation frequency ranking for... that made it possible. Before that, it would be... nobody could do H-indexes without a huge effort. It would never even have occurred to them, probably.
[Q] It’s a short cut.
Yeah. So, it wasn’t, you know, we were looking at citation records for people for decades and recording how many were cited above a certain frequency and so forth. But didn’t have this little nice little number. It’s sort of like a new impact factor, right? For authors. And that’s what people like – something quick and dirty they can do and... because now, a lot of people  have pointed out that there’s flaws in some of these H-indexes.
[Q] Well, they don’t have to put together the whole bibliography; they can just verify the first 20 or whatever papers, and that’s it. They don’t have to go through the whole thing. 
Right. So, I, I keep getting feedback from people who expect me to do something, or recommend something about what should or shouldn’t be done with impact factors. It’s like I’m supposed to, maybe what, come out and say they should be banned? Don’t use them for anything. So, you have nothing else to do? I’ve just got another invitation to write a letter, an editorial about impact factors, in a journal called Industrial Health. I’m going to send it to you and Marie to see if you want to write it. You could spend the rest of your life writing, writing articles on impact factors.
[Q] Create a new industry.
So, when I tell these people now, I say, look, if you want an article, go up on my website, pick any article I’ve written and reprint it. Do anything you want, I’m not going to write another one to say the same thing over and over again. But that’s, apparently, that’s the way the thing works. I don’t follow the rule. Hans Selye, he, in order to sell his idea, the general adaptation syndrome, he told me, he said, 'I made no bones about it – I published the same ideas in any journal that would accept the paper from me', and he was successful because it became a very highly-cited and used concept. So that’s the kind of thing you have to do. I mean, getting across a scientific idea is not just having a good idea, but selling it. So, we're a little past, I'm long past the stage of wanting to sell the Citation Index, okay? And that’s what we had the impact factor for. Other people now want to make a, make an industry out of it.

I was just reading, starting to read an article about, have you heard about, it’s in the latest issue of The Scientist, which probably is the largest issue of The Scientist ever published. It’s happened, but... they’re talking about the... communicating science to the public and what succeeds and what doesn’t succeed. And talking about framing science and referring, do you know about some Nobel prize winning work by [Kahneman and] Tversky?  Yeah, yeah  I don’t know anything about that.
[Q] The economist or statistician?
And apparently, if you don’t, you’ve got to frame the issue in terms of the various contexts of the person’s interest, you know. If you talk in the abstract terms, science doesn’t appeal. Science has to compete with too many other competitive media that people are interested in. That’s why they’re not interested in science, because it’s not, not, I’d say, as much fun, as other things might be, you know. So, getting across scientific messages is not an easy thing to do because it takes a little effort to understand science. And, on the other hand, if you can demonstrate economic impact, in a, in a sense, I almost, I didn’t even know that this is, this stuff I’ve been trying to do about demonstrating the economic impact of biomedical research is, is what they’re talking about framing people’s interest in science. Maybe that’s part of the problem with selling information systems, too; you’ve got to demonstrate the context in which it's helpful. And I don’t know whether there’s a, a message there for getting people interested in the field of information, so when you asked me, how did I get interested in information – I don’t know what happened. But as far as making it interesting for the newer generations, then maybe all these quiz shows do it for us. I don’t know. I don’t know, whether you’re good at 20 Questions, or Trivia or Trivial Pursuits, or other things. I don’t know whether that gets people interested in the information at all, because the people that correct one another are always looking for ways to interest people and getting into the field. We were talking about that down in Tennessee. I don’t know what I can tell them. How do you get people interested in, in getting into this field? They’re competing with other things.

I wasn’t successful... at getting my kids interested in science. Maybe it’s a kind of field that, that the only interest they’ve got to discover it for themselves. I mean, the ones that need to discover it, will do it. And the others, may not. Although, there are plenty of people who are scientists who have managed to train their, bring their kids up with a similar interest in, in fact, even in the same specific field. You look at Dan Koshland who just died. He’s got a, a highly qualified son who’s a, also a biochemist Dan... Doug is his son’s name. Interesting homograph, by the way, DE Koshland; one’s Dan, one’s Douglas. But his son only uses a D to differentiate himself, whereas his father always said DE.  And that clearly had nothing to do with money or anything like that – that was just curiosity. He was basically, was a very wealthy... was born into a very wealthy family; Levi Strauss, I think was their... though, of course, science used to be the, the interest of the upper class, you know. Think of all the scientists who came from the, the upper middle class and the, even the ruling class, in England and elsewhere. It’s rather interesting that the early days of some of the, you couldn’t afford to be a scientist if you were poor. So that’s, that’s an interesting part of the history of science in the 17th, 18th Century. Although I don’t know, somebody like Benjamin Franklin wasn’t wealthy, clearly. But he managed to make that transition from being a printer’s apprentice to becoming a, you know, a founder of the American Philosophical Society.

It’s only been a fairly recent thing that even people in the other sciences have begun to recognise that information is important. But National Academy, for example, doesn’t have a section on Information Science, or anything close to it.
[Q] They have a History of Science, don’t they?
Section? In the National Academy?
[Q] They might.  I don’t know.
I think that economists get in there and sociologists, I guess qualify. I don’t think they have too many. Who do you know that’s in National Academy that’s not one of the true, you know, one of the traditional type scientists?
[Q] I think Tom Kuhn was there. 
Was he a member of the National Academy? In what section?
[Q] I don’t know.
That’s the point. But the American Academy, on the other hand, when they elected me, they put me in the Communications section. So, like in AAAS, they have a section team which includes communication, information and so forth. But it was always thrown together with computing in the early days; it’s not, communication and information Science is more than [unclear], because computers invade everything. Although computer science is a perfectly legitimate separate field today. It used to be thought of as Computer and Information Sciences at Penn. CIS is the designation. Even my e-mail address is still at cis.upenn.edu So...
[Q] Did you say your Citation Classics as being a public understanding of science type of...?
Oh! I think that that, I think that those are, many of them, if they’re written well, are extremely... we always try to get them to do that. It wasn’t always easy to get scientists to write a non-technical interpretation of why a paper was highly cited. But when they are written that way, they are very interesting for a wide, any large number of educated people. I think that it could easily be done that way. And if, if you were to pursue it further, given more space, I mean, we were limited to one page; it was less than 500 words, as I recall. It’s very, very difficult to explain all the ramifications of a paper. You know, one of the things that I always had a big beef with the NIH, and it wasn’t until quite recently that they began to try to do something about it. I remember when Varmus was the Head of NIH; he was... I asked him about this at an open meeting of the Research!America why don’t you get scientists to write summaries of their research? Perhaps that would explain to the public the significance of their work. And he insisted that they were doing it already, and I had absolutely no evidence. And the people who were in charge of their communication group, I remember, sort of, paid lip-service to doing it. But I think, Zerhuni has done more about that. He’s tried to get that done, but not any... I haven’t seen this done in any systematic way. I think that just for the sake of convincing congressmen, I mean, if you wouldn’t have that... remember the old, who was the senator who used to give...?
[Q] Proxmire. 
Proxmire Prize, for what did he call it? Without an adequate explanation, people could just take the title of a grant and misinterpret the meaning of it, the significance. But, even the most technical...
[Q] Golden Fleece, was the word. Was that it?
Yeah, Golden Fleece – that was it. Exactly. The most technical subject could be explained in terms of what its relationship is to other things, you know. Now, maybe mapping would help people but, I don’t know that every grant that’s given has that justification. I think that a lot of them are, you know, is somebody going to say, well, I’m doing this just for the curiosity? There ought to be some room for that, if it’s, but it’s interesting to the scientific community to support it. Or, this particular guy is very bright and he should be allowed to do what he wants. Now, that’s not just a grant; that’s like a, what do you call the award – the MacArthur  award – they give people money just because they’re bright – let them do what they want with it. But that’s not what the government’s about; they’re supposed to be supporting research that helps people in one way or another. So, since it is believed that investing in biomedical research produces greater wealth – in quotation marks – in a form of what, longer life, better life, healthier life. You can put a value on that, which recently, a couple of guys that won the, the Research!America Award were, his name was Murphy and the other fellow from Chicago, they placed a value on life, and there’s definitely a very significant return on that research if it produces a longer life, or healthier life and so on. Reduced, I would expect, reduced expenditure for pain – you know - improved pain. So, I think that, so, you know, that’s why I joined, ISI was one of the early members of Research!America, and then later, they dropped out. Now they’re back in Thomson is now a member of, yeah, Thompson is a member of, of Research!America, and The Scientist is a member. And I set up this award when they elected me to the Board, 3 or 4 years ago, and then Mary Woolley, I think does a terrific job as President, but the other is an Economic Impact award, which is now the fifth award that’s going to be given out, the fifth or sixth coming up, in fact, in a week or so. I’m going down there to attend it next week, I think. It’s maybe more, 2 weeks. They usually have that, they’re going to have a luncheon for the award-winners and then the Board meets. So, what I said was, maybe they need to do something like that in the field of information. You get, you know, more interest in this subject, this...  presumably, more information and education leads to better improved economic benefit. And what can they do in the Third World? They say that health and education are the two significant factors in bringing self-sufficiency in the Third World, and not the kind of help that the World Bank and other people have tried to do. They should focus on education and health.

I’ve always encouraged editors and journals that they should try and do something about identifying their, the citation classics in their field. JAMA, you remember when JAMA ran that series of articles, milestone papers, they called them and it turned out to be that many of them, but not all of them, are highly-cited classics. And I think, ISI could do it, and do it not only for highly-cited papers, but highly-cited books too. Very viable, if you think about, what the public library wanted to know which were the most cited books and they aren’t always going to be the ones that would necessarily point to what should be kept. But I can’t imagine that a citation classic book would not be kept on the shelf for quite a while. Apart from determining that something is a classic otherwise, so...  A hot paper, kind of, sounds temporary, doesn’t it? I mean, it should be because it’s hot for a while. How long, does it remain hot forever? A classic, I guess, eventually becomes, a classic is important whether it’s useful anymore; it’s interesting historically, it was a classic, and therefore it’s something you should know about as an important, historical event in science; something that gets cited and is often used, clearly ought to be of interest to a lot of people. I think we have a capacity to read the titles of thousands of classics if we, if we keep at it long enough. That’s why Current Contents, you know, every week, you were getting a list of highly-cited papers. Well, how long does it take you to read that list? It tells you something about what’s going on, of all the things you could read. So, hit... lists of hits, hit lists are very popular, especially in music, so why not science? Something else I think that, that project that I always wanted to encourage in advertising – somebody ought to do more about putting out the equivalent of baseball cards for scientists. You can get card decks of scientists, so you could get kids trading in Nobel Prize winners, I’ll trade you two Joshua Lederbergs for three Albert Einsteins. That ought not to be so difficult to do; I think it would be a great thing to promote the product, some product. It’s the kind of thing that Ellis Rubinstein would probably like to do for the New York Academy of Sciences. He’s, he’s turned out to be quite a promoter for the Academy.

We talked about information Nirvana when, you know, I suppose, everything that’s ever been published, if not everything ever written, will be available electronically, if they get around to it, scanning everything. And then, who knows? But it certainly would seem that the size of the memories, and the cost of the memories, is so incredibly cheap. It’s still going, there’s Mooers' Law, it’s still operating under the Mooers of Intel. There’s not a lot from Calvin Mooers, but I think that probably it’ll happen in the next 20 years, that you’ll be able to have the entire library of Congress at your fingertips. Truly, you know. What you do with it at that point, I don’t know. But I know that I still, you know, am balking at the, I don’t have a, a iPhone, or Blackberry, or whatever it is, and when I’m in my car, I don’t have access to the internet, because I’m too cheap to pay for the, the, they want to charge you what, $40 a month, just to access the internet in your car? You should be able to, right? Because there’s a lot of things that come up and I want to answer a question sometimes, like whether it’s, during a conversation, or during a crossword puzzle, or whatever it is, you get something that comes up, and you say, for God’s sake, why can’t I get access to it without all the difficulty? Some people do it, if you pay for it. If you pay enough, you can get it.

[Q] How are we going to solve the economic issues that surround open access? 
Well, that’s a problem that’s been around for a long time. I think I’ve said, I’ve talked about that before that it was a problem that basically came up when JD Bernal proposed the central repository idea for, you know, reprints. The traditionalists will be opposed to it. Probably some kind of hybrid will eventually evolve, but I see now that Sigma Xi just put out an announcement that they’re, about the idea of a, somebody, the current president, or somebody, wrote to me as a member of Sigma Xi – membership at large – I’m not a member of a Chapter because I didn’t get elected to Sigma Xi as part of a Chapter when I was at school or anything like that. I just, somehow I became a lifetime member of Sigma Xi by just joining as a lifetime member. And now they want to talk about a Sigma Xi journal of multi-disciplinary research, which is a kind of, it would be their brand of, Nature or Science, you know. They all along, missed the boat on things they could have done with their membership; they were relying on the American Scientist – it’s a nice little magazine, but it doesn’t, it doesn’t evoke peer view oohs and aahs, if I can put it that way. Whereas getting your stuff in Science and Nature, it does. Now they want to do this multi-disciplinary journal, and whether they succeed with it or not, I don’t know. But it’s, it’s not necessarily an open access one. Basically, the idea is to have things available free of charge to the public. That’s what they mean by really open access. It’s that people can get at it free. Whether people can get at things free or not, it’s going to happen in the next 10 or 20 years, I don’t know. I cannot easily see the publishing industry ceding multi-billion dollars in profits that they’re making out of, so called, value added, that they do. And open access means you replace that with what, volunteer work? There’s a new word they have, you know, this term they use for things like Wikipedia – there’s a... they call that... there’s a new term for that... it’s called, some kind of authorship, community authorship.
[Q] Collaborative?
Collaborative, or there’s another word. For work like, Wikipedia, I think that they, the arguments for and against it, we talked about that, a thing like Wikipedia and so on. It’s not properly authenticated; so unless you get things that are authenticated, they’re not going to be accepted, and you won’t get them authenticated unless they get people paid for doing the work that’s required. You can’t just get it out of volunteers. I don’t know. It depends. Within the professional society, you get an awful lot done by volunteers, if you think about it.
[Q] They’re going to list the author names, aren’t they?
Are they going to what?
[Q] The authors’ names... that was one of the proposals...
In Wikipedia? Well, yeah, well, I thought in the beginning they were going, doing that, but I could be wrong. I don’t mind having my name put on something if I’ve written it, or proved it, or whatever. But if you get a collaborative authorship - that’s the word – collaborative authorship; it’s when you do an article where everybody approves it one way or another.

The Mertonian philosophy is basically that science is a communal or communist type activity, you know; it’s something you do for the community and you get paid with, your reward is citation. Recognition is the reward, not necessarily true monetary compensation. And there’s people now who are rediscovering Bob’s idea that, that citation is a form of currency. Was he the first one who talked about it that way? What’s your recollection? Citation as a form of currency?
[Q] He, and maybe Warren Hagstrom. 
Hagstrom. Right. There’s some people now who are circulating the idea of citation as a financial reward type of idea. Economic... it’s an economic activity for, you know, the more citations are going to get you, say tenure; it’ll get you a higher salary, when, in reality, in East Europe and other places where they implemented these systems based on citations brought you more salary and so forth, well, that’s an economic reward. I certainly didn’t think of that as a... I believed that, that citation was a, you know, an emotional compensation; you know, you got a great thrill out of having your work cited, or quoted. Nothing wrong with that. I mean, that’s something we, just as long as you don’t go overboard and get obsessive about it. That’s what we want people to see, that kind of recognition without it being, you know, without hurting other people. But, we know about all kinds of abuses that can exist and do exist, but they don’t really account for that much in the way science devolves because lousy ideas eventually just fall by the, don’t get cited. Negatives that don’t get you too far.

Big science is here to stay. Where are you, how’re you going to do things like the Manhattan Project, or NASA, or the Human Genome, or other things like that without big science? It’s, it doesn’t mean that there won’t be room for original ideas that individuals have. It’s hard for me to imagine that stopping. And it’s hard to say whether, how much an individual need to have expensive equipment or other things that permit you to make new, interesting discoveries. I don’t know what that one main fact would be, but I suspect you, you’d be able to, with the access to knowledge being what it’s going to be, whether free, or slightly paid, I can’t imagine it being all that expensive to come up with information, so originality will, will certainly come up.
[Q] The technological infrastructure now is so vastly improved. I mean, the methodologies, the techniques which we see...
To what extent is it going to be – what’s the word I want? – you know, I can use a TV set by turning it on and doing very simple things, but some of the complexities of using some of the stuff on the internet, and, and just using my, my PC, it seems to me, it’s getting to be, in some senses, overwhelming. I mean, I, maybe it’s because I’m, my generation, it’s gone beyond me. But I, I just find there’s so many new twists and turns that you’ve got to learn. But, the only solution for me, as I’ve just said, I call my assistant in and I say, solve this problem for me, I don’t want to have to figure out why this thing is telling me it won’t do it, or it will do it, you know. Or, or ISI’s email system rejects this message and won’t let you do that. I mean, it’s just unbelievable, the things that you’ve got to keep track of, when other people don’t seem to mind that. It’s unbelievable the number of, and then if you change anything, you’re going to go from Windows, what is the number I have on Windows 99 or 98, and I go to Vista, and then you find out you can’t use this, if you’ve gone through the norm. It’s just... all that is maddening. I just find it, because I just don’t want to have to learn all that in order to use it. So they’re going to have to make it, you know, with your car, you don’t have to really learn how the damn computer in the car works, right? But you’ve got to be able to afford to take it somewhere to somebody who can figure it out, you know? But, just... just the number of things that happen on a PC are incredible. So, it’s not surprising that people have made a big business out of, what do they call it? The geeks? There’s a huge success of a new business called The Geek Squad. I know who to call to get help, but if I didn’t know these people, I would have to go to something like that. You know, you’d probably wind up having your computer serviced by some guy in India who’s doing it. As a matter of fact, when we were calling, I went to visit a friend who’s PC got disconnected from... she couldn’t get on her AOL account, and she didn’t know how to deal with it, because her, her computer is hooked up to her telephone line, so in order to get the AOL, her phone’s got to work, okay? Now, if she calls, she can’t use her phone to call AOL, because she can’t get onto AOL. So, I said can’t you find a friend who’s got a cell phone to call AOL? So, when I got down there, and went to visit – this is an old, old friend of mine; her name’s Anne Geary. I don’t know if you’ve heard me talk about her – we got there, we called, we called AOL on the phone, and we were talking to some guy in India for over an hour! And he couldn’t figure out what was wrong, because what was happening is that it turned out that they assume that the modem in the computer is not working, and therefore not linking to AOL. Now, how could you, how can any ordinary person figure that out, you know? There’s nothing on the damn computer that says your modem isn’t working; you’ve got to be pretty technically savvy to figure out what the hell to do. So, they call in The Geek Squad, the guys who... you’re better off... her computer’s 10 years old, so I said, go to the damn, the, not Circuit City, but the place where you buy, I think she got it through some place called Computer... Computer World, or whatever it was. Go down there and get this damn thing, and trade it in; they’ll just junk it. And get yourself another computer; it’ll be cheaper than trying to fix your modem on that one, you know. That’s another subject – we’re living in a throw-away world, right? So, and she’ll probably, for one-fifth of what you paid for the original computer, she’ll probably get a, a 10GB computer now, for less than the $500, something like that. But all that technological stuff is why I can’t, I, I tried to get my sister to come on email. She refuses, she will not try to get, to have her own personal computer that we can email. Even though she worked in an office and knew how to use a PC in the office, but she doesn’t want to have to deal with the problems of email and, and getting her own computer and being helped out. I did manage to get her to accept the answering machine, so when you call her phone. And I also bought her a cellphone. Just gave it to her. Now she uses it. So, that’s what you’ve got to do sometimes to get them information systems, you’ve got to just stuff it down their throats.

We had the very first commercial SCI service; there’s no question about it. And that, most of that, the credit for that should go to Irv Sher. Okay? Now, here’s a system that we came up with in one year of the launch of the SCI. If you go back and look at the - yeah. That paper, we published on ASCA in the American Behavioural Scientist, was the journal. I think that’s what it was called. And the ASCA system was announced in, was ’65 or ’66? It’s a story I always like to tell about the ASCA system. We, Joan Shook – did you know Joan Shook? – she died. She must have died more than 20 years ago. But Joan was our advertising manager and Joan created this advertisement which looked like a Rorschach test, you know? It had this, what it was, was a one page ad in Science magazine. And in the ad, it had this very abstract picture of a guy or a woman or man, I don’t know, a man or a woman, with their eyes closed; you could see this first one. It said, 'Close your eyes. Imagine an information retrieval system designed just for you'. Okay? Then it said, 'Open your eyes. ASCA!' Okay? Now, I was told that this advertisement pulled the greatest number of inquiries in the history of Science magazine. Okay? And we got, I think, if I remember, in those days it was a lot, like 3,000 enquiries, or something like that. So, we sent out, people wrote in and they even entered subscriptions, and we sent out a response to the subscription. And in the, you know, we had the application form for ASCA, you had to fill out your profile. Okay? Well, a certain number of people answered it, but after quite a while, weeks went by, and these people were not sending us their profiles. And Irv and I, we decided, you know, we’ve got to do something about this because, at this rate, the thing is going to collapse. So we decided, we’d take a couple of dozen answers ourselves, the enquiries response, and call these people and see what the heck was going on. Well, it turns out that a substantial number of these people, and these are research scientists, mind you, not, not lay people either, people had literally interpreted that ad meant that they did not have to do a darn thing, that we would know exactly what to send them. They didn’t have to fill out the profile. So I said, 'Irv, we’re going to have to fill out the profiles for them'. It was like turning a motor. When we started the, the SciMate system, we had to teach people how to use a, a whatever they called them those days, a computer, right? They didn’t, they didn’t really even know. So, what we decided to do, which, later on, made a lot of sense, is we looked up, we knew that practically all of the responders were authors of papers, right? Otherwise, why are they using ASCA? Maybe somebody in industrial intelligence department would get it, you know, or marketing product, but generally, they were all authors. We looked up the guys’ most recent papers and we created the profiles based upon their reprints. Both the titles of the papers and the addresses, and what they cited. Okay? And do you know, we created dozens and dozens of these profiles, started sending ASCA to these people, and there were some people who did not... and even though ASCA had, on every weekly ASCA report... remember you had a place where you could change your profile, you could add to it, you could delete – there were people who used that identical profile for ten years. Not one change. And you know, in a certain sense, I can understand it, because I created a profile for myself, that I continued to use, with ASCA, with very few changes, I occasionally work in an additional name, or something, I used it for 35 years. And when ISI asked to discontinue my ASCA report, I was one very unhappy cookie. I mean, they, they put this personal ASCA, they have now, but it doesn’t do anything what the old one did. I mean, there’s so many different things that are missing from it, including just the mere identification of what you’re, what caused the hit, you know. You, you don’t get it. Like, sometimes you do and sometimes you don’t. So, it never, if we had to live off of the ASCA system, we’d have been dead in the water a long time ago. Even though people do use, now the profile system. You can get a profile off of WOS; you can get a profile off of Google; you can get profiles, you know, they call them, in the early days, they called them push-pull systems. Do you remember that? And here we had this service, and that was a terrific service, and I wanted to get, I wanted to give that service to every academic at Penn. Where, 30 years ago, when Dick Degenario was the librarian, I offered that service to them. They absolutely refused to accept it because, first of all, and I said we’ll give you help with doing profiling, they said, they didn’t want to be inundated with requests for photocopies of papers. They didn’t have enough staff to deal with it. So, to this day, I don’t know of any place that really has a universal personal learning service, that they systematically give to every member of staff.

It’s a very interesting phenomenon, but I’m sure there are people who are getting profiles of one kind of another, but it’s nothing like that. So you never know what, people... and yet these are the... when you ask people what they wanted, this is what they said they wanted. But when it came, when push came to shove, basic research scientists don’t know what they want. Because somebody said, 'If I knew what I wanted, I would have made the discovery'. It’s sort of, it’s a kind of an interesting conundrum, where you try and supply them with something that, what would be the ideal document, would solve the problem that they’re working on. Well, who wants that? It’s like the, the, we used to talk about, do scientists really want to do literature searches? Effectively, when I used to, when, we used to talk about it this way, I said to a librarian, go into a library, and a guy is saying, do you think the average scientist comes to you, and he’s happy when you come up with, with papers that anticipate his ideas? He’s looking to you, for you to prove that he, that it’s a novel idea, not, not that it’s unoriginal. And it’s the same thing with a patent. What’s the motivation for getting somebody to do a search for, for prior art, when he knows that if he does this search completely right, he won’t get the patent. Right? The last thing I want to know is that it’s not an idea, an original idea. Same thing when people were doing searches on compounds, you know. They weren’t really all that well-motivated. So, you’ve got a kind of... right? So, you’ve got to force them to do it. That’s, that, that’s part of the dilemma that we face in using information for discovery processes, you know. So... you eventually solve it. But people like Josh Lederberg always pointed out later on that if you’re a mature scientist, eventually you get over that. And his talent would be, and people like him, in framing questions for which you give them partial answers. I mean, I’m interested in what people cite – if they cite my work, it’s about citation and indexing work, or it’s about impact factor, or it’s about this, but it’s not necessarily the answer to some fundamental question I’m trying to investigate. If it turns out to be the case, well, great. You know, if you’re working in a field of genetics, of course, if somebody answers some fundamental question, well, that’s what you give people prizes for. But you don’t get upset by the fact that somebody like Jim Watson, you know, identified the double helix; you go on from there and then you go to the next step, right? So, it’s your attitude, being mature about how you use and await discoveries, you know. There’s plenty more to be discovered after the, after your great idea is proven not to be so original anymore. It’s a good idea, but it isn’t original. That’s... that’s what makes science go around. I see that, I was recently asked about a paper that Tibor Braun has got, somebody submitted a paper, I think, about doing an analysis of words that are sound like, new or novel or creative. Irv Sher and I did a study that, years and years ago, how often people use the word 'new'. Every scientist publishes something; he thinks it’s new and novel. And there was a lot of discussion among editor’s list as to whether they should ever even let people use the word 'novel' in a title. Should you have to say it? If it’s novel, that’s why we’re accepting your paper. But some people... a novel method for doing this, or a new compound for doing that. So, I don’t know how much that’s changed or not, but that, that’s what motivates people in one... that priority of discovery is not just for patents.

People who have tried to give me credit for things that I really... I was never really all that much of a theoretician, although I would have liked to have done more, discovered more, if I can put it that way, laws. And some people, when you talk about Garfield’s Law, or Law of Concentration, that was the, versus Bradford’s Law of Scattering. People like Steve Bensman understand that, the difference, but not too many other people, I think, ever think about that. And then the thing about Garfield’s constant is not a constant.
[Q] It’s a ratio, okay?
But the... it was kind of a useful way of expressing certain ideas, you know. And I, have you looked at that recently? About, it’s still going up, I think. I think it’s a function, the size of the literature; it’s going keep on going up. How often, and what the average number of citations per year, to what... the average cited item is cited, what, two and a half, three times a year? Something like that.
[Q] Two point something. Or maybe it’s three now.
It’s going up, yeah. And so, what else? Do we have any Small's laws? We’ve got... so, what can I say? I think that, I like to think that it’s been useful. And that it will carry on. I think that information, science is an interesting career– information engineering and so on. So are other things... what else can you say? You like to think that you spend your life doing things that help improve the condition of man, you know. There was a... VI Lenin was a one who had this, there was a quotation that used to be used all the time that, you know, when people said, what did you do... 'As long as I live my life so I can say that it helped in the liberation of mankind'. How do you interpret the, the liberation of mankind? It depends on where you are, and how tied up you are. If I was living in Tsarist Russia, I would understand what the liberation of mankind meant. Here, I don’t know what we’re going to be liberated from, but... so, I think that, the challenges will remain and we’ll... will always be, I hope there will, it will always be an interesting and useful question that people will keep on answering. There will never be an end to the number of new questions that can be asked. So the unanswered questions of science. We used to call that TUQOS – remember that? That was the, another one of the projects that we never finished. We were going to do a project which would formulate the TUQOS, the unanswered questions of science, and keep on putting out, like a Guinness’s Book of unanswered questions of science.
