francis.crick

The late Francis Crick, one of Britain's most famous scientists, won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1962.  He is best known for his discovery, jointly with James Watson and Maurice Wilkins, of the double helix structure of DNA, though he also made important contributions in understanding the genetic code and was exploring the basis of consciousness in the years leading up to his death in 2004.

The story was that… that she [Annie Elizabeth Crick] got… got her sister, my aunt, I think it was, to carry me to the top of the house so I would rise to the top. Well, she was given to these little superstitious things so I always thought… always thought this was rather a funny story to illustrate, but it did show quite clearly, that she was ambitious before me when she knew nothing about me at all, except I was a boy, that’s all about the information she had, so… I don’t… I don’t know if she’d done the same if it been a girl!

Well, I think I was first interested in science when I was a boy, and it’s very difficult to remember as far back as that, but as far as I can remember I was interested in science and it wasn’t something that I got from my parents because they didn’t know anything about science but they were very helpful and they gave me a book called The Children’s Encyclopaedia, which I read avidly, and then I’d wanted to do experiments and I, sort of, blew up things in bottles and tried various other things. So it goes… goes back really, I think, to my… the general curiosity I had as a child and my discovery that there was something, you might say, called science which you learnt about… about the world. So, that… that was the origin, I’m quite sure.

I don’t think things necessarily appeared to me mysterious because in a certain sense to a child everything is commonplace and mysterious at the same time. You know, they accept it and yes there's something… it's sort of there and yet it has strange properties, you see. I think what appealed to me was when I… it was… I read that there were explanations at a different level which would explain some of these properties. I didn’t ask myself, you know, what happens when water melts? Or something like that. But I read what happens when water melts and I thought, isn’t that surprising. You can describe it in that particular way.
[Q] Ice?
Yes… I am sorry, when ice melts, I beg your pardon, yes. So… so that… one… if you… if you… if I read about how ice melts I would then look at the phenomenon in nature and think isn’t it interesting you can explain it in that particular way. But I don’t think I posed the question, what happens when one goes from the other? There were just so many things in the world which did this and did that and it was the realisation that they could be explained in a more uniform and simplifying way that I… I found very appealing, as I think most people do if they have… if it isn’t made difficult for them and if it’s something they… certainly… it’s… it helps if it’s something they puzzled about. But, there are, after all, some very surprising things, I mean, who would have thought that light and heat and x-rays and radio waves were simply all electromagnetic radiation of different wave length? They all look… have a totally different character, but, in fact, that… physics tells us that’s not true. It’s just… just that… that some of them are very high frequency and some of them are much lower frequency and they all travel at the speed of light, in a vacuum anyway. So, again, those are the great… some of the great unifying principals of science which are not the ones that you get from ordinary common sense, shall we say. I mean you can know about radio waves and you can know about light without realising there was any connection between the two.

Well it was this encyclopaedia [The Children’s Encyclopaedia]. I think there was a book about… a popular book about scientists, but I don’t think that particularly influenced me, it was the encyclopaedia really, which must have come out in weekly installments. And I think I must have had the bound volumes of them, so that you got a bit every week of myths and science and history and I don’t know what, a little bit of simplified English literature and… and I read most of it, but the bit that really fascinated me was the science and I would say that that was a very strong influence. I mean, it was an influence but, of course, it worked on my natural curiosity. There were lots of other children who could’ve read the same thing and… ignored the science altogether, for example.

Well, I was brought up in a… in a… a non-conformist Christian family. They were what called Congregationalists. And my parents were not specially religious, but they went to church. We didn’t have family prayers, for example. My father at one period was the church secretary, means he paid the church bills and things of that sort. And so I went… was taken along to church. And somewhere… at which age I don’t quite know, but the age… the order of around 12 or thereabouts, as it were, I lost my faith. I didn’t believe in all this stuff. Whether it was reading that [The] Children’s Encyclopaedia, I don’t know. But, of course, when I went away to boarding school, I still had to go to chapel, I think… I think every morning, I’m not sure, and certainly twice… at least twice on Sundays. So, I would, sort of, sit through it. But… so, I was brought up… up with… with a basic knowledge of Christian ideas, rather patchy in some ways, I would say, but surprising some of my friends from time to time by quotations from bits of The Bible. We had them read… I had so much read out to me at one time or another in lessons and at school.

It’s curious in a sense that I don’t think I heard it from my parents, although my father’s father, my paternal grandfather, he knew about it because he… although he was a boot and shoe manufacturer, he was an amateur naturalist and a geologist and he wrote one or two papers, and he even wrote a letter or two to Darwin and so on. So, there’s no doubt that he knew about it all, but it wasn’t something that came down in the family and I… I may have learnt about it in that  encyclopaedia. I still have it, I go back and look. I don’t actually recall, because I think when I was a boy I was more focused on chemistry and physics probably than on biological things, so I may have known about it but not put special… put special emphasis on it. So, I don’t… I don’t know the answer.

I was brought up on the edge of the countryside, you know, growing suburb. It was on the edge of the countryside so I would, sort of, see frogs' eggs in ponds and various things and my first prize I ever got was for collecting wild flowers because all the other kids lived in the town so, of course, they… I had a very unfair advantage. But I don’t know that I was particularly… asked scientific questions, it isn’t very easy to ask scientific questions about… flowers. They’re more a matter of observation, you know, this is different from that and… and so on, rather than the underlying, say, chemistry of the pigments or something of that sort which make the colours. And… I’m not even sure I had a very clear idea when I was a boy as to what made compounds coloured, for example, because I remember after the war going and actually reading up about the different sorts of ways that they… different organic and organic… compounds absorb light and therefore were coloured and… and so on. So, I don’t… I don't think I was specially interested in biology, and when I was at school it was mainly chemistry and physics and I don’t think… although there was some biological teaching going on, it was for the first year medical students. I was at a school where you could take what’s called your first MB [Bachelor of Medicine] in… at… in your last year at school, which my brother did. So, there was some teaching like that going on, but I don’t think there was much emphasis on biology, as such.

I don’t think at school I was… in… I was at… in any way discriminated against scientists because they had a good… had a science block and there was a good scientific tradition. It was Mill Hill School in… North London. I think I was slightly handicapped by being rather young. I… when I… when I went to Mill Hill, when I must have been 14, I went straight into what’s called the fifth form which is two levels up and then after one year I went into the sixth form so I was very much younger than the other people. So I did feel, I won’t say… I didn’t fit in with them as well as I might if they’d all been the same age, but I don’t think I ever felt any hostility against people doing science, as you might have done in some of the older… older English public schools, for example, at that time. I expect it’s changed now.

No, my parents were rather, I think, surprised to find that they had a budding scientist in the family, because they had very little scientific background as far as they were… well, my… my father had to go and… and help run his factory because his father had died… died at a… at a rather young age, and… but they had a, sort of, literary circle and they would read plays and this kind of thing. I never attended those, I always remember going to sleep while all the people were arriving and things of that sort. It was in… it was in Northampton, provincial England. And… and… but they were very… especially… especially my mother, I think, were… were very supportive; they thought, sort of, science was important and they wanted to encourage me so I didn’t have any… they didn’t… they didn’t know what to do in order to help me. I remember at one stage they tried… they asked some physicist they’d met who happened to be visiting the town, it was a friend… what, you know, what should he do? And so on. They didn’t know themselves and they certainly… were very little help in explaining scientific things to me. It was just the opposite. I would usually have to explain things to my mother because she wasn’t very scientific minded.

I don’t think I have a special mind, I think I have a… the sort of mind that most scientists have. They’re curious about the world and then they learn the way of approaching things scientifically, which is not a natural way of… of doing things. It was… I mean it… it was a very… almost a freaky way of doing things. The Chinese never really discovered it, for example, nor did any other civilisation. It started, probably, with the Greeks but it really developed in Europe with Galileo. All the people before that, they don’t sound like real scientists, they sound like people who were groping towards scientists. But Galileo sounds like a real scientist, he… you… his words… he uses the arguments one would use today. He knew how to… he knew how to do experiments and how to argue from experiments, and he know how to… how to erect general principles, as it were, to explain the experiments, not just a… re-description in their own terms, you see. And… I don’t think that’s particularly natural, I think that’s what you have to learn. The curiosity is natural but the method of explanation is not the natural one. Our… our hunter gatherer ancestors didn’t need to… to… the scientific method, they needed rough and ready rules of thumb, so that… so that they could get by and generalise quickly from one instance and make the right decision, you know. It was more important to make the decision than to actually know the exact reasons you were making it. That’s very unscientific, you see. Now, it is true that when you come to the choice of a scientific problem, you have to do that, you have to use a sort of more intuitive approach, you can’t explain exactly why you think this is a good one and that is a bad one. You may give some reasons but it’s not obvious that they are the real reasons. As in many other things of life, the reasons people give are not necessarily the true reasons that are motivating their brain, you might say. But… but nevertheless the actual way that you approach it and the way you try to disprove theories, for example, by doing well designed experiments and doing what are called controls which the ordinary person has no idea really what a control is, it’s an experiment done to rule out some rather simple other… alternative explanation and that’s called a control. You know, the typical one is the man who… who drank gin and… and water, and whiskey and… and water, and brandy and water and every time he got intoxicated, so he decided it must be water. Well, to a scientist that isn’t a joke at all, because he should have done the control and just drunk the water.

Science is very different in this way from what most people think of as… as knowledge and what they know. The thing you know in science is never absolutely right, you can never say that. It’s the best interpretation you have at the time. But some interpretations are so good that it’s probably foolish to doubt them most of the time. So that you don’t doubt them and you… but you have to know what all these previous interpretations of the data are… are, otherwise you… you can’t, as it were, begin thinking in a scientific way about some new problem. So you have to know that, but you have to realise all the time there may be something which you think is a well established fact, or well established theory, which nevertheless isn’t quite right or may have to be looked at in an entirely different way. So, all scientific knowledge is provisional but on the other hand the paradox is it has a much higher degree of certainty than most ordinary knowledge which people think is… is certain but isn’t. So scientists really do live in a quite different intellectual world from the majority of people.
[Q] This isn’t at all generally understood, I don’t think, is it? 
No, I… well I… I mean it… I don’t think so, of course, it’s understood by most scientists but… but for people who are non-scientists, that’s not that there’s a lot of intermediate people who are interested in science and some of them would understand it. A lot of non-scientists don’t think that particular way. Thinking in a scientific way is not necessarily a natural way, it just happens to be a very effective way. It’s not even very effective for one person, it must be groups of people doing it because otherwise you get trapped in your own errors and having other people… that’s why you need a consensus of… of people to agree on something scientifically. To have one person is fallible. I won’t say it’s a group… other… a number of people are infallible but they’re less fallible. The errors tend to average out, shall we say.

Well I didn’t actually learn the thinking at first, you know. At the first… you’re just satisfied by learning about all the strange things in the world and there are two aspects of why the world is strange. One is that it’s strange on the surface, I mean a giraffe is strange the first time you… you see it and… and no doubt the first time you look through a telescope and… and see stars more clearly or see there are more stars, there are lots of things which are just simply observation which are strange. But many people have that experience, you don’t have to be a scientist to… to appreciate all that. The… there’s the other… the other strangeness is the underlying simplicity of much of the world, which is not apparent from the complexity we see. And this is basically because our… our brains have evolved in terms of what our ancestors experienced, on the one hand, and what our own experience was. Our brains have devolved so they only look at a rather narrow part of what constitutes, really, the whole universe; they only look at a certain small range of sizes. They don’t normally look, for example, at things you can only see in a microscope, let alone things which are much smaller. They don’t look, normally, at things which are much bigger. I mean, most people have a pretty vague idea how far the Moon was, they have distances which are really earth distances. But when you look at… at the sizes we know from the very, very tiny things that you get in the interior of the nucleus of the atom now, right up to the size of the universe, you realise we only see a small very window of that. And the same with time. We… we have a time of experience which again we hardly appreciate anything which is shorter than a millisecond, a thousandth of a second. It’s usually in seconds, minutes, days, even… even a hundred years is not… we can grasp, but a thousand years we have to be almost taught. But the… great length of time, for example, of the… of the age of the Earth which is shorter, of course, than the age of the universe, four and a half billion years on the one hand, and the very, very, very short times which… which physicists deals with, with these events usually with very small matter and so on. Again, it’s only a very small window of… of time, so we only see… and our brains have evolved to deal handily with that. Now when you want to understand the world you have to go… you have to go beyond those narrow limits both… up and down, both in space and time and then you find that there’s a uniformity and extraordinary things happening which you’ve no idea of just looking at the world. And it’s… this is the fascination of science really, I think, to uncover so much which is not apparent just in everyday life.

It’s not a natural way of… of looking at the world, although it comes… it can be learnt and it springs from our curiosity and it has lead to this great expansion of our knowledge in space and time. And also we have to think of ordinary things like causality possibly being different and much more subtle things than we’ve touched on so far. Well, for example, we know that space and time are not as distinct as I just implied in the thing; that… that relativity shows, essentially, they're one aspect of space time but you don’t discover that until you get up to velocities which are comparable to the velocity of light, roughly speaking. And… that’s not, again, something which we normally experience in everyday life, except light and we don’t even know how fast that’s moving. I mean, if you ask the average person how light moves, they’ll just say very fast but they really don’t know.
[Q] So fast….
They might know how fast sound moves because they’ve heard a thunder… a clap of… of thunder following the flash but, they have very little idea of… unless they’ve learnt it from books, of how fast light moves.

Well, I think it’s stripped the world of the wonder that people had in the past, but it’s replaced with a new sort of wonder in my view: this wonder of the very small and the very great and the very short and the very long, and all the strange objects and behaviours you find in between. Now one of the reasons I think that people think it’s inhuman, which is the other thing they say, is the most highly developed sciences at the moment are not the ones which are closest to us as people. They’re… they’re physics and chemistry. Chemistry in particular seems to have got a very bad name among people. To say something is chemical is a terrible thing to say, apparently, although they’re made of chemicals. It’s a bizarre… when you think about it. So, when… biology, since the… the introduction of molecular biology has also become a hard science but it still hasn’t got up to the brain and our feelings and our perceptions and things of that sort,and these are still in a half scientific world where we don’t have the insights and the explanations. Consequently, when people learn modern science it appears rather detached from the things that they, as persons, are mainly interested in. But that isn’t… that isn’t going to last. Another one or two hundred years we shall understand people’s behaviours and what it is that makes them think in this way and feel in this sort of way and so on, rather than the rather crude rules of thumb we have at the moment. Because obviously we do have rules of thumb, otherwise we couldn’t interact as social beings, but they’re not necessarily the accurate ones. That… there… it’s just… just the same in physics, there’s a physics… a sort of physics called Aristotelian physics after Aristotle, that’s what the ordinary person believes in physics. If you ask them questions, they… they answer as if it was Aristotle answering; they don’t answer as if it’s Newtonian physics. I mean, people do experiments on this… even with science… science… starting undergraduates often get the things wrong, you see.
[Q] What would be an example of that? 
Well, the answer is, if… if you were flying along and you dropped a heavy bomb from an aeroplane and so on, where would the aeroplane be when the bomb hit the ground? Well, the… the correct answer is… most people think you leave the bomb behind, you see, well you do a little bit because of the friction of the air, but leaving aside the friction of the air, the fact is the bomb hits the ground immediately… underneath the aeroplane, you see. And that would be one of the standard… one of the questions they ask people and there are a lot of a number of similar ones and so on. So, people have rough and ready ways of dealing with people, you know, they think he’s angry, or he believes so and so, or this, that and the other, and that's… you can’t operate in society unless you have those beliefs. It isn’t clear that that’s going to be the way we should talk about it in another 100 years time, we shall still have to explain the behaviour, but we may interpret it in a… in a somewhat different way. Well, just as people in the past, sort of, thought that when there was a plague or something like that, it was a visitation from God and what was wrong was that they… they’d been sinning and they… and they had to pray for forgiveness of their sins so that the plague would go away. They didn’t have the concept of a bacterial infection. Now, the plague doesn’t go away because you think of it a bacterial infection, it’s just the way you look at it and the way that you behave. If you all congregate together in a church to pray that doesn’t necessarily a good thing because it may spread the plague, for example. If you knew about the… it being an infection and so on, then you would probably not do that. So, it does lead to different behaviour. But it doesn’t mean the actual phenomenon disappears because you explain it in a different way.

If we take the case of biology, for example, we don’t know how you build a hand. We know… we… we believe we understood… understand a lot of the principles involved, we don’t think there’s anything deeply mysterious, but it’s a very complicated operation in which we have to unscramble just all the detailed way the molecules interact in order to get the structured shape of a hand, with the bones and the nerves and the right number of fingers, but of course sometimes you get people with an extra finger and so on. We don’t understand developmental biology. That will probably be understood, I would say, within a relatively short time, tens of years and… but the… and the other thing that we particularly don’t understand is the way our brains work. We know an enormous amount about… about bits of our brains and psychological things but they don’t click together in a… in a really… in a picture so that… in such… a good outline picture that we can answer the sort of simple questions you would ask, such as what is memory, and what happens when I… I see a red… red ball or something like that. We can’t really answer those questions yet and the final question we have to… the final broad subject that we have to address in biology is the whole nature of evolution. We think we understand broadly the evolutionary process, but we certainly don’t understand it in detail. How can we understand how you evolve a hand unless you know how you make a hand now, for example? So we have all those things, so it’s an immense amount of biological knowledge, let alone all the practical knowledge which will come out: how to get better crops, better treatment for diseases and so on and so forth.

We think we understand the general principles but we don’t really… understand exactly why this one step and… well, let’s take a case: what was the evolution of language? For… just to take a thumb which is very close to us, and we don’t know when it originated, we don’t know what happened, whether it did it in stages or this, that and the other. So, when you… although it may be all you can say, wave your hands and say it was done by natural selection, that’s the principle involved but what you want you to know is when it happened and what were the steps by which it went, because usually evolution goes in a series of steps. A complex thing doesn’t evolve all in one go, usually. It usually takes one step and then it takes another step and then a further step and… and so on, as far as we can tell. But naturally we only have the rather imperfect or very imperfect historical record for that. We can’t go back in time and look at dinosaurs and so on, we only have very fragmentary information. The more genetic information we have now and the more we understand about development, the easier it will be for us to try and track back in time to see what the various steps were. And some of them go back a very long time. For half time that life has been on the Earth all that was here was bacteria, you know, that… they… they were the only things around for the better part of two billion years and then there was some step which, as it were, multicellular organisms or eukaryotes as they’re called – they’re not quite the same those two – began to evolve and again we would like to know what happened with that step. So, there are many, many steps and, of course, eventually we’d like to know how life originated and there’s work going on in the Salk Institute [for Biological Studies] and other places in the world, of course, on the origin of life but it’s very difficult because we don’t have any… any of the evidence. We’ve got very little… we have no molecular fossils and yet it was clearly in a molecular event, and so we have to try and deduce it from the principles of chemistry and having bright ideas, so there’s many of those things. Now, you could argue the origin of life is so long ago and may have been… may have been a rare event that it may take a very long time to understand that. But the origin of language, I would have thought, was… was much closer and… and there are a lot of things in between.

If you… if we look at… back at the guesses we made in the past when we said something would happen, say within 10 years, even though it was a subject we knew a lot about, sometimes it’s happened in three or four or five years and sometimes it took 15 years or longer, so you only have a very rough idea. When you come further than that, when you come to looking 30 years ahead all… most guesses are not much good and even then a lot of things that you guess are other things which you didn’t guess at all, especially in things you don’t know much about so you can… must take all these statements in a very loose sort of way. But, to answer what… what makes it… well, if you think that you can… you have all the general principles established and you have the techniques and it’s just a matter of collecting a lot of information and putting it together then it… you think it’s going to be much shorter than if it’s the opposite case where you don’t understand the general principles, the techniques are rather clumsy, there’s an awful lot to learn, that’s going to take a much longer time. So it’s… it’s sort of things of that sort which enable one to say this is likely to be soon and that is later but all these things have to be taken… all these remarks have to be taken with a grain of salt.

The techniques in terms of molecular biology are really rather backward and rather slow but that’s because the system’s very difficult, and molecular biologists happen to be very good at developing these techniques so that… so that they… they work on a much faster time scale in… in molecular biology than they do in the so-called neurosciences, that’s… that’s the one thing. The other thing is we don’t have a… we can’t answer… we don’t have a good set of general principles. We know certain things about the way neurons send out signals, we know… and roughly the type of signals they are but we’re very unclear what… how the… how an individual neuron actually collects the signals, decides whether to send out its spike or not, for example. And… when you come to the action of very many neurons together, very many nerve cells, then we don’t understand that at all really. We’re just groping with explanations and feeling our way. We don’t have what you might call the overall… or we don’t know the overall organisation of the brain. We know there’s a bit here and a bit there and a bit there and that they’re connected but we don’t… they’re not very clear exactly what this job does. Now, when you come to different parts of the body that’s not true. We know roughly what the liver does; the liver is the organ of the blood, is the classic way of saying it, we know that, we know many of the operations that go into it. It isn’t the only thing concerned with the blood because the heart pumps the blood, for example. We know all those for the major organs of the… of the body, but when you look at the subdivisions of the brain we really don’t know the answers. We have… we have provisional guesses and probably some of those will be on the right lines, but we don’t have good crisp answers which you think are likely to be fairly stable for some time. And that’s why it’s going to take much longer.

You have this paradox in biology that, although there may be underlying principles, the actual results are often very, very gadgety. I mean it’s like… like an automobile, the basic idea of the internal combustion engine is relatively simple. But if you look at a modern car with all the gadgets for… adjusting when the spark comes, for example, with electronic things raising and lowering the windows and all the other things that you have in your car, you see how… what elaboration comes from a quite simple principle of internal combustion. But in that case we know roughly what everything does because it was designed by us. So, we know that the muffler reduces the sound, for example, and if you suddenly found your car’s making a very loud noise it’s probably because the muffler’s gone, and so on. Well, we have crude knowledge like that, but remember in the case of our brains and our bodies, we didn’t design them. They were evolved, and therefore we have to look at it as something that somebody else designed, what’s sometimes called reverse engineering. It happens in the… in the commercial world when one firm produces a gadget and another firm buys it and tries to take it to pieces and find how it works, that’s called reverse engineering. But, in our case, it’s reverse engineering what you might call a foreign culture as we don’t understand the set of ideas which, as it were… there weren’t even any ideas which produced the brain, we don’t understand the principles which produced the brain, although we’re groping towards them. So, you can see it’s a very complicated and difficult problem.
[Q] And some people, I mean, I don’t say you, but some people that aren’t scientists might still be tempted to give up on that and go for the argument from design, although the… the idea, they believe that….
Well yes, of course, but I don’t think you’ll ever… ever satisfy such people until you can give very convincing and detailed explanations, which at the moment often we have to do a certain amount of hand waving. We can say we can’t see in principle why it hasn’t been done by… by evolution by natural selection, but obviously the more cases we have worked out in detail the more we can counter any argument which says oh, but… it couldn’t have happened that way because. That’s why you need detailed scientific knowledge, as well as the principles, because you need the detailed knowledge to refute counter arguments.

Oh well, that was… the major idea in biology. I mean, no biologist doubts that. The idea… it was [Charles] Darwin and [Alfred Russel] Wallace, remember, actually, but Darwin did… Wallace just wrote an essay and… and Darwin had actually worked on it long before and worked on it much afterwards and helped more put it over. But it should be Darwin and Wallace who had the idea, and the idea is a transparently simple one, once you’ve grasped it. I mean [Thomas Henry] Huxley said, ‘How could I be so stupid not to have thought of it?’ You see, but having the idea isn’t enough. You must show that it actually operates in… actually in the real world.

Well, I never thought of myself as exceptionally gifted because I always… sort of, had to work away to pass exams and do this, that and the other and I certainly wasn’t gifted in things like languages. I’d quite a job getting through school certificate French, I remember, and I was hopeless at Latin because I just couldn’t… I couldn’t bear… bring my mind to focus on it, is what it really came to, I think, because I was really so bad there must have been some instinctive hostility towards it. So, I thought I was, sort of, averagely bright but I’d never thought I was anything very special and I don’t specially think now. I think it’s partly a matter of luck, you know, in some of these things. You hit on an interesting discovery and you get encouraged and you go in a certain way and… and you might well have not had that piece of luck and it might have turned out differently.

Of course we were lucky, we just happened to be in the right place at the right time. But we were thinking in the right sort of way, so it wasn’t just as we… just stumbled on it accidentally as if you were going for a walk and found a buried treasure, a lot of money or something on the ground. I mean, we were looking for something, we weren’t just wandering around aimlessly. But I think, possibly, the other thing is that I’ve been very lucky in the people I’ve been… had as close friends and I think I’ve been influenced by them, and also some of the older people I work… work for. I think I was… I was lucky.

I don’t think, in my case, there was one special person who made a large difference, but I think there were several people who made a considerable difference. For example, when I… in… the war when I went and worked in the Admiralty, I worked with group of people… headed by a man called Massey… Professor Harrie Massey. He seemed to be a very venerable figure to me because he was a full professor, as they say here, and… and he was a fellow of the Royal Society and so on. And I thought he was… it turned out he was 34, I think, at the time, I worked out afterwards, but I, sort of, thought of him as much older. And… it’s interesting that I don’t think I was aware specially of being influenced by him until I heard him give a talk, many years later, at a dinner of the Royal Society. And he gave a… instead of giving a sort of rather frivolous after dinner talk, he gave a quite interesting and serious one. To my astonishment he kept repeating a lot of my ideas. Well, I realised he hadn’t got the ideas from me, I got them from him, you see, but I hadn’t realised I got them from him until I heard him talk that way. So you can have a lot of influence of that sort. I knew I was influenced by him but I didn’t realise quite to what extent. And I was certainly influenced by [William Lawrence] Bragg, the… the younger Bragg, as a crystallographer, and also by Linus Pauling but that was a more indirect influence, not so much a… a personal one, but just following the way he… he did his work. So, there’re a number of influences of that sort but there wasn’t, I think, one person who made an enormous difference, there were several people who made a considerable difference.

It’s very difficult to give advice because we have this, of course, for the young people who come here once a year or so to the Salk [Institute for Biological Studies], because the Salk has a… a thing one… one Saturday, I think, where they have pupils from the local high schools come, selected ones, and they get some talks and shown around labs and what goes on. Well, what one tends to say is rather platitudinous. You say, you shouldn’t go into science unless you’re really deeply interested in it, unless you feel strongly, because the work is very demanding. I mean, you have to work long hours and so on… you don’t… necessarily get paid very well, certainly at the beginning and… and unless you’re really vitally interested in it you… you would… you know, you wouldn’t… you’d want to go on and do something else. So, that’s one of the things that one does. When you come down to more practical things, well you… you…they… you should say well… I think it depends on the individual person and then you have to ask them which bit are they interested in? How mathematical are they? How… do they like using their hands? And things like that. Then you have to go on from what they say to give them some… perhaps some advice in that direction. But really, when it comes to more detailed advice as to about careers, as to which university they should try go to, I wouldn’t be the person best qualified to do that. There are people who do… do give that advice.

That’s a natural part of the scientific career, but, you understand, in order to be accepted as an apprentice, you have to show that you’ve done well at exams and you have to give the impression that you’re, sort of, reasonably hard working and that you’re bright and all those things. And obviously, therefore, if you get taken on with a… a very good school, Harvard, Stanford, Caltech, a number of other ones of that sort, the chances are that you’ll then have… be sufficiently qualified to go… stay there, or, usually in America, go to another place where you’ll work under somebody and that is your apprenticeship. When you get… when you’re working for your doctorate, I mean, the… the so called graduate student in the scientific world is the lowest form of life, really. He’s the one… he is the apprentice. He’s like the apprentice who fills in the little bit… corner of the picture that the master allows him to do while he’s doing the interesting parts, as they did in the Renaissance and things like that, you see. So… so… and then when you’ve got your PhD, then there’s usually another year or two when you’re what’s called a post-doc, a postdoctoral. And that’s a very crucial part of your career because again you have to get… usually go somewhere else, not always, and taken on and… now you’re beginning to choose what you want to do rather than what was suggested, you see. And that’s when you begin to… to practice. Of course, some people are so good that they… they can accelerate that somewhat, but that’s the normal course, so you certainly serve an apprenticeship. It would be very difficult to do scientific research unless you did it with someone because not only a lot of little tricks and things to learn but the whole scientific attitude has be absorbed… and what you do about publication and nowadays what you have to do to want to get money, you see, which doesn’t happen automatically by any means, you have to write grant requests and so on. So, a lot of skills of that sort which you… which you have to learn.

One… one of the… the things, fortunately, I’ve never had to do, is a question of… of raising money because when I… I started after the war there was more money around and anyway it was… it was the business of… more of the people one stage above me, the more senior people to get… get money. Science was… expanding, we were supported by the Medical Research Council and for a number of years money wasn’t a serious limitation. Then, of course, there was a period came when money was very tight, but by that time I was no longer doing experimental work. I didn’t need as much money therefore, on the other hand. And… and then it was easier because by then I got sufficient reputation to get money in much more comfortable ways like having an endowed chair as I… I have here at the Salk Institute [for Biological Studies]. So, I haven’t had that but I’ve seen younger people… this is a very severe stress in that they can sometimes can only get money for three years, they have to… and so they have to choose something that’s going to result… produce results within the next… the three years that's coming and before that’s finished they’ve got to start to write another grant request. Sometimes now it goes for five years or say for seven, so money was more serious. On the other aspects, of learning how to do research, yes, I certainly had to learn that and I didn’t at first, I mean, when I started really on my… more on my own, but I did learn from watching [William Lawrence] Bragg and some of my other colleagues. But I think one of the other things which I haven’t mentioned that you learn is… is when you have fairly close friends and to discuss things with them. And this is really, for most people, there are few people who work best in the solitary way, but for most people and certainly for… for scientists, I wouldn’t like to say for mathematicians, certainly for scientists it… it helps to have one or two close friends with whom you continually talk about things because… and often you can talk an enormous amount. This is what I did with Jim Watson, and this is what I did later with Sydney Brenner and also with this mathematical friend of mine Georg Kreisel, for example; all these ones help you to see how to go about problems and prevent you get… stuck… stuck in a rut, so that it’s really part of your education talking to your contemporaries as well as having the apprenticeship with older people.

Well, it depends, of course, what it is. Of course, it’s rather different if you’re doing experiences because you may have a collaboration where one is an expert at one part of the technique and another at the other and you… you work together in that way, and so on and so… so… that’s one way. But, of course, if you’re… we’re talking about more ideas and things, yes, it is important to be candid and… and not to be afraid of saying some… something silly. And equally when whoever it is you are talking to says something, it’s your obligation to try and show what’s wrong with it as well as appreciating whether it’s a good idea or not, you see. So that… this… but this comes quite naturally to… to people, especially younger people. And, of course, it does help, the tradition that you have especially in America of not showing undue respect for your elders, which is a great handicap in Japanese science, for example, where… where it’s not polite to contradict the senior person.
[Q] But didn’t you expect respect?
I much prefer it when somebody contradicts me as long as it… in a reasonable number of instances they turn out to be right. If somebody contradicts me constantly and was constantly wrong I wouldn’t particularly enjoy that, but I don’t feel I’m getting anywhere in the discussion and this is getting more difficult as you get older because younger people are more reluctant to or don’t think it’s worth their while or things of that sort, so it is more difficult.
[Q] This… I mean, I suppose that your collaboration with Watson is one of the great… [sic] it’s difficult for, perhaps, you to put yourself outside it, but it is one of the great collaborations isn’t it, like Hardy and Littlewood or… or…?
Yes, except it didn’t go on for that… such a long time as Hardy and Littlewood, I think. I mean, it was mainly the two years that Jim was… was there the first time and then a little bit later when he came on a second visit and then when… when he went… when he went back and went… resumed his job at… at Harvard, it isn’t that we didn’t see each other and so on, but there wasn’t the close interchange. It does help very much if… if you’re together in the same place.
[Q] So your collaboration with Sydney Brenner would be more…?
Well, in that case, of course, we were… were sharing an office but of course Sydney was doing experiments a lot of the time so we weren’t in the office, you know, the whole working day together. I was usually in the office.

Well, in general, you know, the experimentalists in biology, I think, occupy the more important place because there are very few areas in biology where you can do what you could call steady theoretical work. Some of the work, the mathematical work in… to do with evolution would be a case where you can… the theorists can make important contributions and some of the present work being done on how nerve cells behave, a single nerve cell with all the things coming in, that can be done. But the other sort… there is another sort of theory which consists of not so much doing computations to test out a particular idea but having, sort of, general ideas, as in the case of DNA. We had the general ideas, we then had to build the structure and show that it actually could be built, but the important thing was having the idea of what we were trying to build and although there is a certain scope for… for people doing that, usually it’s better if that’s combined with doing experiments. And if I were younger I think I would try to do more of this… some sort of experiments in some area of brain research, but the ones that particularly interested me… interest me are very demanding and time consuming and take rather a long apprenticeship, so I don’t do them. So, I think you… what is important really is that different experimentalists should talk to each other and exchange ideas and that is probably as important. After all, the theory of natural selection was an idea, you see, when you think about it, and sometimes ideas come out of the experiments and sometimes the ideas come first and then… and then the experiments are designed round them and course there’s a constant flux to and fro in most cases.
[Q] I mean, is it temperament which takes… or accident which takes a scientist in one direction or another?
Yes, well it’s not so much temperament, it’s also ability. Some people are very good at doing experiments and… doing experiments is not easy because first of all you have to be fairly meticulous and not too sloppy and do things in the right sort of way, and then secondly you have to have a sort of feeling, a sort of green fingers as when it doesn’t work as to what it is that you can make it to work, and that is very difficult to teach and… some people seem to have the ability to do that and some people don’t – they just get bogged down in the details.
[Q] And how about you?
Well, I’m not sure I’m so good at that. I mean the only good experiments I’ve done, when we blundered on, essentially, were doing… I was doing some phage genetics, genetics on bacteria phage. I was doing some bacteria phage genetics and found an odd phenomenon and then did explore it and then I’d… and… but the experiments were relatively easy to do and could be done rapidly and… and you could get results very quickly. And there was something to think about because it turned out you could… it was a formal scheme that you could put them into which wasn’t at all obvious and was novel and was not unimportant. But I don’t think I was particularly good at biochemical experiments although, again, it may be if I’d been apprenticed to somebody who was doing biochemical experiments and had stuck at it, I would have acquired the… the expertise and… and could then could use my intellectual ability together with the experimental know-how.

Before the war I was working on a very dull problem which I didn’t really select myself, which had been selected by my professor. And I was building an apparatus, which is something I’m not particularly good at, but I did it. And I would have had to go back after the war and finish that but for the lucky fortune… lucky chance that the thing was blown up by a… a land mine during the war. So I didn’t have to go back and start all over again and… do it… and… and finish it, I should say. And I didn’t want to go back and start all over again. So, what the war gave me, essentially, was a chance to interact with some good scientists, to make me think about what I wanted to do, and gave me an opportunity at what you might call a second start, where I could really think what I was interested in, which would have been very difficult to do when you were younger because when you’re younger, usually, although you have a certain bias, you… you follow the, sort of, next step in the professional path. You… and… by the time you get to the age that I was of about 30, you’re… you’re getting just well established, and you don’t feel you want to make a change. On the other hand, it’s actually a very good time to make a change, in some ways, but, of course, you have lost those very key years of… of the twenties… in your twenties.

The test I used which I stumbled on was to see what it was I was gossiping to people about. What you’re telling people, what you gossip about is what you’re interested in, and that’s what I found I was telling them about, so I decided that’s what I must be interested in. And exactly how that interest arose isn’t very clear, except that they are two of the things which appeared mysterious unless you answered them, you had to accept a more religious explanation, which I was reluctant to do on general grounds. So, I think that was the key thing that made me choose those two things, those two areas of biology. And some of the areas which one might have gone into, I didn’t want to go and… in… in… work on certain parts of physics, I didn’t think I was good enough as a theorist, and the… some of the experimental parts were getting things for teamwork, and didn’t look so interesting. So, there was no particular appeal in what I did… the little I did know, which wasn’t very much. So, it was very easy to make a change. So, it was a very unusual situation. Very few people find themselves in a situation like that.

The borderlines between the living and the non-living, what we would now call molecular biology, and the action of the brain, in particular what we call consciousness or awareness, because those, at the time, seemed deeply mysterious and didn’t look as if you could easily explain them. They seemed to be… and after some struggling, I decided I’d work on the… on the borderline between the living and the non-living, and essentially that’s been cleaned up, in principle. There’s an enormous amount of work in working out the details and so on, but in principle we now understand that. It’s no longer mysterious. But the other one, which I then took up when I came to California, how the brain works, on the other hand is still very mysterious. And for a long time I didn’t bother about the problem of consciousness. I just wanted to know what was known about the brain and about the… parts of psychology and so on, so I could really begin to see the problem from inside the subject rather than looking at it from outside. And in the last few years I’ve got the… the feeling now is the time we should come to grips with this problem, in the visual system anyway, of how we see things. And I’ve begun to notice that other people are now saying the same thing. I think they might have done anyway, but I expect that Christof Koch and I – he’s the man I’ve mainly worked with – have given them a little push in that direction because it really wasn’t respectable to talk about it before. It was thought to be either a problem which you had to leave to philosophers or one you couldn’t do experiments on and how we would define it and a lot of things which we think are irrelevant. So are… are really… are… what we’ve been hoping to introduce is a new approach to the problems. Of course, we’ll be very much happier if we had not only a new approach, but a solution. But so far, most of the ideas we’ve come up don’t look what I would call specially convincing. Maybe one of them is right; we don’t know yet. So, we have to keep going on working a little harder.

Oh yes, that was certainly true. This business about scientific human beings is extremely odd because all scientists know that other scientists are human beings. Scientists, if I may say so, are much more social creatures than… writers. Writers are somewhat solitary, when you think about it, when you look at their way of life there’s almost a reluctance that they go and mix with their fellow men although they obviously have to do it to get something to write about. But if you walk around one of the labs here or even in the theoretical things you’ll find people in groups all the time and they’re not just sitting there not talking to each other, I mean they may be not talking… they’re not talking all the time but they are interacting. And it’s well known in labs that some people can’t get on and nothing you can do… you just have to keep them in somewhere… somewhere separate because of some reasons of temperament, and for other reasons you find you have a group of people and perhaps two… two or perhaps three of them get on extremely well in a way you wouldn’t necessarily have predicted. So, these social interactions are very important and everybody… I mean, it’s part of… of the scientist's stock in trade to know about the character of other scientists, you see. I mean, how reliable they are and so forth, whether… whether they’re paranoid and all sorts of other qualities, whether they’re a good person to go out and have a drink with in the evening and so on, these are… that’s what you have to know about scientists and that’s why people go to meetings. They go to meetings not only to hear about new scientific results but to get an impression of the personality of the person who’s doing the work. It’s much easier to do that directly than actually reading the papers because the papers don’t… are written in this funny style which almost leaves the personality out and yet the personality is one of the most important things because some people, you learn, are very reliable and some people also… and others are not, and some people have bright ideas and some people always have crazy ideas and things of this type. And you’d be surprised just talking to a person for a few minutes how… easily you can assess all that kind of thing. So, scientists know that other scientists are human enough but the general public has this extraordinary picture and I don’t know where it came from, and I think it comes from over… overhearing scientists talk because they talk in this strange jargon, in this, sort of, inhuman, sort of way and therefore they must be inhuman, that’s what the… the thing is. Actually if you hear two scientists talking they don’t really talk like that much of the time. They may talk it when a layman overhears them but if you go to a… groups of scientists they’re usually quite jolly, I would say. They’re also very dedicated in what they do. Some, for example, are known to be over ambitious and… and some people are known to be rather quiet and retiring and… and so on. It’s… it’s very important to know these things if you work in an… an area, this is why it’s more difficult when you get… get people like, say, a number of Japanese scientists who you haven’t met because you don’t get any impression of their personality from the papers.

Well, molecular biology, as we would call it now, in the late ’40s was in a very confused state. It’s very difficult, especially for young people now, to realise that all the things they take for granted, we didn’t know then. We… we didn’t know what genes were made of, that was one of the main problems. We certainly didn’t know how they replicated. It was almost impossible to see how a gene might be replicated. And we certainly didn’t know how a gene act, although by that time there was evidence to suggest that a gene might be important for coding for a protein… protein. ‘One gene, one enzyme’ was the slogan at the time. There was experimental evidence that suggested that DNA might have some part in the genetic material, produced by… this evidence by [Oswald] Avery, [Colin] MacLeod and [Maclyn] McCarty, but the general feeling was that genes were made of protein because proteins were more sophisticated molecules, and that’s what probably you wanted for a gene. So the thing was in a very confused state, and that of course is partly what Jim [Watson] and I talked about a lot of the time.  Was it… was it DNA? Was it protein? What could the structure of DNA be? And we were aware, of course, of the work going on in King’s College London, the experimental work trying to discover from the fibres of DNA what the structure was. And we followed that reasonably closely, especially as I was friendly with Maurice Wilkins. But nevertheless, it was very strange, and even up to a few days before we first saw the idea of the structure, we were in a state of pretty total confusion. So, it happened very suddenly when Jim got the idea of the base pairing, and we also knew the chains ran in opposite directions – we’d deduced that from Rosalind Franklin’s data – and… and that we could build a model. We had to show that a model could be built, it wasn’t just a bright idea. And once we had a… a model that looked really very convincing, of course, and then we… we told the people in London about it, and they told us where they had got, which was quite a way in that direction, and compared the thing. So it suddenly looked very promising. The whole world suddenly changed. We could see the outline. We could see outlined possible answers to all the questions we’d been asking, although we didn’t know, of course, if the answers were true, and all the details had to be worked out. So that’s why, from that period, we could make shrewd estimates as to what it was that was likely to be discovered and – with the reservations that we didn't get it very accurately – how long it would take. I don’t think any of us thought that it would come out quite so quickly. Certainly we didn’t before the DNA structure. And there is a certain similarity now, if you work on the brain, where it’s in the same confused state that molecular biology was in the pre-DNA period, I would say. But whether that’s a useful analogy, only time will tell.

I had had some more experience and I had worked with… with scientists of some reasonable standing and so the reason I was able to get into the thing was because of personal recommendations of people who had known me during the war, essentially. Basically, [Harrie] Massey for whom I had worked, and he introduced to me to AV Hill who is a Nobel laureate and a physiologist, and he introduced me to the Medical Research Council, and so on. And then eventually after working in a tissue culture lab they set up this unit in the… in the physics lab and again I went and talked to [Max] Perutz and produced a sufficiently favourable impression, so it was all that sort of thing.
[Q] It sounds like a whole series of accidents then that somehow… I mean, were you gravitated by accident, do you think, into this… the right place at the right time issue, which was what you called it?
Well, as it looks like… as we know now, of course, it was that I was… it was an accident but I… I would have likely to have got into something with that degree of motivation and wanting to get into it. It might have been somewhere else, I mean, for all I know it would have been Oxford. Just… it was just that AV Hill was a Cambridge man and said you ought to go to Cambridge, you see. And so I went down and talked to several people in Cambridge and that’s how I got started and then it was an accident that… that the Medical Research Council was setting up Perutz. And it was certainly an accident that Jim Watson came and that there was work going on in King’s [College London] on the experimental side, so it was a whole series of accidents. But if you look at most people’s careers, it is bound to be a series of accidents. I mean, what you have to ask is, what would they have done if this hadn’t happened? Well, it clearly, in the case of the DNA structure, it was a very crucial thing because it gave one a reputation and made it easier to go around and do other things, but I would have expected, nevertheless, one would have done something. I didn’t have very high expectations of doing things. I thought the problem would last me my lifetime. I had no idea it would be solved within 20 years, you see. I was… I mean, it was embarrassing almost, it got to the stage when, instead of this problem lasting for one’s life, one had to look around for another problem. There's plenty to…plenty to do as we… as we already said.

No, curiously enough I don’t remember the first time I met Jim, no. I do remember going home and Odile saying Max - that’s Max Perutz - was around… around here with a young American and you know what, he had no hair, I mean he had a crew cut. It was the first time she’d seen a crew cut. So, that’s the first time Odile must… must’ve… have seen him and I must have seen him very shortly afterwards, but I don’t remember the actual introduction. I don’t see why one should; it would be no notably special thing in first contact. It was only after we’d talked for some days or a week or so, I think, or probably quite soon that we realised how common our interests were and how different our backgrounds were, you see. Because, he didn’t know anything about crystallography by which time I’d known a certain amount – how to solve crystal structures by x-ray diffraction – and I didn’t know much about the phage group which he knew about and all… a lot of the people in America that I had read about, he knew personally. So, we did have different backgrounds, but we had the same interests. We… we both thought that finding the structure of the gene was the key problem whereas my… my two colleagues, Perutz and [John] Kendrew, were merely keen on getting protein structure, they weren’t interested in genes, as such. Of course, they were interested in genes in a general sense, but it wasn’t part of their daily work. Nor was it of mine. It was… it was, you know, done on the side, you might say.

I think he did seem in a hurry. Well, he was young because he was very precocious, he went to the University of Chicago when he was 15, you see, so that’s why he was… he’d got… he’d already got his PhD and had done one year post-doc when he came to us and he was 23. Usually, that’s the stage at which people are… are still working on their PhD. He was a couple of years ahead, roughly speaking, and he was young, but he was obviously very bright. I mean, you know, you could tell that just talking to him straight away. And, the fact that he had a strange manner… we were used to that sort of thing in Cambridge so it didn’t strike you as particularly odd, whereas it probably would strike you as odd… it would strike people as odd in more conventional places.
[Q] I didn’t know… I mean, I didn’t know about his manner.
Well, you know, he speaks… he speaks in a funny way and he is apt to express himself rather… his mind rather freely and a few things like that. These are some of the things you’ve got to get… expect with bright young men in places like Oxford and Cambridge. I mean, there are bright people who are perfectly normal and well adjusted but they don’t always give that impression, I mean, many of them.
[Q] Was it all good fun, I mean, I suppose that’s what I mean? 
Oh, well, yes, it was, except, of course, I had to work for a PhD, remember. That… that was… that was interesting but was less fun, I would say. Yes, talking to Jim was always fun and… and, of course, the protein structure work was interesting too. One shouldn't… shouldn’t play that down but… you must remember when we were interested in DNA we didn’t know the structure was going to turn out to be so significant. In fact, Jim said we… we used to wonder whether it was going to be rather dull and all right, we’ll get the structure, what's it going to tell you? You see. But, fortunately it wasn’t like that.

It’s very difficult to remember what you thought at the time but it so happened that my son was away at a boarding school then, he must have been a… well, I can work out how… how old he was, he would be about 13, 12 perhaps, and so I wrote him a letter saying I thought… think we’ve got something important. So, we did know… we did think it was going to be important but we… there was a reservation… you know, did we really have it right? And when we saw the… the data from the experimentalists in King’s College, London - Rosalind Franklin, Maurice Wilkins, for example - we were more encouraged because it fitted very well with what we’d proposed. So, that was the first step but it then took quite some time. And then, of course, what the idea was the replication mechanism, and the replication mechanism had to be established by quite different types of experiments which… which weren’t done until the late ’50s, so… so it did… it did take some time.

The… we… I did an experiment with… with a lady, Leslie Barnett, and we put the plates in the incubator sometime in the afternoon and we came back in the evening to look at them and we… if the… if the result was what we expected, namely that it was called a triplet code, never mind exactly what that is, then there would be some plaques on one of these plates, you see. And we took out that plate and it got plaques on it, so the first thing we did, make… check we'd got the plates… hadn’t got the plates mixed up by checking all the labels and then I did say to Leslie Barnett, ‘You realise you and I are the only people in the world who know that it’s a triplet code’, so we did actually use that phrase at the time.

It’s not quite solving a great big puzzle in the sense of a jigsaw puzzle because a jigsaw puzzle has got very defined rules, and you merely have to search around for the right bits to go where, and you have certain rather broad principles to guide you. It’s much more… less well defined than that, in that you don’t even know that there’s going to be an answer, for example. And… and you… a lot of the information may be wrong. It’s as if… if you were given bits of several puzzles mixed together without being told they were mixed together. And then you had to have the idea, oh, maybe there’s more than one puzzle here and sort the bits out before you tried to put the bits together. It’s complications of that sort. Or you… you may be misled because somebody had taken out a… a piece and put in a false piece. In other words, you’ve got an observation which was misleading, and you have to… you have to get rid of that. So, it’s more complicated than just solving a puzzle. I’m sure there must be things in ordinary, everyday life which are comparable, but I’d be hard pressed to think of an everyday example.

Well, you’re constantly driven by your curiosity, and you’re constantly frustrated. So it’s a bit of both. I don’t know. It's like… it's like asking an explorer what happens if you’re… exploring a strange bit of the world? There are hardly any bits left now, but in the past, say, exploring a bit of the Amazon jungle. Obviously it’s dangerous, it’s interesting, you don’t know quite what you’re going to discover. It’s a mixture of all those things. It must be, in a certain sense, reasonably pleasurable or you wouldn’t go on with it, you see, I mean, if it was thoroughly distasteful, shall we say. But it’s not unalloyed pleasure because you’re not getting any feedback or getting results, you see. Much easier… the ideal thing to do is if you do experiments in which every few days you get a nice, positive answer. And then you go on and do another one and get a positive answer. Then you get reinforcement all the time, and then you’re really very cheerful and happy. But in this work, certainly… and that’s why it helps if there are two of you because if one of you gets a bit downhearted, the other one is probably, you know, in a more buoyant mood, and carry you along. But it’s not to be recommended for everybody, I can tell you.

We rather took that for granted because it wasn’t so difficult to get things published in those days, and it was published very quickly, you know. They received it, I think, on April 2nd, it was published on April 25th. That’s… that’s hardly more than three weeks, which nowadays they’d probably take much longer than that. And there was… there was… there were, of course, many more papers being submitted to them then. So, because… because our professor, [William Lawrence] Bragg, submitted it, there was no serious doubt or worry about it being published. And we didn’t get a lot of reaction to people, as I recall, as a result of the publication. We didn’t certainly get… I don’t think a lot of people fully understood it when they… when they saw it, or they passed it by. You must remember, we wrote two papers.

You remember we… we wrote two papers, there was the first one on April 25th with the accompanying ones from King’s [College London], but a month later we wrote another paper which was much clearer and more explanatory and spelled out the implications of the structure. That, in my mind, is the much more important paper, although it’s the first one that’s always cited because it was the first. And… but even so, I think a lot of people told me… or a number of people told me afterwards they’d read it and thought it was just another one of these crazy theoretical papers. And it was only, I think, when we went around talking to people about it, some people… attracted to the idea immediately. Other people never got round to liking it. And there was a whole spectrum of people in between. And gradually more and more people found the idea interesting. But it took some years before it was… I don’t know when it was… really began to look as if it was really… everything was in the right lines, but probably not till the early '60s, for example.

Ours wasn’t exactly right, it was only approximately right. Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins had refined it and got it in a better shape. Well, it’s… it isn't… it isn’t that it looks so beautiful, it’s the idea, I think, of the structure and what it does which it… because of its… its simplicity that’s really… really what makes people say it’s beautiful, which I think is the right word. I mean, it was very unexpected that it should be as simple and as striking as that.

I think it gives a reasonable impression but I don’t think it addresses very well how we interacted together because to do that you have to… to make… give it really some life. You have to go into the technical details which you can’t do into a thing like Life Story so you get a rather superficially impression, you know. We just talked a bit here and there but, in fact, it wasn’t like that. It was a lot of detailed arguments, some of which were quite off… off centre which, looking back, we can see were irrelevant and some of which were very elaborate or fairly elaborate, I wouldn’t say very elaborate, fairly elaborate. And it’s… it's that level of discussion that’s important, to get down to the nitty-gritty and argue, you know, well this experiment shows this in this detail or could’ve been a mistake or what could have gone wrong there and should we ignore that and so on. It gets really quite… and it’s very demanding, in other words you usually go on for hours and you wouldn’t go on for hours unless you were very interested in the topic. You can easily exhaust somebody who isn’t interested if you talk to them about it. So, you have to have two people who are both very interested in some topic and then they collaborate very closely, so I don’t think that Life Story got that over so well. It just showed there was a collaboration and we had some mutual interests and there were one or two exchanges but it didn’t show the depth of what we were doing.

That’s greatly exaggerated by the script… scriptwriter, I mean, we did have people coming and… and Jim [Watson] got rather tired of my repetitive enthusiasm describing the structure but… but we… we didn’t know the structure was right, remember. We thought it was probably right but we didn’t know that it was really right and Jim certainly had grave reservations at first. And this scene where we went out to the pub and had this great celebration, that’s totally fictitious, I mean, there was nothing like that. We were… we were, sort of, pleased about it and thought… this looks like a jolly good idea but… jolly good ideas are not always right. It actually took 25 years to show that that idea was really right. I mean, it… of course, it went in… in various stages of being a good idea to being pretty plausible to being fairly probable to being very probable to being almost certainly right, but the… that final stage took 25 years. There were still people who were saying it wasn’t a double helix 20… after 20 years after the structure, putting forward alternative models, which were wrong.

Some… some scientists have put a lot of emphasis on beauty and elegance being important for a theory. They say a theory is right if it has those qualities. That is probably true in very basic problems in physics. It’s less true in most biological problems because they… biological systems are the result of evolution, and they produce very complicated things. Now, the reason that DNA looks… looks so beautiful and simple is that it goes right back to near the origins of life, where things had to be simple. But if you actually look at the actual process of DNA replication, it isn’t at all the way that it… we used to describe as the sort of conceptual way. All sorts of funny things happen. You start off by making a bit of RNA, then you put the DNA on the end, then you cut the RNA out, then you fill it in. All sorts of little things. You have to have… you have to have proteins which will unwind the helix and link it and then join it together again. You get an enormously baroque, complicated apparatus which actually does the job, which you could hardly say was simple and beautiful. It’s doing a lot of subsidiary things. It’s the basic idea which is simple and beautiful. And there will be things like that in biology, but often it means looking into the way these complications that… have been produced by evolution and seeing how all those complications fit together. So, I think there’s nothing corresponding to evolution by natural selection in chemistry and physics as such; it only occurs in biology, and this gives biology a particular different flavour. And it’s this flavour which is very difficult for mathematicians and… and physicists coming into the subject to appreciate because their subjects have a different flavour.

Well, I wouldn’t put mathematics as a science. I would… I would put that as separate. I think there is a continuity between… between physics and chemistry and biology in that sort of way. Mathematics can apply to all of them, but mathematics is a discipline in its own… its own right. You can develop mathematics which has nothing necessarily to do with the everyday world, although when they do produce these unusual forms of mathematics it’s rather surprising how often they tend to be applied to things in the real world. But the criteria difference, you don't have to do… in the ordinary way, you don’t have to do experiments to show that a mathematical proof is right. Nowadays it gets complicated because they have… the proofs are so elaborate they have to do part of them on computers so people like to think of them as experimental. And some systems can’t… non-linear dynamic systems are not easy to attack with mathematical ideas, so sometimes you have to simulate them. But leaving those complications aside, mathematics, I think, should be put slightly on one side. The other scientists… sciences have a lot in common except you have this different character in physics, and in chemistry and biology because of the… of the nature of the problems that… of the material involved and the nature of the problems that have to be solved.

Well, I started as a physicist. But remember, I’m not really a physicist anymore because physics in… in these… in those 50 or more years has changed enormously, and the physics I learned was very old-fashioned physics and is very out-of-date now. So, it’s only that I started off with a background in physics. And so I don’t think I should be thought of as a physicist in those terms. And I had to learn, of course, about biology and learn to think in a different sort of way.

You have to simply look at the world in a different sort of way. That’s what I think is meant by being… being born again when you look at a… a subject. And it’s in the way I’ve just described. You have to realise it’s the end product of… of natural… of… of an evolutionary process largely driven by natural selection, and this will produce which one might say molecular gadgetry of a quite different description to the things that you get in stars or in… in geology or any of the other branches of applied physics and chemistry.

I think that physicists and computer scientists are interested in the brain. Everybody is interested in the brain. So, they naturally like to apply the idea they have to what they’ve learned about the brain. This, I would say, has had mixed success. Because a, sort of, caricature of what can happen… a physicist works in a certain area, and he has a certain expertise, he learns something rather superficially about the brain. He thinks, oh, my expertise or my way of thinking about it will be useful for the brain and he produces a theory without having any close knowledge of really what the problems are in the brain or even, it seems to me in many cases, not really caring how you would test the idea experimentally on the brain. They just like the idea because it’s such a pretty idea. I’m not… obviously, in some cases that will be useful because it will introduce new ideas from outside. But it does seem as if it introduces many… too many ideas which are unlikely to be right. So there’s an awful lot of noise among the good stuff. And I would say the same thing is… has been happening with people working in artificial intelligence using computers because it’s doubtful if the actual way that you program a von Neumann computer, the sort of thing you have in a personal computer at home, that type of computer, is really the sort of thing that goes on in the brain. And the new type of computing, the parallel distributive processing, which is more brain-like, is… ideas based on that are likely to be more and more useful, but you can’t be sure. In a subject like this, since we don’t know the answers, we can’t say in advance which… for sure, which is going to be useful or not. We can only just have our prejudices. When we know what we think are the right sort of answers, we can look back, of course, and say, you know, that approach was a waste of time. But at the moment, it must… it can only be somebody’s individual opinion.

Well, you must realise the brain is much more complicated than the… the basic molecular biology, although, naturally, when you explore all of the ramifications of it, that gets complicated too. But the brain is inherently more complicated than what… what I was dealing with before and has got very… more ways of approaching it because not only do you have to know about the molecules involved and the nerve cells involved and the way all the nerve cells are connected together and the sort of way they fire and so on, but you’ve also got to know about the relevant bits of psychology and even have some knowledge of what the philosophical points are because otherwise you may be thinking about things in the wrong way. So… so, it covers a very much wider range of disciplines on the one hand, and everything is much more complicated. But what is even worse is, everything is much more in a fog because in almost all these things, we don’t have a… a foundation set of ideas in which we can fit the observations we have and generate new ideas. We haven’t got that yet.

Well, there are various things people want to know like the general questions, what is the nature of memory? We already know now there are several types of memory. The… the… one way of expressing it is that the memory of knowing what you had for breakfast is not the same type of memory as the memory of what the word ‘breakfast’ means, or the third type, the memory of how you eat your breakfast. Those are different sorts of memories. We even have the beginning of understanding some of the molecular… some of the key molecules underlying one of those sorts of memories, one of the so-called glutamate receptors and so on. That’s one sort of problem. And perhaps the key problem is how… is what is called consciousness, and in particular, to take a simple example, how it is we see things, how you’re aware of the visible world outside. Why is it you just don’t behave as an automaton with no picture of the world in your head, as it were, but just simply behave? As you can have… automata in… in factories nowadays making motorcars and things of that sort. They sense what the thing is in and then they make the right operations and so on, but there’s no evidence that they've got any awareness. So that again is one of the… one of the key problems. And… and then the more elaborate forms of awareness like self-awareness, or even perhaps people would say the simpler ones like feeling pain, for example. So those are the major, major problems – how you see and hear and feel – and they’re all extremely complicated. We know enough to know that the apparatus is very complicated. What we don’t know is if there are simpler… simple ways of looking at the way it’s all organised. That, we haven’t yet discovered.

The key question is what philosophers would call ‘qualia’: the redness of red. What explains the redness of red? Or, in other words, what explains the fact that you are aware of things? It’s not easy to define these terms; in fact it’s better not to. But you all know… everybody knows roughly what they mean to be conscious because they know where they’re in a dream… in a deep, dreamless sleep, they’re not conscious or when they’re under an anaesthetic, they’re not conscious. They… they actually know that there are these… they can be in such states where they’re not conscious, and the real question is what’s the difference in the brain when you’re under an anaesthetic, a deep anaesthetic for example, on the one hand, and when you’re awake? Because it isn’t true the brain just packs up. All sorts of things go on and if you had your eyes taped open and… and signals…sent into your eyes, then part of your brain would react just as it would if you were awake. But there must be differences and we don’t know what those differences are. And it turns out, not many people in the past have been very interested in finding out because they found so… so many interesting things working on anaesthetised animals that for a long time they didn’t even work on alert animals. Now they work on alert animals, but they’re not necessarily trying to find the difference between the anaesthetised ones and the alert ones. And that’s one of the problems which certain people say will never be explained by science… explained… it's something outside science is required to explain that. The only way we could refute that would be to explain it by science and produce such a… a convincing explanation backed up by so much experimental data that we could say the other hypothesis, that there has to be something extra, is not needed. That’s, of course, the furthest we could go. We’re a long way off that yet. How long, I wouldn’t like to say.

[Q] The something extra, this is… I mean, this is… 
Well, that’s what the ordinary person believes.
[Q] What?
Well, he believes that there’s some soul or other which, when he dies, as it were, goes off somewhere else, and while he’s alive does the actual seeing and feeling and all the rest of it. That’s the common view of mankind, in one sort or another, and… and there are many people who think that science will never be able to explain that. Now there may be aspects of it which science can’t be… explain because it’s a very private thing. But that doesn’t mean to say that you couldn’t… explain the principles on which it’s happening and explain why it’s private, for example. But… but that we can’t do as yet. A lot… most people working on the brain believe, indeed, in what I’ve been saying, that there is probably no necessity. Not everybody. Sir John Eccles is an exception; he’s what is called a dualist. He believes that the soul interacts with the brain in some way, and without that you couldn’t see or feel or do anything else. Or move, for that matter. You wouldn’t have free will, for example, whatever that means.

Well I’m interested in… in how we see things. When I say this to people over the dinner table or whatever it may be, there’s usually a pause because they can’t think what it is that one wants to know, and the reason that they feel that way is that when they see, it’s simply so effortless, they open their eyes, they look around, they see the world, as we say, in glorious technicolour and what is the problem? Well, it turns out when you look into the processes that have to go on in the brain to enable you to see, they are much more complicated. So, people’s idea about what constitutes seeing is totally over-simplified, one would almost say wrong, I think. Now, the way you can show this is, is you show various visual illusions which makes them realise that seeing isn’t a simple process and that seeing is a constructive process; your brain has to construct from the information coming into your two eyes, this just two-dimensional projection of some aspects of the visual world onto your eyes, it has to construct this three-dimensional picture that you have in some sense in your brain, although people argue what sense it may be, how do you construct that? And that’s a complicated process which you can’t easily do in a machine. People have been trying to make machines to do machine vision and the more they try to do it, the more difficult they find the problems are. When you look inside the brain you don’t find a simple bit of apparatus – seeing is not done just in your eyes. The… the signals go through a relay station to the back of your head and then through a series of… of stages going forward and those are very complicated, much more complicated than we even realised 20 or 30 years ago. And many different parts of the brain do different things. One bit of the brain appears to be mainly interested in colour and shape, another bit of the brain appears to be interested in movement. And you know this is the case because you can have people with brain damage, for example, who only see in black and white, they can’t see colour and there's one person with… in Germany, a patient with brain damage, who can’t see movement. She can see things all right, it’s like seeing the hour hand of a clock, but she doesn’t see it move. So it’s very threatening if she goes out into the street because she can’t see the cars moving. When she looks again, the car’s in a different place. When she pours a cup of tea, all she sees is a gleaming thing of liquid, she doesn’t see the… the tea rising in the cup and often it will spill over before she realises it’s full. Now, that isn’t the way people think about the way they see. They think they just see like that. But it isn’t like that. So we have to… you have to understand the problem of seeing. You have to understand, first of all, all the things that visual psychologists have shown, the very funny phenomena they’ve uncovered on the one hand, then you have to understand essentially what is known about the brain, usually about the monkey’s brain because we can’t do these… many of these experiments on people. Monkey’s visual system is probably fairly similar to ours, and then you try and put these together in some way to ask what constitutes seeing. But it turns out that if you put the animal under an anaesthetic, much of the reaction that goes on its brain is somewhat similar to when it's awake, so the actual awareness of seeing must depend in some way on some difference between when the animal is awake and when it’s under this anaesthetic and we don’t know what that difference is; whether it’s different cells firing or cells firing in different ways or some combination of those two, whether it involves some very special form of short-term memory or whatever. And how you get an integrated picture from all these neurons… all these nerve cells firing away is also a mystery. So those are the things we want to understand.

The monkeys after all, in the wild, in their natural state don’t lead exactly pleasant lives. I mean, they… they at least have freedom, but they don’t necessarily get enough to eat, they maybe have short lives due… because of predators, which is a normal thing, or they may suffer from diseases which are not treated. Animals in laboratories are now much better treated partly due to the Animal Rights Movement and so on. They are properly fed, if they have some infection it’s dealt with and… and they… great lengths… people go to great lengths just in these experiments to see that the monkeys don’t suffer pain. It’s very fortunate that when, as we know from human beings, if you put an electrode… you take off the skull, which is a painful business, but once you’ve taken off the skull, if you put an electrode into the brain to pick up the signals, there are no pain receptors in the brain or no… you don’t feel it at all, you don’t know the electrode is there, so presumably we… we think it appears to be the same for a monkey. The monkey… the operations which cause pain are done under an anaesthetic and even if you’re working on an alert monkey… and the monkey actually is glad to do the experiments because he gets a bit bored in his cage even if he’s given television. He gets a bit bored in his cage and they quite like to work away, in fact they get impatient, they do get rewarded with a bit of orange juice… they get impatient if somebody comes in the room and they’ll rattle the key because they want to get on with the experiment and get a bit more orange juice, so I don’t think the monkey has such a bad time and I think the knowledge is important and it is therefore worth doing those things.
[Q] But isn’t it… well, isn’t it… it is intellectual curiosity which drives you?
No, well it is in my case but remember that… that all this work on the brain will have medical implications so that if you want to make a really strong defence you have to say that what we find out will be important in medical terms and for understanding various illnesses like schizophrenia or depression, for example, will probably be illuminated the more we discover about the brain.

Of course there’s an enormous amount of knowledge but only a fraction of what we need to know, and it isn’t necessarily the key fraction and, alas, we don’t know what the key fraction is so… so we don’t know exactly what to look for. We just… it’s like going into a jungle, you may have got through an enormous amount of jungle and seen an immense amount of… of plants and animals and rivers but you may not have found what you’re looking for, and you don’t even know it’s… even… some people will say it isn’t there. I mean, even if it is there you don’t know how far away you are from getting it. So that's the sort of analogy you would have to make. It isn’t as if this… in fact, again, I've… I've put this in this book I’ve just written that an enormous amount is known about both the psychology of seeing, about what is known about the brains of humans and animals because you can now do scans on humans when they’re doing certain tasks, certain visual tasks and other tasks and so on. In spite of that, they almost never tell the students that we don’t understand how you see anything, which is bizarre in a way.

There is an enormous amount going on in molecular biology because just about the time that I came to California and switched to neuroscience the techniques of recombinant DNA came in and molecular biology got a second wind, you might say, and has really taken off. And it's not only that they’ve discovered certain basic things in… in the simple models that we had but, of course, they’re applying it to many… so many other things like sequencing the whole human genome and finding out eventually what all our genes are and what they do and how they… how they all in… and after that how everything interacts together and all the controls work and so on. So, there’s… certainly plenty… plenty going on there and, moreover, it will… the techniques of molecular biology and the things we’ve just mentioned will help us in… attacking the brain because we need new techniques in order to answer the questions. People are always puzzled in science as how you know the answers. One man, I believe, at a high table in Oxford or Cambridge who overhead two scientists talking said, ‘How on earth can you know about these things if you can't see them?’ Because they were talking about atoms or… fundamental particles or something like that. Well, that’s the nature of science. That you have to make a lot of observations and then make hypotheses and then put them together. You don’t actually have to see things with your own eyes, not that seeing through your own eyes can’t be misleading too but...

Well, there's one which… which one of my editors found particularly surprising in which you have what is called a Necker Cube which is a drawing of a cube, just 12 lines showing the edges of the cube, on a piece of paper so you see 12 lines and you look at it and you see a cube not straight head on but slightly to one side like this, and if you go on looking… looking at it for some part of a second… some part of a minute or something or other, it will flick over and you’ll see a different view of the cube, and then if you keep on looking it’ll flick back to the original one. But there’s nothing actually changing. What’s coming into your eyes is… there’s nothing on the page that’s changing, what’s changing is your interpretation of the three-dimensional picture that you’re seeing which shows very clearly that your brain… and it so happens that two interpretations, because the way the thing is drawn, are almost equally plausible, so the brain looks at one and then that fatigues it in some way and the other takes over in a way we don’t fully understand, and so on, and you see that one… you never see both at once. That shows that what you’re seeing is a constructive process of the brain, you see. And there are a number of other things along those lines. For example, seeing in depth is not only due to see your two eyes but it gets slightly two different views of the scene but if you close one eye you can see in depth especially if you move your head, you see, because there are a lot of other clues in the visual scene which your brain interprets as being depth. Remember there’s no depth, as such, on the image on your eyes.

Before we knew the three-dimensional structure of DNA, people didn’t realise it was a two-chain structure to begin with. The key aspect of the structure was the complementary nature of the bases so if you had one particular of these four possible bases, if you had a big one on this side you had to have a particular small one on this side, or vice versa, and so on all the way up. So, it meant that you could easily make, by separating the two chains, you could then easily make a new complementary copy by just obeying these pairing rules of which one went with what. And that solved in one blow the whole idea of how you replicate a gene. It didn’t prove it, of course, it merely made it a plausible hypothesis but it's turned out to be correct. And not only that but all the techniques which are nowadays used for manipulating DNA, or many of them, depend on this recognition process so you can get two things coming… two separate chains or mixtures of them and the appropriate pairs will fiddle around and come together so you can… you can select out ones you want and do all sorts of tricks. But… so, the basic reason was that it showed the molecular… what was probably to be the molecular structure of the gene, it… it suggested how it replicated and you could read into it how the actual gene acted or many of the genes acted although that was, again, a… a much more speculative hypothesis which took quite a number of years to prove but turned out again to be broadly correct. Of course, because of the complicated nature of evolution, there are a lot of exceptions to these… small exceptions to these rules but the broad picture was roughly as we saw it in those days, in those early days and it’s very unusual for a static structure, just a molecular structure, to give such insight into all these different… into even one function let alone a whole lot of different functions and such key functions because they are the key functions of biology. So, that’s why… that’s why, essentially, it’s regarded as an important discovery because it complemented the original ideas of Darwin on evolution by natural selection plus genetics which was started with Mendel which… which showed that… that the genes were particulate and not blending and then it showed what the molecular basis was, showed how the genes act and as… and in the last 10 or 15 years has given us a whole lot of new tools for fishing out genes, altering genes and so on which have got immense practical importance as well as being important theoretically.

Of course, there are some people who feel that you shouldn’t… shouldn't use genetic engineering but… and you should only use natural things. There’s a… a movement of chefs against DNA but that’s ridiculous because if you go and, I'm sure, went through their menus you’d find that most of the food they supplied was not natural but had been…but had been selected by man by ordinary breeding techniques. If you buy… collect wild mushrooms they’re natural, but if you eat beef or corn or almost anything, it’s not like the wild animals, they’ve been particularly selected and bred for, they just use rather old-fashioned methods to do it instead of these… more efficient modern methods, but there’s no difference in principle. You’re… you’re trying to get an improved genetics into the things which you want to, in this case, to eat.

We saw, essentially, all the developments up to about the middle '60s. We saw the idea of replication, we saw the idea that would be an RNA messenger which you… you make a working copy of the gene and send it off to the machinery which does the protein synthesis and so on. We had the idea of mRNA although we made a mistake about that in detail and we had the right ideas about protein synthesis. What we didn’t see was two things: how easy it would be to sequence DNA, which was done independently by two groups, one in America and one in… in Cambridge, England… one in Cambridge, Massachusetts and one in Cambridge, England.
[Q] The sequence?
Yes, actually work out the actual sequence of the four letters which make up the… the message and that can be done now and, of course, is being done at enormous rates nowadays because the methods get better and better. But that was one of the big breakthroughs and the other breakthrough was the business of being able to… by using enzymes, by using natural molecules which perform certain reactions, to be able to cut DNA, join DNA, match up DNA and manipulate it and put it from one place into another and join it up and essentially be able to handle it, you might say, using often single copies which then by biological magnification you could just make as many copies as you want by putting it into a bacterium or whatever it is and letting the bacterium grow till you got as many copies as you want. So, by using all these tricks which are based on making, as it were, nature do the work and using the base pairing of the DNA to help you do the manipulation, you can do many things and none of that we foresaw because it was… again, it was too far ahead. In terms of time it was between 20 and 25 years ahead and that’s a difficult time to… that’s where, generally speaking, it’s difficult to see what’s going to happen.

There’s a very easy test to tell how fast the subject is moving and that is to see how the word 'recently' is used. Now if you are… interested in Latin and Greek or something in classical studies and somebody said, recently it was shown that… that means within say 20 years, something like that. If you… neuroscience, on the other hand, if you’d ask about recently, usually means within the last year or two, or three or four years. If you ask in molecular biology if they use what it means by the word recently it means in the last few weeks, so that gives you some idea of the increase in rate while in the old days it certainly would be years where we would use 'recently' and now it’s weeks.

Oh, he would’ve understood it very easily. Remember, he first… had to understand Mendelian genetics but he would’ve welcomed that very much because it solved a lot of problems that he was worried about, about so-called blending inheritance and… and the fact that it was particulate, and so on, he would have been very pleased with. And he was… sufficiently a… a scientist and a naturalist to appreciate the idea of the chromosomes in cells although that wasn’t the main level at which he worked. It would have been a little… take a little longer to explain to him, I think, about the nature of DNA because you have to explain the nature of organic chemistry which was only very… understood in a very primitive way in… in his time and certainly at the time he was doing most of his major work, and so on. So, once he’d got that, I think he would… he would be very happy to see there would be a molecular basis of replication because he had… makes odd remarks about… he had ideas about pan-genes and this, that and the other. I think he called them pan-genes or something like that, which were… those ideas were wrong and then he’d have been delighted, I think, to… to see it. And he wouldn’t have been at all put off by the complexities of the whole thing because, being a naturalist, he was used to the complexities of nature and… but nevertheless, he was a man who was looking for simple underlying principles, so I think he would have welcomed it very much.

I think the basic idea you can easily express in very general terms. Remember, [Alfred Russel] Wallace had the same idea quite independently so it isn’t… it isn’t… so, it's not a very esoteric idea. As… as one has already said, it… it’s an idea which strikes you as obvious, why didn’t you think of it before? Once somebody says it. But to arrive at it is a different matter, you see, and then… as… his case it was because he said he was reading [Thomas Robert] Malthus and this gave him… and he’d been… he got around to the idea that species were not constant and were varying but he didn’t understand what the process would be. And then that gave him the basic idea, and then being a very conscientious man, he worked through, you know, and kept notebooks and collected lots of examples in order to write a treatise on the matter and then he was pushed into it by Wallace essentially so he wrote a short version which is what we call The Origin of Species. That was his idea of a short book. It became a bestseller, incidentally. It was sold out the first day, I think, and had to be reprinted.

Well, the… the essence of the idea is there is variation in… in the… in what is inherited and the favourable variations are selected because the other ones… other ones don’t leave sufficient offspring. They… they die or don’t… don't leave offspring in the right way. It's… it's very simple mechanism. I mean, we use it in the test tube nowadays. I mean, people evolve new molecules by natural selection, for example, because we can use… we can do it very rapidly because we can handle vast numbers, we can… we can handle more than a… ten thousand billion little molecules at once and so… forth, so we can select for rather rare events in a very rapid space of time. We can’t do it, of course, for large organisms, we can’t speed them up but… so, the process is very well understood. What is not understood is all the little gadgets and devices which nature has done in order to make it work a bit better or make it work more efficiently and there’ll probably be some surprises there. So that we… we don’t understand all the gadgetry which nature has evolved to make this process work in a better way, but as far as we can see, that is the main and… and… if not the only process which is involved. There is a certain amount of drift of things but there seems to be very little what’s called Lamarckian inheritance of something the… from the experience of the organism being passed onto the offspring which is the obvious idea to have, you see, that if you… if you exercise your muscles then your children will have bigger muscles, you see. That seems unlikely and certainly isn’t common.

There was a very strong… I’m not the right person to ask this because it’s really a matter for history of science, but… it… there was a very strong prejudice that species were fixed, you see. You had to get the idea that species could change, and that was the… well, so, until you’d taken that step, it wasn’t at all obvious what the… what you were looking for. And then… so it was only the people who were thinking about how species could change, which must have been very few people, who were in the position to ask why… what would be the mechanism. Because otherwise, you thought that creatures… species were created and that as ones died out, new ones were created, or whatever it may be, you see. And… but again, you should really ask somebody in the… history of science that sort of question because you have to go back and see what everybody was saying at the time, and usually what we… what we know about is a bit garbled.

At one point he was considering becoming a clergyman. Then he considered becoming a doctor. And then almost by accident, he got this invitation to go on this… the voyage of The Beagle. And… it’s a very interesting case of a… of a man who didn’t go through what you might call the formal academic ladder. And then, of course, he had financial independence from his father. People don’t realise he had six or seven servants living in his house, you see. And that… he did get some money from his books, and certainly he was shrewd with his investments, but essentially he didn’t have to… he did have a job, I think, as a secretary in one of the societies, for a time, but once he moved out into the country, he was… he was self-supporting financially.
[Q] Why do you mention that? What’s the significance of that? 
Well, I… I think because it was such an unusual career. He didn’t go through… be a professor and go through the academic thing and… and be paid. He certainly didn’t have to get grants, there weren’t any grants, and… and so on. So, it’s not something you’re likely to find nowadays. Very unusual. Even if you do find a rich man who wants to work, he usually works… goes and works in a lab as Victor Rothschild did, for example, till he was 50 – worked in the zoological lab at Cambridge.

Yes, well that was an example of how you can be… be too logical about things, because, as you know, the idea was that Eve was made from one of Adam’s ribs. So, I naturally concluded that… that this myth had arisen because men had one less rib or one less pair of ribs than women. It seemed to me, if… if that was an observation, it would be a… a way a myth could arise, and I mentioned this when I was in my early 20s probably to some medical friend, and, of course, he nearly fell off his chair laughing because men and women have the same number of ribs, you see. And I realised you shouldn’t try and explain myths in too simplistic a way. They have a life of their own. They don’t necessarily… they don't necessarily… the logic of the past, shall we say.

Now, I find it very difficult to take all this religious belief seriously because they almost all, leaving aside all the modern Californian ones and New Age stuff and all that kind of thing, they almost all originated at a time when our picture of the universe was totally different from what it is now. I mean, the universe in those days was… the Earth was the centre of the universe. We didn’t even know the whole surface of the Earth, but we knew a certain amount of it. That was man’s home. Man was clearly special, and therefore it was only reasonable he should have been put there for some purpose in this special little place and so on, and that he hadn’t been there for terribly long, never mind exactly how long – 5000 years, 10,000 years, something like that. And the Earth was not terribly much older than man. That was the… the picture, and it was a very reasonable picture to have at that particular time. And most religious beliefs are really done in that context. I say most, I mean, certainly the Christian ones and the ones that are associated with them, Judaism and… and Muslim beliefs, and so on. Well, now that’s totally been changed by science. Almost everything I’ve said just now is… we know now to be wrong and that we’re an insignificant planet in a rather minor star in one galaxy of God knows how many, and so on, and it seems rather vague that… that, you know, that God should have sent His Son just to this particular place, and so on. There are always jokes about, well does he have to go to all the other places in the universe where there’s life, and can he travel faster than the speed of light, and a few jokes of that kind, you know. But the point is it makes them all seem absurd. And as for the doctrine of the Trinity, I mean that’s bizarre when you look at it. I mean, how could anybody have thought out such… such an extraordinary doctrine? And yet you have a college named Trinity. I shall know that Cambridge has come into the modern world when they change the name of Trinity College, when they start calling it Newton College or something like that. Otherwise, they’re just living in the past. And most of them are living in the past, even though the name is only a minor symbolic thing.

I think there are two reasons for religions. I mean, there… there’re a number of reasons. One is that people do have a curiosity about the world, and they like to understand, you know, how did it start? Where does it come from? Why are we here? How far back in time does it go? All those sort of questions on the one hand and also, the… religions also have a moral say, they say you should not do this or you should do that, often for rather arbitrary reasons, when you look into it. But some of these are founded on, well, on… on quite deep biological reactions, and some of them are rather arbitrary, like particular food habits or something like that always strike one as rather… rather arbitrary. And you have to ask why it is… what’s their value? Because they… wouldn't have… there has to be something in-built in man that is… has some selective advantage otherwise religions wouldn’t have… wouldn't have prospered the way they’ve done. And one reason is that it gives solidity to a society. A shared set of beliefs binds people together, and there’s a lot of… of… in… in our early evolutionary histories when we’re hunter-gatherers and later on when we became agriculturalists and so on, there was much, really, warfare between one lot of tribe and another tribe. And anything that… anything that consolidated the acting together of members of the tribe probably gave them survival value. Now, these things are not known for sure, they’re only speculations, but they… there has to be an explanation in the long-run. If it turns out that most of these religious ideas are really false, there has to be an explanation as to why they appeal to people so much. And it must be an explanation in terms of natural selection and what the selection advantage is. Now, I don’t say what I’ve just said is the explanation, but it may be somewhere along that sort of lines.

I just take the conventional, non-religious point of view, you know, that after death that’s the… your… the end of you, and… and that… that’s it. But… but many people are reluctant to believe that, again because I think they have this picture in their minds of people, and the picture, sort of, goes on after the… after the person has died and so on. There’s certainly a very strong wish, you know, that somebody, even if they haven’t died and you… got another chance of seeing them again and…. There are all sorts of little problems with that. What age would they be when you see them again? Or will they have a body? And this sort of stuff, you know. And, of course, people invent a lot of fanciful answers, usually tying themselves into knots in the process. So, it doesn’t sound very plausible. I don’t say one can refute most of them; they don’t… they don't have the ring of truth to me.
[Q] Science doesn’t really offer any sort of consolation, does it, to the idea that one day… I mean, that you’re going to die soon. I mean… I mean, is that…
It doesn't… well, I don’t think it offers consolation, but I… I think it’s perfectly possible to… to live in that sort of way. I don’t think anybody… everybody needs to have that feeling. But maybe… maybe it’s a stronger need in some people than others.
[Q] But in personal terms it doesn’t bother you that [sic]?
No, because it… because I find the… I find the idea so implausible that I don’t really want to put any weight on it. I won't… I can’t say that it’s positively wrong, but I think, as we understand more about the brain, it'll become less and less plausible. But that may not be true. It may go the other way. For all we… all we know, the research on the brain will eventually lead us to embrace some point of view which is more like the ordinary man’s or religious point of view, that there is a soul which… which persists after death. I think it’s unlikely myself, but we can’t rule that out. The only way that I would claim to do it is to do experiments on… on the brain.

You see, you have to ask them whether they’re stating a personal prejudice, which we all have and which I could make much stronger statements… I would say I think it’s very unlikely that this, that and the other, you see. And I… or more particularly, I'd say I’m not going to bother with that point of view because it’s so unlikely, it’s only going to make a mess of one’s thinking, you see. But if you then are… are asked, you know, just how sure are you of the foundations of what you’re saying? You have to be more cautious. That’s… I mean, that's one of the curious things about the scientific life, as… as we… we may have said already, namely, that you don’t have certainty, but nevertheless you have such… such a… a range of degrees of plausibility that the very plausible ones approximate to certainty. Whereas when you look at what other people believe, they have a feeling of certainty for things which are probably completely wrong, you see, which is bizarre in a way.

In point of view of science, there is no absolute truth. What you’re doing is trying to make models of the world and find which model of the world is… fits best. Why should something be true? Your… your brain is making a model of the world. There’s not necessarily truth out there.
[Q] But… but surely it’s true that the structure of DNA is… is a double helix? 
You want to be very careful like that because, of course, some of the genetic material is single stranded DNA. It’s very difficult to make a… a statement, especially in biology, in which you won’t find minor exceptions. I mean, Newtonian mechanics is true unless you get… get up to speeds approaching the velocity of light or if you get under certain conditions usually of very low mass when you have to use quantum mechanics, you see. But for sending a… sending something… a… a satellite or something… to go and… go and look at one of the major planets or something like that, Newton mechanics is perfectly ok. Well, is it true? Well, the answer is it’s not absolutely true – it’s true within that the very large range… range of things but not at the extremes. So what do you call that?
[Q] So the… the scientific enterprise, I mean, it isn’t… it isn’t just to find out what’s true and what isn’t true, it’s to… it’s to improve on….
 Well, we… we use that terminology, you know, in everyday life. We do say I don’t think that’s true. And you say that in science as well. But if you’re then being very pressed as to what you actually mean, then you have to make a more cautious statement the way I did. But in ordinary… in ordinary, everyday life, you know, you… people will tell you something and you’ll say, I bet that’s wrong, you see. Or… or you can say that sounds right to me, or something like that, you see. Or you can say look, we’ve got this observation and this observation and this observation. This seems right. What’s your objection? That type of thing, you see. So, in every… in everyday conversation among scientists, they will certainly use the word 'true', but they won’t necessarily mean it in the absolute sense that a layman would use it.

The most exciting thing was seeing the structure, no doubt about it at all. You must realise that although you have to have a certain merit to get a Nobel Prize, there’s a certain amount of a… of a lottery about it. I mean, there are lots… I have… certainly friends and colleagues who I think ought to have Nobel Prizes who haven’t got it, and I can think of one or two who have it who might perhaps not have been given… given it, you see. So it's… the… the… what’s odd about the Nobel Prize is that to people outside science, it represents a particular thing. You either have a Nobel Prize or you don’t. Within science, it isn’t that. You have good scientists, some of them have got Nobel Prizes. Some of them don’t have Nobel Prizes for what you might say trivial reasons. For… for example, [Vincent] Wigglesworth, who's the… the… founded the subject of insect physiology, he really ought to have had a Nobel Prize, but it doesn’t apparently come… insect physiology doesn’t come under physiology, you see. But, I mean, but he's perfectly… he’s at that stature. And there are certain… you can find other examples of people, or you could find people who, just by the luck of somebody got a prize and theirs was so close… a little bit too close to it, therefore they haven’t got it. But to lay people, on the other hand, it is a sort of label, you see. And among scientists, they… they notice whether people have got Nobel Prizes, but it isn’t thought to be the overwhelming thing. In fact, there’s sometimes a negative feeling that once you’ve got a Nobel Prize you won’t do anything good after it. And there’s a lot to be said for that. Most people don’t do so well after they’ve got a Nobel Prize as they did before simply because they’re getting older, I would say. I think it’s certainly true in my case. The work I did before the Nobel Prize is better than the work I’ve done since. But I think… I think… again because I think younger people do the better work. That’s one of the things you learn in science, that the people from about 25 to 35 to 45 are the ones who are really doing the interesting work. And the more intellectual the subject is, the younger the age. This is particularly true when you go to theoretical physicists and mathematicians; they do their work usually very young, and the more experimental it is and the less intellectual it is, then often the work… the best work is done later, as a general rule. But, of course, even that has exceptions.

You… you’re obviously all trying to, you know, discover the secrets of nature, or however you like to put it. And, in principle, you’re all supposed to work together and help each other. And a lot of cooperation does go on in science, but there’s necessarily a degree of rivalry. If… first of all, mainly it’s because of reputation, because people want to have the reputation. And unfortunately it’s usually the person who does something first who gets it, not always. Sometimes somebody will do something first and someone will come along and do it very much better. But in general it’s the person who does it first, so there is this element of a race that comes into it. And some people are a lot more competitive than others. Some people are over-competitive, they have what’s called ‘nobelitis’. They look as if they're trying too hard to get a Nobel Prize. That isn’t thought… highly regarded. And… and so you get… get this strange mixture of… of cooperation and… rivalry. You get it to some extent, you know, between the armed forces, which are supposed to cooperate but nevertheless are… have a degree of rivalry. I mean, the… the air force against the navy and the army and so on. There’s always that… that sort of tension there. Or even one regiment against another regiment in the army. So, it’s… it's what you would find in most walks of life, but… but the general public is apt to overstress, I think, the competitive nature and not recognise how much cooperative work there is – people, you know, exchanging ideas and giving each other material and so on. Usually, it’s acknowledged. It’s polite to acknowledge it or make the person a co-author if they’ve done a substantial part… significant part of the work and so on. Very difficult to convey the exact balance. And, unfortunately, it’s got more competitive recently because there are more scientists and there are more good scientists and the techniques are better. And many of them are worthy of support, but because they’ve grown so much, they now need large sums of money, even in biological sciences where they don’t need enormously expensive apparatus like these super colliders, whatever it may be, but they do need apparatus and things. And that’s… that's become an appreciable part, or a noticeable part, of… of the national budget. So… so, you can’t just… can't go on increasing indefinitely. It’s… and… it’s unclear just what level science should be supported because you can argue from different points of view.

[Q] Would you prefer to be Newton or Shakespeare? And the implication of the thing is something to do with some important difference between science and… and… if Newton hadn’t had been Newton, some other person would have been Newton. And if someone wasn’t Crick or Watson, presumably someone else would have….
Well no, that’s not quite right. No, I don’t think that’s right… quite right. I don’t think anybody… any other person would have been Newton. But other people collectively and possibly singly might have done Newton’s work, because… Newton did a lot of things. I mean, he did all the work on optics, for example, as… as well as all the… all the work on… on mechanics, the Principia and so on, and… and a number of other things as well. And… so, they certainly would have been done, but Newton was outstanding first of all because he was both an experimentalist and a… and a theorist. He built the first reflecting telescope. I mean, he was good at that sort of things. He’d… he did the experiments on… on optics himself with the prism he bought at the fair and so on, as well as doing all the… inventing the calculus, as well as being a mathematician. So, he was outstanding because he… because he did so many things and did them so well. And, after all, to some extent, that's what we feel about Shakespeare – he has a universal quality. But they are very different and I don’t think you can say whether you’d prefer to be… I don’t think it’s a meaningful question. I mean, you are yourself. What would you… what do you mean… how would you know what you’d prefer if something was changed and what would you change?

I think… well, I think the work of art is… has more personal quality in it but… but because you can have discoveries… can have discoveries made which are made by a number of people so it’s not very personal. People have argued the other way, that… that, in certain cases, it’s the personality of the scientist, and it certainly helps in the short term, I think, that the personality of the scientist can help sometimes – or perhaps sometimes hinder – in putting the ideas over. And probably one of the more important things that Jim Watson and I did was to put over the ideas because we were, sort of, felt… expressed ourselves fairly forcibly and fairly clearly, and we clearly… and we thought logically and so on, and we were keen to promote, or even do, in some cases, key experiments. So, I think we… we did contribute in… in that way. I don’t think there’s anything you’d see correspondingly in something  Shakespeare did. It’s not as if he ran a workshop for young… young playwrights and it's well known those things are not always terribly successful. And… and anyhow, the whole… the whole character, I think, of the enterprises are different because science builds in this slow way with one thing on top of the other, so you’re always building on the results of what a lot of people have done beforehand. And although there is some truth of that in literature, in that you’re adding on to a tradition, as it were, it’s not nearly as strong.

It’s the… it's the business of making reproducible observations which can be done by other people. They’re not necessarily repeatable because sometimes it’s unique observation, but it may be a one of a similar type, as when you look at one star and then look at another star, for example. It’s making observations. It’s setting up some theoretical model of what is happening, which… in nowadays, in these mature sciences, is usually related to other scientifically established things. It’s not in isolation. And then trying to make further observations or do experiments, if you can do experiments, to try and confirm or… or disprove these… these general ideas. And I don’t think you normally do that when you look at it… when… when…. that’s not the way the ordinary… most things are done.

						I think, as one remarked earlier, that unless you’re very keenly interested and fairly motivated and I would say almost dedicated, the frustrations and the difficulties, although of course there are rewards, but the frustrations and the difficulties are such that if you don't- aren’t motivated in that way, you’d be well advised not to go into the- into the field. You might just well go away and do something else like make money or whatever you want to do. Well, you must notice that people who make a lot of money are people who are interested in making money. They don’t even need the money, usually. They go on making the money when they’ve got masses of money. So it’s just the same thing again: if you want to make money, you have to be really interested in making money. Same thing with science. And I’m sure it’s true if you want to be a first class musician, either as a performer or as a composer or anything else or a painter. You have to be- to have a strong motivation to do it. You have to think 'That’s the thing that I really want to do, and I don’t want to be bothered with other things'. I’m not sure all careers are like that; it’s a much more relaxed way if you have some rather simple, more routine sort of job, and it has the characteristic that you work from nine to five or whatever it is, and when you go home, that’s the end of that. And you have the weekends off; you don’t have this feeling every weekend that you ought to be doing some work, although you should resist that because you shouldn’t work all the time. But- so I mean, there are other ways of life, and it is more difficult-  this is what one saw in the generation of the '60s - there were so many opportunities, that people who didn’t have a strong drive didn’t know what to choose, and they often had difficulties in that way, whereas it probably didn’t matter what they chose as long as they made the choice. But if they kept dithering and wondering if they should do this or the other and so on, they didn’t necessarily perform as well as if they’d made a rather arbitrary choice.
					
When you go… go into a garden you’re conscious of photosynthesis or things of this sort which the average person wouldn’t do, or you… you know something about the range of… way petals are around… arranged on a rose, you know, they’re arranged on a spiral, they’re not necessarily arranged in just five fold symmetry and things like that. There are lots of little things like that you know and… and I think they complement what… what the more direct aesthetic feelings that people have. But I say sometimes they can get in the way. There are lines of poetry which I used to like and now I realise, you know, I don’t like because… because they’re unrealistic. I’m not sure I can quote the one about, 'Oh God make small the old star-eaten blanket of the sky that I may wrap around it and in comfort lie'. Well, the fact is that when the star… you see all the stars at night, it isn’t a blanket at all, it’s extremely cold because the radiation's going off into space, you see, and what sounds like, I used to think, was a remarkable bit of imagery, I can’t enjoy anymore now because he's got it back to front, you see, you’d never think of that as a blanket if you were a tramp. You would know that when… if you were sleeping out, you would know that when it was cloudy it was going to be a warm night and when it was clear it was going to be cold. So… so, there are a few cases like that where you feel the poet simply didn’t understand what he was talking about. But in… by and large you don’t get much of a conflict, I would say.

I think you get a feeling for the complexity of a single cell and particularly a nerve cell, of course, which is more interested in all sort of cells, but I think you can… because you have to realise, you have to just sort of scale everything up in your mind and try and think of the cell in terms of the molecules in which it made up. And when you think of it that way, and think how many different types of molecules and how they interact and how they arranged and all the… the arrangement of the… the membranes of the cell and the filamentous particles and things like that, but you have to go… be able to think in terms of the molecular level. But what… if you’re used to thinking about atoms and molecules so that they’re like objects of everyday life, there isn’t any particular problem in imagining the complexities of a cell. The… it… you should think of it this way, it isn’t that the cell is small, it's that you are big. You see, you should think… start off with the atoms of which everything is made and which... and the… the atoms make up the molecules which are not that much bigger than atoms. In terms of diameter there’s only… not weight, but only less than a factor of 1000, say, between a… a very big molecule… it depends on the shape. But… but when you know… when you start from the atoms, of course, which is where you… I think you should start, then you see that it… is necessarily a very complex object. And then you have to realise that you are made of an enormous number of cells, so it's only if you start… take an everyday point of view that you think the cell is small. I don’t think of cells as small, I think of them as large, at least in some contexts. I don’t honestly think about subatomic things. I just have to go down to the atoms, as a… as a physicist would have to do.

The odd thing is, because we originally drew a turn and-a-half of DNA and because the model we built was not much more than the turn or so. Of course, we knew that it was an extremely long molecule, but I notice a number of people got the idea that that was the size of the DNA molecule. You know, there’s a… there’s a painting by Salvador Dalí, a great big painting in a bank called, I don't know, 'Deoxyribo-something or the other, homage to Watson and Crick', and it’s got bits of DNA in and they're all a turn and-a-half, I mean, it’s bizarre, you see. So one… one now tries when people do illustrations you try and tell them, you know, first of all please get it right-handed. If… you have to be careful because if you print a right-handed thing it becomes left-handed, so one Israeli stamp got it the wrong way around, I think. And the other thing is, make… try and draw it so… give the impression it’s a very, very, very long thing, like a piece of string as we say, a great big ball of string and that’s quite a short piece of DNA, just a ball of string. And so, it is a misunderstanding and it… it’s due to the fact that you don’t… if you want to build molecules where the atoms are a reasonable size then you don’t want to build things miles long because it's just… you want to get over the general features of the structure which you can see in quite short… short length of it, so….

If you look in Who’s Who it doesn’t say I belong to the RNA Tie Club apart from the fact it’s defunct now. It always had a rather ethereal existence. It was a… an idea of… of [George] Gamow's. He called himself Joe Gamow because he spelt his name G-E-O and he thought that was pronounced Joe. All his friends called him Joe or Geo, what he would like to say. And he became interested in the idea… he had an idea that DNA, the DNA structure, was a template for protein synthesis, which was wrong, but it made us begin to think about the coding problem, how you translate from nucleic acid sequences to proteins. It made us begin to think about this in a systematic way, and the club was simply his friends so it was a very mixed lot of people, some of whom were in the field and some of whom had got nothing to do with it specially but just some people Gamow knew. And Gamow would… seeming somewhat whimsical, there had to be 20 members, one for each of the amino acids and you had a tie pin, which I don’t think I ever got, and a tie, which I still have, and there were four honorary members for the four bases, I think two were appointed. I don’t know if we ever got up to 20 members. The club as a whole never met. Occasionally there would be local chapters meeting. There’s a picture of four of us in our… my sitting room, three of us wearing our ties, for example, and we would write occasional papers because there was not many people interested in these very speculative ideas and we’d just send them, as it were, to the members of the club and they would show them occasionally to other people. So… well, nowadays people do the same thing with electronic mail, you see. They chat to each other on electronic mail on a much faster time scale and things of that… of that sort. Gamow was a very amusing person to talk to. He… he had quite a lot of imagination but he… he was at an age where he didn’t absorb the… all the scientific details completely accurately so occasionally he’d get cytosine and cysteine mixed up and a few things like that but… but he at least told the general outlines of the problem. The sad thing was that this general approach of… regarding it as an abstract problem which you could solve in an abstract way has turned out… turned out to be a complete failure. Because now we know the answer, we know there was no way of deducing it from first principles, at least nobody has been able to discover in the last 20 or 30 years, now that we know the answer, what… how you would deduce it from first principles although people have tried. So, in actual fact it was all a waste of time but it did focus our idea on various aspects of the problem and made us think of various experiments so it was useful in that way. So… but that often happens in science, somebody will produce a theory which everybody’s attempt to focus on that thing and disprove it often turns to be quite fruitful. So even an incorrect theory can sometimes be… that doesn’t mean to say that all incorrect theories are useful, but a minority are.

What… the problem is that… that the language of genes is written on the DNA and the RNA in a… in an alphabet of four different chemicals, rather like the Morse Code which has got two, a dot and a dash or three if you call a space and so on. Whereas the language of proteins is written in 20 different amino… 20 different types of side chains or amino acids which is going to make up the proteins rather like our language which has about 26 characters, for example. It’s like trying to find how you go from the Morse Code to the ordinary alphabet which you… the Morse signal from the ordinary alphabet which you know is known as the Morse Code and that’s why it’s called the genetic code. Because actually code is the wrong word, it should be called a cypher, strictly speaking, but genetic cypher doesn’t sound nearly as good as genetic code so it just as well that we used the wrong term. And he had an idea about how that might happen in relation to the DNA structure which turned out to be wrong, then we realised we could think of it in abstract terms and we had various attempts and ideas, all of which turned out to be wrong and now we know the problem is insoluble from that point of view. So, it’s a salutary lesson as to how you can spend quite a bit of time on a problem which looking back, you can see there was no possible answer.
[Q] Does that matter, that, and does it feel like a waste of time or what?
Well, it did in a certain sense but on the other hand we spent… we spent other time thinking about the experiments which didn’t depend on this particular point of view and there were certain things as to exactly whether you read them three at a time and things of that sort and it focused us on that sort of way of thinking. I think we’d have got there anyway but… so, it was partly a waste of time but not totally so.

It isn’t quite clear who would’ve done it, because if we hadn’t done it, we would’ve thought that Linus Pauling would have had another go, but... it wasn’t clear that he wasn’t rather enamoured of his original structure. But after he’d seen Rosalind Franklin’s data I don’t see how he could’ve stuck to his original structure. I think he would’ve… bound to have a second attempt. The person who should’ve gone on to do it was Rosalind Franklin, but she moved from the lab because she didn’t get on with Maurice Wilkins, she moved to Birkbeck, under [John Desmond] Bernal, and the condition was made, I think improperly, that she shouldn’t go on working on DNA, so she didn’t do further work on it. But even so, Maurice Wilkins would’ve gone on and done the work, and encouraged by us to build models and a little prodding and so on, and I think he would’ve probably got there, he… either he or Pauling would’ve got there within two or perhaps three years or something of that sort. And I don’t… can’t help feeling that in both cases they would’ve seen the implications of the structure. Although they… they… I don’t... they necessarily have seen it quite as quickly because, of course, we saw it immediately because our minds were prepared for the implications, but it… they would’ve been seen… if they hadn’t seen it we would’ve certainly seen it. So… so, it did accelerate… it did accelerate the thing. It… probably the useful thing as far as I was concerned is it gave me a certain entrée to people because they were interested in it, and they wanted me to exert some influence in the way the experimental work went by going around giving a lectures and trying to get people to think about the problem. Because, you realise, people didn’t think about these problems before. They were totally new way of looking at things, or they thought they were problems for the future. I mean, that’s… that’s a common… a common thing when you have situations of this type that people think yes, that is a problem, but it’s premature to attack it now. That’s what a number of neuroscientists feels about trying to attack consciousness, they say, well yes, in the long-run, of course we’ve got to solve that problem but, you know, we’re busy now doing useful things and it’s premature to go on and do it. So… and maybe… sometimes it is premature.  You don't know until you've tried.

Well, of course, she was dead, you see, so that it was not possible to have it [the Nobel Prize] posthumously, and moreover there would’ve been a problem for the electors that they don't… they're not allowed to give it to more than three people, so I don’t know quite what they would’ve done. They… they could’ve given it to Jim [Watson] and me for… for the physiology one and they could have given it to Rosalind and… and Maurice Wilkins possibly for the chemistry one. They would’ve had to work out some other sort of compromise. But it didn’t arise because she… she died a few years earlier of cancer, so….

Well, the first thing you have to decide is whether you’re interested in physics or chemistry and biology or sociology or whatever else… some of the less hard sciences or whatever it is, where your interests lie. You have to choose a field and usually people don’t have too much difficulty with that because they say… suppose if they’re very good at mathematics but don’t want to be a mathematician they're more likely to go into… into physics or possibly theoretical chemistry or something, and conversely if they’re not and they’re interested in animals and plants… Jim [Watson] was a bird-watcher originally, that’s how he got interested in biology, for example. They go in for it for just rather general feelings as to what they are generally interested and what they’re good at. And I don’t think many people have a lot of problem with that except sometimes that they… they don’t have a very strong feeling one way or the other and it's not clear under those circumstances they'd be advisable to go and do anything. But, having chosen the field, then it’s partly a matter of… of accident and where you’re accepted at a university and how… and do you work on… and which person… where… where you’re accepted to do research although you have some choice in… in where, you know, in… in choosing. But it's also partly a matter of luck and how you get on with this professor or that professor and which other young men you meet and so on. And that will probably lead you to a… a subfield of work of some kind. How you chose the actual problem, that's almost impossible to describe. It depends on the actual field, what it is and how adventurous you should be or not. It depends… you have to look at your temperament and how much you’re prepared to take risks. It's like asking somebody how should you invest. The first thing you ask is, or one of… or the second thing you ask anyway, how much risk do you want to take? And that would certainly be one of the things you would say here and how… how… have you any degree of financial independence, for example, which means you can take bigger risks? Or lots of other considerations of that sort. So, I don’t know anything… very general rules you can give.

First of all, I… I was very lucky to get into a good lab and in… a good lab and in Cambridge, you see, because of these personal influences essentially and then, secondly, the problem we work on was a way-out one so there weren’t many other people working either on protein structure or any of these other things, so there really wasn’t an enormous amount of competition. It wasn’t as if lots of groups were… had got the technique and were all focused, you know, on… on the same problem so it was more relaxed in that way, and so there was more time, you felt you could take things more easily and was more social life. Although people have social lives, you know, even under these competitive conditions; they have games of softball and they have picnics and this, that and the other. There’s quite… quite a bit of… or… or… parties and so on. I’ve noticed that even though these people have to work very hard and have to get grants and so on, nevertheless, they do need some relaxation and they also will go off on holidays, mountain climbing or whatever and get away, which is very sensible. So, it… it really… it really kills you if you… if you try and keep your nose to the grindstone all the time and I think people realise that. They need a… a relaxation and a change and… and so on. You… you have to be careful you're not… don’t get into that habit of having to work every evening and every weekend and not take a holiday. You’ll soon find, you know, that your productivity goes down and you're not enjoying life as much.

I feel they would… they will be of interest when we have a good theory as to what is at the bottom of consciousness, knowing how we could put it in a machine. Of course, computers are not used just for consciousness, they’re used for all sorts of things. They’re used, for example, by experimentalists, they often… experimentalists now run… experimentalists on a monkey, showing it things on a cathode ray screen, is often run by the computer and all the results are recorded on tapes and then played back and analysed often afterwards. So, there’s a lot of automation in… in laboratories and so on. And then, of course, people who are doing modelling, are doing theoretical work almost always do elaborate things on computers which I, personally, don’t do myself. I mean, I have used computers a little and my whole… my son and his family are all computer people and one of… even one of my… one… one of my daughters is… is a computer programmer and the other one is at least learning to use a computer but everybody uses computers nowadays, it seems to me. So I don’t do it specially but for some things, of course, they’re absolutely invaluable. But to answer your particular question, you know, can a computer be conscious? Well, it’s the sort of thing you might chat away occasionally at tea but unless you got a really got idea, I don’t think it’s… it’s going to get you anywhere. And I think… I think, and I’m sure Christof Koch would think the same, that the time to worry about that is when we have a real understanding, not necessarily a totally detailed understanding, but a real understanding of our own consciousness and animals' consciousness and so on. Then is the time to see what are the particular features that produce this type of awareness and how would you… put that in a… into a computer, what type of computer would it have to be. And I… I think our ideas are so vague really about what is… what is the characteristic features of consciousness, it's probably a waste of time to do it on a machine because you’re going to have a real problem getting a machine to tell you whether it’s conscious. It’s got to speak to begin with. Bad enough with a monkey. You have to assume that it’s conscious, remember. I have to assume you’re conscious when it comes right down to it. I have no direct knowledge that you’re conscious, it's only by analogy and because you say you’re conscious and you appear to behave the way I behave and I know I’m conscious, therefore I deduce you’re conscious but I don’t have direct knowledge of it. It’s much worse for a monkey.
