gerald.edelman

US biologist Gerald Edelman (1929-2014) successfully constructed a precise model of an antibody, a protein used by the body to neutralise harmful bacteria or viruses and it was this work that won him the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1972 jointly with Rodney R Porter. He then turned his attention to neuroscience, focusing on neural Darwinism, an influential theory of brain function.

I was born on July 1st 1929 in New York City. My mother was one of the early women in the insurance business and therefore had a great deal to do with Wall Street. My father was a general practitioner serving in that role, although he was trained as a surgeon, and he insisted on working in a rather poor neighborhood. He was very dedicated, because he was one of the earliest cases of polio in Philadelphia where he was born – had a great sympathy for disability. My mother of course had different notions, and thus I had a very extraordinary exposure because living in the poor neighborhood was one thing, but living in a rather fancy place was another. That was Long Beach, Long Island, where they had a rather elaborate set-up and house. My mother of course felt that I should go to a fancy school like Horace Mann Lincoln, which was the one that was outstanding in New York, and my father said, 'No, my son goes with the people.' My father won, and so I went to a local high school where I learned how to run and, if stuck against barriers, to use fisticuffs.
This was about what I remember in my early youth; except that I did remember just now my concern with gadgets and, speaking of my father, I remember the time I tried to build a welding machine out of a women's hair curler and a brazing rod, with nichrome wire for resistance, and I did know about Ohm's law, but I obviously didn't calculate right, because in the basement when I turned it on, a huge blue sheet of flame came out of the circuit breakers which were circumvented; my father was not pleased. I might like to hook this up to my later scientific excursions but I can't really.
In fact, what I was – how shall I say – attracted to enormously was music. I think the first exposure I have in recollection is that my mother and father figured out a very neat way of babysitting in those days. They'd park me and my sister Doris in a box in Carnegie Hall and leave for the two hours of the concert and then come back and fetch us. And I do remember my first exposure to music, which was Fritz Reiner conducting Eine Kleine Nachtmusik of Mozart, and I could... I was close enough that I actually could see, I believe, a little bump on his nose, as well as follow with fascination what he was doing with his fingers and arms; and something happened at that moment to turn me onto music and thus a good deal of my time outside of regular schoolwork was spent at the violin. I had a succession of teachers at that, finally landing up with a teacher known as Albert Meiff, who was a classmate of Jascha Heifetz in St Petersburg under Leopold Auer – that very famous pedagogue of the violin... turned out one brilliant violinist after another. My parents were quite happy to support this enterprise except they were not happy about having me do it professionally, so we were a bit at cross purposes, and I do remember my mother saying that performing music was not more than one step above juggling. And I said, 'Mother, you know, Mozart and Beethoven are not juggling.' She said, 'Well, I see that didn't work, so I have two more things to say to you.' And I said, 'What?' And she said, 'Jascha Heifetz.' And she walked out of the room. Well, I didn't really listen to her until one moment when I was in a recital and I realized at the end of playing this Franck Sonata, that I really wasn't interested in the audience, and it struck me for the first time that, while I was trained in music and wasn't really half bad, I was not really interested in performance. And it was at that moment that I said, 'Oh well, you better not do this thing.' So I thought I'd compose. But then while I had a theory of music pretty closely in my head, I had no gift whatsoever. And it was at that moment that I decided that I would look elsewhere, and finally I landed on the notion of becoming a scientist.

My father had this remarkable collection of books and he didn't read them – he was too busy being a practitioner and helping people in real situations – but it was a huge collection of books. He had a chap, not related, called Sam Edelman who was a bibliophile and polyglot sort of figure who collected these books for him, and your comment about learning how to pick locks was the fact that the books that had a slightly more racy flavor were under glass and locked in a... in a compartment, and I remember sometimes taking care of my father's office and figuring: how can I get into that without being discovered. And what I discovered in fact was a book called The Satyricon of Petronius Arbiter, who was in the court of Nero, and it had some racy illustrations, and so far I've embarrassed myself by the tale, but that's what happened.

I mentioned the fact that I was interested in gadgets; I was particularly interested in building model airplanes – indeed, even radio-controlled airplanes – and in those days the technology was not up to what it is today and so the... these radio-controlled airplanes were not small; they had wing-spreads up to eight to ten feet, some of them. But I can't really attribute it to that. I do remember reading some remarkable essays – for example, Faraday's essay on the candle, you know. Faraday was in fact in the British Institution, also a remarkable lecturer, following his mentor Sir Humphrey Davy, and I remember being very influenced by that, struck by that, amidst all my other reading. But it wasn't until college that it struck me that I'd better not do music, I'd better get into something else, and I decided I'd get into scientific research. Well, when I thought about it – and I did think about it a lot but in a very parochial way – I thought that I'd have to become a doctor like my father. That of course was an error in a certain sense because I didn't realize at the time that research was broader than simply an application of medical precept. Nonetheless I did go to... to medical school; that was the University of Pennsylvania, but I should backtrack and tell you that I had gotten into a small college thanks to my sister who was a bridge player and was a friend of the Dean who was a bridge fiend.

I was not accepted and there are many reasons for that – one of which was that I was involved in a debate in high school, and the debate had to do with standing armies, and my principal, who was rather narrow in his views of politics, came to the conclusion I must have been some kind of far left demonic figure, maybe even a communist. And I do know that it was mentioned in some of the letters that were written about college. In any event I didn't get into college but I managed to get my sister persuade Ursinus College to take me. Well, that was in some ways a vain venture because in a year and a half I'd dropped out. One day I decided this was rather boring and I left for Miami Beach, Florida, where I spent a considerable amount of time at the poolside, and after that time my mother showed up and said, 'I understand that you've got about 19 bucks left in the bank', and I said, 'In fact, 14, Mother.' She said, 'Well, guess what, if you don't go back to school you're not going to get another cent and you're going to have to work.' And I said, 'Mother, you know I've sworn that I would never work.' She said, 'Well, think about it', and she swept out.
I thought about it and I made a deal that I... I would go back to Ursinus College if they'd give me a key to the library and didn't insist I attend lectures; I'd take the exams but no lectures. They very kindly did that, and so there it was that I became an autodidact. I sat around, probably wasting a huge amount of time because I had no-one to guide me, reading all kinds of books that I fantasized were going to give me some understanding of the world. I remember particularly the ones of Russell and Whitehead, Principia Mathematica, where they attempted in two huge volumes full of arcane script the description of their attempt to reduce mathematics entirely to logic. Well, I spent a lot of time on that but I didn't get too much satisfaction, I must say, in the sense of understanding anything. Following this whole set of episodes I did get into the University of Pennsylvania, where things were more challenging, I must say, and it was in fact through the study of anatomy that I realized how challenging they could be. So I immersed myself pretty deeply.
By the third... by the third year, the end of the third year, I was lucky enough to be allowed in to the Johnson Foundation for Medical Biophysics under Britton Chance and there it was that I did the first piece of scientific work I ever did. Chance was a virtuoso in physical chemistry and was well-known for his remarkable efforts at measuring fast chemical reactions. He had a theory about a certain enzyme in yeast called cytochrome c peroxidase, which is involved in the oxidative path for respiration, and he had this idea that there was a ternary complex between that hydrogen peroxide and cytochrome c, and I spent a good deal of effort using his fancy apparatus to show that in fact it did not exist. I wrote a paper but Chance never published it; he put it on a shelf. I've seen him recently, by the way – about a year ago. He's remarkable. I think he's into his 90s and he has persisted as a... a very vigorous and interested personality. Well, that was my real exposure for the first time to what you might call serious scientific research.

I then decided: well, since I've gone that far in medical school, I think I'd better clean it up and learn a little bit about medicine, so I had the good fortune to go to Massachusetts General Hospital. And that was at Harvard, and it was in fact one of the leading hospitals – certainly in the field of internal medicine which... which I decided to do as a house officer. I do remember one episode in... on the trip to the... to the interview at Massachusetts General and it taught me a great deal and it might have some influence on my thoughts about how you deal with young people today. I went up with a man named Warren Bowman, who was the first in my class; he worked assiduously. I was the second in my class in whatever these ratings mean. I didn't particularly work much; I was still fooling around with music although I had quit really. And what happened at Mass General is you went into a small room with four people – faculty people at the Harvard Medical School – and they queried you, and then... I only knew this retrospectively... because what happened is a young lady came and said, 'Come with me' if you got anywhere with those people; and they took you upstairs to the full faculty with my Professor Walter Bauer, or the one who was to be my professor there, and was one of the majordomos, I suppose, of Harvard Medical School, and you got another going... about and going-through.
Well, I couldn't answer more than 30% of their questions and I was pretty dispirited; on the train back I said to Warren Bowman, 'Well, that's the end of it for me because I didn't understand what the devil they were talking about.' There was a guy actually even asked me a question about physics, and Bowman said, 'Oh I answered all their questions. There was one particularly stupid one and I told them that, and they said, "What about an electrocardiogram in a whale?" And I...' He, Bowman, said, 'I told them that was a lot of nonsense. Well, I said to myself, Warren you're out too because about two weeks before Paul Dudley White, the great cardiologist was seen harpooning a whale, and he was on that board. The funny thing was I was accepted and he wasn't.' When I got there I remember talking to a physician Bill Baker, who was in the room the first time, and I said, 'Bill, why did you ask me about a cyclotron?' He said, 'Oh, I ran out of questions and I just sort of thought, well, you know, try something.' And I said, 'Well, that's amazing because I couldn't answer most of your questions.' He said, 'That wasn't the important thing; it was the style of your response.' And I think that is an important issue that I learned something from: namely, it isn't so much the absolute correctness or pedantry that counts; it's the way you look.

I was hardly ever, in fact, home. We lived on Beacon Hill which was right across from the Mass General Hospital, which was just an amazing place. It had this sense of history; I remember they had this lecture room called the Ether Dome, where ether was first administered successfully, and it conveyed great humanity with history with an incredible expertise at medicine. I remember one episode, though, which sticks in my mind, and that is this business of staying up all the time and praying that you could get to bed; and I remember that I was loaned out by the medicine department of pediatrics and there was a rather sick kid who had a diarrhea that was causing imbalance of the electrolytes and the kid could actually have died. In those days we didn't have computers – we used slide rules – and I figured out what was called in those days Gamble's formula, stuck the intravenous in and the kid seemed to be improving after two hours of watching, and then I remembered that I had to give Grand Rounds to the Massachusetts General Hospital within four hours. That means putting on a clean white uniform and being prepared to be published in the New England Journal of Medicine. So I had a sort of discrepant... well, contradictory choice: should I sleep in a four foot bed next to this very sick kid or should I go back to the residents' quarters after training the nurse? So I trained the nurse, went through it twice, and said, 'If the temperature does this do that; if this happens do this. Now repeat.' And she repeated it all, and I staggered back to the residents' quarters, walked up four flights of stairs, hit the place that takes you to the roof, realized that that means I go down one, went down one and flopped into bed. The rest of it I don't remember. It was recalled to me, however, by the nursing supervisor who called me up and said, 'What the hell are you doing with my girls?' And I said, 'What?' She said... I said, 'What are you talking about?' It turned out that the girl called me and she said, the nurse, 'The temperature's 102.6', and I said, out of my coma, 'Put the kid in a brown paper bag and send it to the laboratory.' I went to my Professor Bauer and said, 'You know, this can't go on.' He said, 'Yes it can; get back to work.' Well, these days they don't do that. They've relaxed the other way. And it is an interesting thing that in those days it was considered to be essential... an essential part of the job to really be on it all the time. I guess the worst with the neurosurgeons. And I guess the worst outcome of that was a lot of divorces. But whatever it was, it was an interesting and memorable experience to be in that great institution.

The great scientist Fritz Lipmann, for example, was on the wards, and he didn't know much medicine – he got his degree out in Germany. And there was also Paul Zamecnick, who was one of the most important people in the early business about translation, you remember, in protein synthesis. And he would come on the wards and be the... the so-called visit. Well, in fact the... the residents there were formidable. They were really great at diagnosis and when they weren't, they called a man named Paul Kranes who came, lugubrious in his merits, and he walked into the room, saw the patient, came out in maybe a half an hour later and said, 'Gentlemen, it is a case of Pelizaeus Merzbacher Syndrome', and you'd say, 'What?' And he almost always would be right – raised your averages amazingly. There was this tremendous sense of dedication to the person at the same time for high scholarship. Of course things have changed a lot, right? Today you have some kid who may not even come near Paul Kranes's aspect as a clinician but he writes a... a little slip for a scanner and he sends the... the slip in and the person gets a scanning and the diagnosis rate is even better than Paul's. Well, yeah, there's only one trouble with that: it costs billions and billions of dollars and it's no place to be sick. So we have this curious contrast between how it used to be... which is easy to reflect on in a positive mode when you're in the position I am in now. I really don't know what to say about it except there is a contrast.

I got a call from the United States Army. Most of my colleagues, when they saw that potential of threat it was just after the Korean War, elected to go to the National Institutes of Health. I had another idea: that I would go to work with Joe Smadel at Walter Reed Hospital on rickettsia viruses. And so I allowed myself to be inducted; I went to Fort Sam, Houston, Texas, training under machine guns, because in those days a lot of MDs in the service didn't know which end of a rifle was up, and a lot of them were slain. And, in the middle of all of this, I expected my orders to take me to Walter Reed. Instead, guess what, they took me to Paris. I was very despondent. My wife was thrilled. And, indeed, we went to Paris, and my wife calls it the F Scott Fitz-Edelman period.
I... I had a remarkable post there. I was physician surgeon to the headquarters of the European Command. In those days EUCOM, as it was called – European Command – was a kind of nerve centre for the entire military effort in America. In Germany and in France and what have you. And they were quite liberal; they took over whole families, cars, collie dogs, whatever. For instance, in the place I was at, which was called Camp des Loges where, if I remember correctly, there were about... oh, maybe seven generals and maybe a fewer number of admirals, I don't remember the exact number, but they were all very high figures and I had them as patients. And I worked out there somewhere between SHAPE and Versailles, and every fourth day or so I would go to the American Hospital in Paris, the so-called 196 Station Hospital, where I would deliver babies and be officer of the day. And so I saw a lot of patients – actually, I would say thousands upon thousands of patients over those times, in a clinic and then, of course, delivering babies... I delivered a fair number of those. So that was an extraordinary experience because I had an opportunity to mix with other young people – for example, British doctors, who hadn't gotten a locum tenens in England, and who just sort of said, 'Paris is a nice place to go', so they had the British Hospital and the American Hospital to serve his residence in. So we had a jolly time, and it was an interesting time.
It was very lucky for me that I had, when I went to high school, a fellowship with another scientist we both know, Dick Lewontin, at the École Libre des Hautes Etudes which was a French school, at the New School of Social Research, a French school established because very famous and accomplished film people – René Clair for example, people like that, were émigrés to America because of the war and the Nazis; and so we actually were trained by people like that. Eve Danielle, René Clair, occasionally Charles Boyer, and I must say I had no talent whatsoever. Richard was some kind of small genius. He, he actually caused such admiration they tried to persuade him to go into drama. He used to do a single skit called Théodore cherche les allumette  – Theodore Looks for the Matches – about a kid who got drunk in Montmartre and is trying to climb up the stairs and it was remarkable. And some people say he still has that remarkable dramatic talent. He is an interesting and most competent figure in evolutionary studies. So here was this period of interaction with all of these people in Paris, and I did not lose sight of science but, indeed, from an intellectual point of view I was rather bored.

My professor, Walter Bauer, wrote me a letter after the... oh, about a year and a half of my being in the army, he wrote me a letter saying a friend of his, Detlev Bronk, is going to be starting a university at the Rockefeller Institute. Now his advice was for me to come back to Boston to complete my medical studies but he suspected that I would be foolish enough to stay in science... or my interest in science and, indeed, I wrote back with gratitude, and it was he who hooked me up with Detlev Bronk and I finally had the opportunity to go to the Rockefeller to get scientific training.
But I can backtrack a bit and say while I was in France, that boredom that I had was a very important issue and, again, like being an autodidact I didn't have any guidance which probably was pretty wasteful but it had other benefits, and one of them was this. There was a thing called the American Library on the Champs-Elysées and it had books never cracked and a good section of scientific books – for example, Cohn and Edsall's book on proteins and peptides and amino acids. And I remember reading that one with great fervor, although it was quite abstract actually. And then, above all, a very signal event occurred. I found a book on immunology. And, if I remember correctly, immunology in medical school was a sort of side-track of the microbiology course, and you got three weeks of serology – what happens when you mix serum of patients who have been immunized and what happens when you get a cloudy reaction or complement fixation or what have you. Well, I read this book in my boredom, as I said, and what struck me was that it was amazing that all the book talked about was antigens, the foreign molecules on viruses, bacteria or even on chemicals, as Landsteiner from the Rockefeller showed, were injected in your body. And it occurred to me that, gee whiz, this doesn't seem to me to be the central issue. The central issue is antibodies. Well, my naïveté was remarkable – my ignorance was even more remarkable – but I had this idea that, look, this book shows this picture of an antibody molecule and it looks like a loaf of bread, a baguette. But that can't really be right. I had no real notion of how big the molecule was, and I said... but I got this idea that maybe I should work on antibodies, because that seemed to be the thing. They were the things that they had discovered in serology which reacted with the foreign molecules, and indeed that was signal for my going to the Rockefeller; it was that that determined that I would begin to work on antibodies, which is what I did.

Well, I'll tell you one anecdote of the army... it has really no relevance to science proper but it does have to human judgment and interaction and, after all, that in the end is what the brain is responsible for, so we'll probably come to my interest in the brain. At that time it wasn't so explicit, but I had a commanding officer who must have gotten his medical degree from the back of a comic book because he never really did anything except when he went on ward rounds with us at the American Hospital. We had one whole floor at the 196 Station Hospital; he would say, no matter who it was and what age and what the disease was... let's say a kid with the flu, he'd look down and say, 'Gentlemen, you know this could be cancer', and the patient of course would go into a tremendous tail spin. And so we used to hide the patients from him.
One day I was delivering a baby and had just finished and I was writing up the case when the phone rang and a lady said, 'I'm Major General So-and-so's wife', and I said, 'Oh yes, I know your husband – Air Force isn't it?' And she said, 'Yeah.' I said, 'What seems to be the trouble?' She said... by the way, this was about 12:30, half hour after midnight... she says, 'Well, he has some pain', and I said, 'Where?' And she said, 'I'd rather not say.' And I said, 'Down there?' And she said, 'Yes.' And I said, 'Does he have any fever?' And she said, 'Well, I don't have a thermometer but he feels a little warm.' I said, 'Tell you what I'm going to do. I'll send a technician out with some stuff and I'll see him first thing in the morning in the clinic, I assure you.' She said, 'Hold the phone, I heard some screaming.' She came back; she said, 'The general says you're going to put on your uniform, get the Cadillac ambulance and drive out to St Cloud and see him yourself.' I said, 'Ma'am, I can't do that; I'm officer of the day.' And she started yelling, and I said just, 'I'll call you right back.' And I called up my commanding officer, the colonel, and I said, 'Colonel, we have a case here; Major General So-and-so has epididymitis.' And he said, 'What's that?' And I said, 'Never mind; just come.' And he said, 'You wake me up for this?' I said, 'It is a Major General', so he came. I gave him the red pill and the blue pill and he went out and then I delivered another baby. And when I was writing that one up three figures came down the hall. By this time it was about three in the morning and it was the general, white as a sheet, the wife looking nonplussed and my commanding officer with a huge smile on his face. He went out there, he peeled back the blanket, and he looked at the general's soft parts, and he said, 'You know, General, this could be cancer', and he leaped into his trousers and that was the end of that story. I assure you it was real, it was like MASH.

Well, that was an amazing thing, and a thing again like the Mass General itself that cured my... any snobbery that might have come from being an autodidact, because that of course was another great institution, and in those days... in the early Rockefeller Institute there was a style which we don't see much anymore. You know, you and I have talked about this. So what was that style? Well, it was the idea of having people develop their own views – not in some departmental organization or some coterie or some category, and there was nothing heritable about it. Every lab was centered around a particular individual and his style. But that style, while it was idiosyncratic, had a shared belief amongst all of them; they all had this almost quasi-religious belief in the powers of science. And this chap Bronk, who was in fact a dean at Swarthmore College and then was at this Johnston Foundation which I originally mentioned and where I had worked, and finally became President of Johns Hopkins University, was in fact at that time President of the National Academy of Science and he then became President of the Rockefeller; and he had this brilliant idea of setting up a graduate program, in the broadest sense, where you just didn't do it the way they did in the universities – in fact you didn't have a committee, you had an interview with Bronk, usually a walk in New York for two hours, in which you were asked the most remarkable variety of questions. And he personally chose the students, and I have to say he was some kind of small genius because that student program within rapid order became the leading one in biology in America, even though there were great institutions in competition – for example, Harvard itself. So it was an extremely fortunate thing that I... that I got there.
And what happened at that point is I decided to exercise my interest in... in this antibody molecule which was called gamma globulin in those days. There's an interesting referent here because that book I mentioned I read in Paris by Cohn and Edsall; Cohn was the man who fractionated serum for military purposes, and Cohn fraction two... usually ammonium sulphate fractions, Cohn fraction two was the gamma globulin fraction, it wasn't exactly pure; it was my good luck to get a huge bottle of it from human placentae, of all things, from Lederle Labs in New Jersey. And so that was my sort of bailiwick; I could dig in and do all kinds of things.
Well, I began to be very interested in physical chemistry and in molecular structure, and I decided I would work on that. And I have to say one of Bronk's great attributes and remarkable notions was apprenticeship was the key – not pedantry and lots of courses. In fact, we didn't have any courses. So I sort of taught myself again physical chemistry. A little later on I got some help from some trained physical chemists but, initially, I got into protein physical chemistry. And it was there that I decided I would really go after the structure of the antibody molecule. That hope and that assertion turned out to be extraordinarily naïve because I didn't have any idea of how difficult a task it was going to be. Nonetheless that pretty much gives you an indication of how accidental all of these things are; they aren't really – if I hadn't read that book in Paris, if I hadn't had the naïve thought about going after this molecule, the terrors of which did not yet overwhelm me, I wouldn't have started.

Every day you had lunch and every lunch consisted of your going to any table you wish in the dining room where you were served, believe it or not – you didn't just do it cafeteria style, you were served in high style – and you had the opportunity to mix with very great scientists. And it wasn't the question of parts of departments; there was no such thing. You mixed accordingly. And that influence was perhaps larger than anything a single mentor could have done. It was an opportunity to see all the different ways that these remarkable scientists thought, independent of their disciplines, although of course they were ensconced in them.
[Q] Who were they?
Well, let me give you one example of the kind of tone that could be established. I don't know if you remember the name of George Kotzias – he's no longer with us – but Kotzias was the man who... very vigorous Greek, who was in hospital with me at the Rockefeller. I was an assistant physician at the time, he was an associate; and he was a kind of flamboyant figure, very assertive but very imaginative. And one day we went for lunch, not together, but we landed up at the same table, and at this table was René Dubos, perhaps the greatest high priest of microbiology and virology of the time and a remarkably broad scholar, and a little man named Max Theiler who got a Nobel prize in plant biology... in virology, as a matter of fact. And George joined us; I was at the table, and he sat between Theiler and... and Dubos, and he said at one point in the conversation, 'Max, how many papers have you got?' And, if I remember correctly, Theiler said something like, 'Seven.' And he turned to René Dubos, and he said, 'René, how many papers you got?' And Dubos said, 'Mmm, maybe 400.' He said, 'René, can I ask you a question?' He said, 'Yeah, what?' He said, 'How come you ain't got the Nobel Prize?' And there was that degree of exchange, of both humor and mordancy, and that had an immense effect – that one and a half to two hours was the most important part of the day.

I was exposed to Stein and Moore who were the reigning protein chemists in those days, and who had invented the amino acid analyzer, and who thought I was quite daft for trying to do something like antibodies. The issue is very simply put: Sanger and Tuppy had done the first brilliant complete analysis of what's called a protein... insulin, which had a molecular weight of 6000, that's 6000 times the molecular weight of hydro... the atomic weight of hydrogen. They, Stein and Moore, who, by the way, got the Nobel Prize at the same time I did in chemistry. Stein and Moore had been working on the amino acid sequence of ribonuclease, the very important enzyme, and I think the molecular weight was of the order of about 13,700. Here I was, going to do the sequence of a molecule that had a molecular weight of 150,000. If that didn't put me away in the loony bin, I don't know what. But I in fact stayed at it and I remember quite clearly experiencing what I'll call an epiphany, although that's too dramatic a word.
The... what intrigued me at that time, as I said, was physical chemistry, so I took my antibody fractions out of that Cohn fraction II, and I started treating them chemically with a variety of tricks. One of the tricks was to break the so-called disulphide bond, the sulphur... sulphur bond that occurred in certain proteins from an amino acid called cysteine, to make something called cystine. And I was very proud of myself because I made a rotating amperometric electrode that would measure how many of these bonds I broke. At the same time I was very intrigued – and here we go back to my fake, my disastrous welding machine, or brazing machine of my youth – I was very intrigued with the ultracentrifuge. In those days they had this giant instrument called the analytical ultracentrifuge where you could measure the so-called sedimentation constant, how fast the molecule fell in a field of 300,000 times gravity – a very, very high-spinning rotor which contained a little optical system that you could look in... invented by The Svedberg, a Nobel laureate in Sweden.
And so I was working at my amperometric electrode one day when I said, ‘You know, maybe I should block these sulphydryls that I make when I cleave these bonds, and stick it in the centrifuge.’ I had been of course looking at the native molecule in the centrifuge and that made a nice peak. When I did this it broke those bonds and put it in the machine. It didn't seem to move at all compared to the native molecule, so I rapidly made some mathematical calculations about maybe it unfolded and that increased the... the drag and the solute, and maybe that accounts for why it's so slow; it doesn't sediment. It turned out that nothing... nothing of that kind could explain the result. The only thing that could explain the result was that I had cleaved the molecule and that the molecule consisted of chains. Well, we'll come back to that, but the main thing was that... I can't quite call that an epiphany. I'll tell you about others that like are contrasted with, but gradually it became clear to me that what I had concluded was contrary to what was in the literature and that was of course extremely upsetting but it does teach you something about science and the way it proceeds – mainly, that there's a lot of stuff in the literature that doesn't quite gel even though it looks that way. So that was the beginning of my total absorption and of course there were several thoughts that were associated with this.

I had to confront the issue of heterogeneity. This gamma globulin was really rather weird. When you subjected it to another kind of separation on the basis of its net electric charge, called electrophoresis –another Swedish invention of Arne Tiselius, a person who later became my friend – that molecule sort of developed a smear instead of being a nice sharp peak like albumin in the serum; this thing out of the serum was a smeary peak, and if you cut the peak and put it in you got another peak. And so it looked like it was an enormously heterogeneous molecule, at least in terms of its net electrical charge. Well, that was another problem because you can't... if something is a mixture of a whole bunch of things, you can't do a chemical analysis. The third thing was the specificity, and here I have to come back to the atmosphere of the Rockefeller and how important that was.
Well, I didn't have a mentor; I had a ghost. The ghost was Landsteiner. Landsteiner was perhaps the greatest scientist who ever inhabited the halls of the Rockefeller except perhaps Avery – Oswald Avery who discovered the DNA as the genetic material. And I was fully aware of the ghost of Landsteiner because Landsteiner was the man who allied immunology with organic chemistry; who showed that you could take some organic chemical... little molecule called the hapten by him, and hook it up and stick it into an animal and the animal would make molecules – antibodies – that recognized that hapten and distinguished it in the most remarkable way. An example of the distinction is this, think of a benzene ring, this six-fold structure and put a nitro group in one position and another on another. If you put three nitro groups in symmetrically on that ring it becomes something called picryl – that yellow stuff that's sort of antibacterial – and you could distinguish between dinitrophenyl and trinitrophenyl, just by one nitro group using Landsteiner's methods, which is amazing specificity. And, in fact, what it meant is you could recognize molecules that never existed in the history of the earth before.

Now those were the three things: the size, the heterogeneity, and the... and the specificity, and that framework of challenge was the one that I lived in for a fair number of years, and fortunately was joined by colleagues of great talent, because otherwise we wouldn't have gotten anywhere. So the question of size had a potential solution in that splitting I talked about in the centrifuge – namely that when you broke the disulphide bonds you got smaller pieces. Well, I'd hoped, and it turned out to be the case, that one of the pieces would be small enough to do sequencing of the kind they did with ribonuclease.
The second problem was... was really interesting because it connected my medical experience and my chemical experience, and here I must say something about that. You really can't predict what the importance of... of a certain kind of experience might be until after the fact, so I hadn't realized how important it was to have had some medical exposure. And here I have to go off on another tangent but I think it's relevant to the question of heterogeneity. It's well-known amongst internists certainly that a certain disease called multiple myeloma, which was a disease of the cells that make antibodies – a cancerous disease – that they sometimes spill into the urine a protein called Bence Jones protein. Bence Jones protein had a peculiar property, and I should diverge once more to tell you the background of that, because it was against that background that I had perhaps the most complete break in trying to do the structure of antibodies.
It... Bence Jones protein was in fact the second protein ever discovered. The first was discovered by Liebig; it was albumin – that predominant protein in your serum – and they already knew in those days that when a patient was sick with certain diseases he would spill albumin, or she would spill albumin, into the urine, and the way you could tell it was you could heat the urine and you'd find that a black... a white cloud would appear – precipitated denatured albumin. And that wasn't a good thing. Well, it turns out that two Scottish physicians, Macintyre and Watson, were taking care of a man – a grocer, a wealthy grocer in Scotland – who had what they called mollities ossium, softening of the bones. It happened to be myeloma. And they heated the urine, à la Liebig, and what they found is that they got the precipitate but if they heated it a little more it went up clear again. So Watson actually wrote a letter to Henry Bence Jones who was a student of Liebig and was a practitioner in London, a fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine, and a rather well-known practitioner, and they said, ‘Here's what happened; what is it?’ And he hooked it up in his... cooked it up in his retorts and he concluded it was the deuterated hydroxide of albumin and that was good enough for the time. The main point was is what they called almost pathognomonic diagnosis – namely, if you cooked someone's urine and that had that phenomenon of going out of solution and then going back in, you had Bence Jones protein – that meant you had multiple myeloma – so you could really sort of show off and be brilliant without even talking to the patient. Well, I... I knew about this so I started to study myeloma and it turns out that in myeloma, a molecule that looked exactly like antibodies was present in the serum in huge amounts, and in fact sometimes in such large amounts that caused trouble in itself besides the cancer. So the thought occurred to me when I split the antibody molecule that maybe one of the pieces might be the Bence Jones protein. The second thought was: hey, but myeloma proteins are very pure. By the way, trivial pedantic detail: people tend to hyphenate Bence Jones, Bence dash Jones sort of English style. It isn't true – that was his middle name but the best of it is his uncle who is called Bence Bence Bishop of Beccles. Only in England.

One of the pieces of good luck I had was to be joined by my first graduate student when I did get my degree, and that was Joe Gally, who, as you know, is present here at the Institute now. And Joe was, as he is today, a remarkable synthetic mind; and so here were the two of us laboring away, trying to characterize the physical chemistry of myeloma proteins and compare it to antibodies, and we found that when we split it, it did the same thing. I should... should say that it was more than just looking in a centrifuge; it was something called a starch gel. We now have a different kind of gel but effectively the idea's the same: it's an electrophoretic gel in which instead of running it like that big electrophoresis of Tiselius in free solution, you did it through a medium. Today it's acrylamide; in those days it was starch, and that separated the molecule not only according to charge but according to weight. And so we would see these patterns and what we noticed is that if you did immunoglobulin or gamma globulin which was called from the normal patient it was a smear – it was a black band and a smear. If you did myeloma proteins you got the black band but the smear was not a smear – it was a series of bands, and in each case only one for each myeloma patient, and each one was unique in his migration. Well, if you added up a whole bunch of myeloma proteins it looked like you could make gamma globulin, and that... that convince... convinced us that, hey, you know what, maybe this is a selectional system, not an instructional system.

Where was immunology at the time all this was happening? I never looked on myself as an immunologist – in fact I didn't look on myself as anything – but it was more physical chemistry than it was immunology; immunology was the background knowledge, as was medicine. So what did they think? Well, what they thought was what a very brilliant and great chemist Linus Pauling thought –namely, the way the specificity problem was solved... remember the size problem might be solved by cleaving the molecule, the heterogeneity by assuming that you actually have cancer supervening on one cell that makes just one gamma globulin, each different for each patient, and third the specificity problem.
Well, Pauling suggested that the way... and he was a friend of Landsteiner... suggested that the way you recognized these molecules is the foreign molecule came in and then you folded the antibody chain around it and it's sort of like a cookie in a cookie cutter, and then the foreign molecule went away and you were ready for the next time, so it would go like that. That was called the instructional theory, or the instructive theory of antibody formation. It was very powerful in the sense that it was simple, elegant, the way Linus Pauling was in the way he did his theories... turned out it was wrong, but at the time it was the prevalent theory, except for one other gentleman: Macfarlane Burnet.
Macfarlane Burnet was a virologist and epidemiologist from Australia – remarkably broad mind. A friend by the way of René Dubos whom I mentioned before. And Macfarlane Burnet just persistently attempted to understand the specificity problem, and following upon some work of Nils Jerne, that maybe the antibodies all existed beforehand and what they did is brought the foreign molecule to the cell and then made more of the same backwards, which turned out to be a wrong idea. But the idea that it was a selectional system, a natural selectional system, got to Macfarlane Burnet, who finally came up with the idea of the clonal selection theory of antibody formation. So that was the selectional theory as against Pauling's instructional theory. Pauling wasn't the only instructivist but he was the most prominent. Here was Macfarlane Burnet's idea: that each cell – this was the cell that would make a myeloma protein if it got cancerous... each cell would have one antibody on it. He didn't call them antibodies, he called them recognizers. And each one would have a different one, and it would be a repertoire, and you'd make that independent of anything that happened in the outside world, but when you got a foreign molecule in there, the foreign molecule would go down and poll this library and finally hit one that stuck to it, and another that stuck to it, and those would be produced clonally – that is, the cells would divide asexually two to the nth: one, two, four, eight etc. And this idea, which was by no means accepted, was one that Joe Gally and I found enormously attractive and it fit exactly what we said about the myeloma, where instead of stimulating cell division by antigen binding, what happened is a cancer came onto this one cell and made huge amounts of the protein.

This may be the time to say something about what you learn from the faults of great men, because I did learn something from both Pauling and from Burnet. When, I don't remember the date, I'm not good at chronology, but in the mid to late '60s I was invited for the first time to a very large scientific symposium – the Kaiser Foundation symposium –and I remember it for several reasons. One is that I had a suite at the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco with even whiskey bottles in the room – that wasn't bad. The second was I had an honorarium that seemed humongous at the time – something like $750. And the third was the scary part: when I looked at the program, which I hadn't seen before... as it arrived in the room, guess who was speaking first, and I was speaking second? Linus Pauling was speaking first about his antibody theory. Well, that threw me into a sort of terror because I was about to give a speech that said that he was wrong. So I called up a friend at Stanford who knew him and I said, 'Do you think you can rig a dinner – we've got one day, and I know it's an imposition...' And, by golly, he pulled it off.
So there we were – my friend and I with Pauling and his wife. Pauling, you remember, had two Nobel Prizes – one in chemistry and the other in international peace, the Peace Prize, because of his interest in nuclear events and disasters – and all that evening, all he could talk about was nuclear containment and, let me put it this way, when you're in Linus's presence you were forced to admire. And so everyone was admiring and I couldn't get a word in edgewise until I finally said, 'Sir, there is just one thing I wanted to tell you. You see, we've been working on antibody molecules and we've cleaved them and they have polypeptide chains linked by disulphide bonds and, furthermore, different antibodies have different amino acid compositions.' And that's about as far as I got. He went right back to nuclear containment. So the next day I said, 'You know, you'd better take it easy here.' He got up and he gave an absolutely brilliant lecture. I was despondent. And at a certain point he showed a figure of the instructional theory on his slide, and he said this is one of the polypeptide chains of the antibody molecule. And I said, 'My God, he understood everything.' So I got up and I said, 'Well, you'd better stick to the facts.' And I think that doesn't necessarily make for a good lecture but I... I did my best. I came back to my chair and there on the chair was a piece of paper that said: 'Edelman, send reprints, Pauling.' And that was the end of that.
And now my second anecdote is about the other great figure who's a biologist. When Joe and I were working on this antibody and Bence Jones thing, he visited us. Completely different kind of personality; and that's an important thing to realize about science and personality: there's no one way of being. He came and he said, 'Well, what are you doing? And I said, 'Well, sir, we're working on the structure of the antibody molecule.' And he said, 'That's a total waste of time – what are you doing that for? Chemistry just makes things worse.' And I said, 'Well, if you don't do that, you see, we're selectionists like you, and if you can't count how many members in the repertoire it won't work. Supposing it's only five and it's not a...' He said, 'Mathematics is even worse than chemistry. Don't worry, young man, my theory is correct.' And he walked away. And I remember thinking: is he stupid? And then... no, the funny thing was his theory was correct, but I learned from each of them two things: the first one was from Pauling who would have... and you know he had a big role in the double-helix story... who would have abandoned instructionism if he had only gone up to the cellular level, but he stayed all at the molecular level. And one of the lessons in biology is that you'd better look at a multilevel system, because at the cellular level, and this is where Burnet came in, you had something called immune tolerance in which you did not make antibodies to your own proteins when you were developing. That's like The Hound of the Baskervilles when the guard said that the hound did not bark... the dog did not bark. And Pauling didn't know that. Had he known that he would realize you can't wrap an antibody molecule around nothing. And so the whole phenomenon of immune tolerance, to me, it meant it couldn't be that way. What I learned from Burnet was you can be right the way he can be, but you can't be really precise unless you look down a level and do the whole thing in terms of molecular structure as well as the cellular behavior. Those two lessons I learned from great scientists and they were very, very important in conditioning the way I responded later.

The problem of the Bence Jones proteins went as follows: at a certain point we knew that there were chains – we knew they were linked by disulphide bonds. We didn't really have a very good method of fractionating them except the starch gel, which wasn't good for preparative purposes, nonetheless. One day I said to Joe... and, by the way, we differ a little on this story, but I don't think basically... I said, 'I'm going to make Bence Jones proteins out of your light chains.' We had been fractionating these things and got light and heavy chains – the light chain about 20,000, the heavy chain about 55. And he said, 'Well, you... that's the craziest thing I ever heard.' We set it up, we cooked it, and, by golly, we got the Bence Jones phenomenon and I damn near dropped the tube. And at that moment I had a real epiphany, and so did he. I remember his saying something like, 'Well, now we see everything', and my response was, 'Yeah, dimly.'
But we did see now something really extraordinary – namely that Bence Jones proteins were, in fact, in the case of the cancer, a result of making huge amounts of the myeloma protein which was the whole thing that had the disulphide bonded structure and 150,000 molecular weight; they were extra chains, they were small enough to go out into your urine because they were filtered by the kidney. And in fact that was the end of the Bence Jones story. We... we found out the answer to Watson's question: what is it? Bence Jones protein is a light chain of an antibody. What do you mean an antibody? Well, the antibody was not instructed – you just had huge numbers of them – and that's why, for instance, different myeloma patients had different mobilities for their light chains. Well, then followed the fact that we had solved the size problem to a degree, the heterogeneity problem because of the fact of an accident of nature, and a third problem, the specificity problem, by having chemical results that fit Macfarlane Burnet's theory. So that was all groovy, but then the next thing was, you know, now we had to sit down and do the whole structure. And that's a totally different episode because it involved being joined by remarkably talented people – for instance, Bruce Cunningham, who was key; Einar Gall who is now the Director of The Neurosciences Institute, the Research Director; and Myron Waxdal and Paul Gottleib, and we had a little cadre of people who said, 'Okay, now we're going to go after the whole darn structure.' So that began another episode.

Clearly it depended very much on Bronk and his ability to deny any bureaucratic structure. I can speak to this because that ability was in full evidence when the condition for my staying at the Rockefeller came up. I went to him, and you remember I said I was working with Joe Gally mainly; I had another student, Don Olins, who in fact was the man who, with his wife later on, discovered the nucleosome – the part of the chromosome that is the protein part of the chromosome that's so important in its organization and burying the helix. At that time the question was: well, could I stay after I got my degree? Incidentally, it might be worth my saying something about that.
My degree examination had the famous René Dubos, it had a physical chemist Norman Sutin, who then was at Brookhaven, and it had in fact Maclyn McCarty. It had a group of really distinguished scientists but, in a very curious way. It wasn't even very much about antibodies; it was actually about quantum mechanics. I was asked about the de Broglie relationship, which has to do with a certain particle wave thing and calculating a certain wave length for... consistent with... with what was known about quantum mechanics. And I think there was a considerable degree of frustration at that, because most of the people there were not particularly familiar with quantum mechanics, but I think that is an indicate... indication of the way things were at the Rockefeller. Things were just go and flower organically; they didn't have a committed sort of style, and so when it came to the question of could I stay after my degree, I went to see Bronk and asked him, and he came up with a perfectly startling suggestion. He said, 'Yes', if I was willing to take on the post of an assistant dean, then I could do it.
And I remember being shocked and sort of overwhelmed and I said, 'Could I get back to you?' I went home and I remember speaking to Maxine and saying, 'You know, this is ridiculous. I'm not a dean, I don't know anything about it, I don't want to do it, I'm a scientist etc.' She said, 'Shut up and accept.' And I said, 'Why?' She said... I said, 'So what?' She said, 'You know you're going to do the science anyhow, and if this helps that would be good.' So I did accept and I did learn one of the secrets of the system, which was a non-system – namely as an assistant and finally an associate dean I brought material to him one day about a certain candidate person, and when he saw it he became furious. He said, 'Never do that again. Never bring all this stupidity in.' And I had all kinds of, you know – what do you call them?  – CVs and marks and things of that kind. He said, 'That isn't the way we work around here.' I said, 'What... what do you wish, sir? He said, 'Look, is he our kind of person or isn't he? I hold you personally responsible.' And that taught me a great deal about this plastic style, and it was in fact my taking on that that allowed me to continue to do this thing, and in fact finally the curious thing which is worth reflecting on.
I had been working in pure physical chemistry on fluorescence – the excitation of molecules by light to emit another wavelength of light – and I was the recipient of a grant from the National Institutes of Health on fluorescence spectroscopy, of all things, and I was building a fancy spectrofluometer... here we go back to my brazing machine, what have you... what they called an absolute energy recording spectrofluometer, and I had this grant. But the funny thing was that all the work on immunoglobulin was being supported by this grant which just had nothing to do with fluorescence. Of course, we used some fluorescence on antibodies but these days that wouldn't have gone. So the combination of remarkable person-centered ability of Bronk to see creativity in terms of a contingent set of relationships, the fact that the relaxation was very great with the NIH, enabled me to bring... to bring together a bunch of colleagues who were able then to attack this structure. So there we went, and I must say that was a remarkably intensive period of about four years in which we went after chain by chain – first the light chain, then the heavy chain, of the antibody – and it was remarkable.

I remember being visited, of all things, by Leo Szilard – the great physicist, one of the brilliant minds of the time – and I remember his position... speak about Pauling, it was the same kind of thing. He came in surrounded by three or four admirers and he said, 'All right, I have 18 minutes; what's the problem?' And Joe Gally, as a matter of fact, said, 'Well, we're working on this quenching relationship.' There's a certain equation called the Stern-Volmer equation and we were having trouble solving it under a particular set of conditions and here was this brilliant physicist, so we proffered, and he pushed it aside and he said, 'That is not... that's not interesting; I'm interested in dirty things – tell me about antibodies.' And his... his attention span was not great, so in the middle of it he said, 'All right, what about this fluorescence?' And Joe proffered this thing again. He said, 'I don't need that', and Joe said, 'If you don't want to listen to the facts, there's no use in talking', and he walked away. And Szilard said to me, 'Who was that?' And I said, 'My first-year graduate student.' He was sort of dumbfounded.

We set to work doing the structure, and after... oh, three years... three and a half years, we were pretty close to finished. Rodney Porter, who of course shared the Nobel Prize, was working on the structure of the heavy chain, and he was of course in every sense a much greater expert than we were. He... he was a student of Sanger's – a very good protein chemist. A man who finally got converted over from instructionism – I think I helped there, or maybe, as he thought, hindered – who was remarkably virtuoso. In fact he did not finish the heavy chain before we finished the whole molecule, and that goes to show you the luck of the draw. It's worth saying something about how we got the sample.
It hooks up to what I said about myeloma proteins – remember I said myeloma proteins are gamma globulins or, if you will, antibodies that haven't yet met their antigen, and that huge amounts of them are made by this tumor, multiple myeloma, which is... is.... grows in such a degree out of the bone marrow that it causes holes in the bone and actually lyses the bone, and this is this mollities ossium of Macintyre and Watson, the Scottish physicians. Well, there was a patient, Mr Eubanks, who had so much myeloma protein in his blood that it was hindering the circulation of his digital arteries and it was threatening gangrene in his hands, so they were going to do an exchange transfusion – that is, put in other blood and take out his myeloma blood. Well, it wasn't a cure but it was a palliation. When I heard of this I said, 'I'll give my blood.' And I came away with about a half a pound of pure antibody in my hands, and that enabled us to go and do this structure.
Well, we did this structure, and I remember quite clearly that it was announced at Atlantic City, at the Federation meetings – I had been offered a lectureship there – and I remember it was my first encounter with what I'll call the style of science reporting in those days; it was the reporter from The New York Times, Walter Sullivan, who was most impressive. It was in fact a big issue; it was a whole page of The Times. He came to me with 30 questions and he said, 'We don't want to talk now; you look over the questions. Anything that's silly throw it out; anything you can answer, answer; those that you can't answer, just say no.' And he came the next day and he gave still what I consider one of the best interviews I've ever had of a science reporter. Those were the days in which you did not have a coterie of science reporters, but maybe it was better; I'm not sure.

I can tell you one other epiphany. Having the business of the cleavage is one sort of... minor... The one of the Bence Jones protein is pretty impressive. The third one, which came with the help of my fellow scientists, was: when we had the whole structure, I disappeared in a room with some poppit beads, child's beads that... these little round plastic beads that hook into each other to make a chain, and some piano wire, and a frame you use usually to erect organic chemical reaction – sort of like the thing supporting the lights here – and after about two days, and my colleagues thought I was nuts, I had built a chain model of the antibody molecule. And of course it wasn't like what you really see when they finally did the X-ray but it was enough to do something really very satisfying, and I have to speak to that... sometimes you're lucky when you mean actually... put luck it... not important, just about four thirds. What was lucky was that the antibody problem was so severely constrained that once you saw that Macfarlane Burnet's theory was correct, and once you saw the structure, you could answer a huge number of questions that people were never able to answer. For example: what part of the molecule bound to the antigen?
Well, here Porter did something very remarkable because he cleaved the molecule by cutting the chains – instead of breaking the disulphide bonds he broke the chains themselves – and he got one part that bound the antigen and another part that happened to crystallize, that is in fact, we showed, responsible for the other functions of antibodies. So in short order what we got was a picture of a molecule that had these domains that had variable domains in the light and heavy chains, where the sequence changed, and which was accounting for why each myeloma protein antibody was different from the other, and constant domains, and we could actually... I think it was really one of the first proteins if not the first where domain structure was shown. And I'll come back to that because it's an important genetic problem, and you as a geneticist would realize this. Well, we could then assign to each domain a particular function, and then we could even hook the molecule and see how it was hooked up to the cell, and you'll remember that it was one cell, one antibody, and that if... and this generated the next question... if each antibody was different, how did they become different. Well, it turned out that here was a problem that Joe Gally and I worked on theoretically.

I have always been interested in theorizing, and that's not perhaps a very popular thing to do in biology. In physics it's an essential thing. In biology, for the most part, without being condescending when I say it, you really don't need it; you need genetics as we understand it today, you need chemistry and you admit that Darwin was the greatest, but you don't really do it the way a physicist does it when he says, ‘I need the second law and I have the Schröedinger equation’, or what have you. But I've always believed in this other idea that you might as well theorize, as long as it doesn't drive you nuts. So Joe and I started to attack this problem of how the antibody molecule had variable sequence so that each cell would end up with a different sequence in that part of the molecule that bound the antigen. Well, we'd already shown that if you took the light and heavy chains from two different antibodies, you could recombine them so that you can get enough diversity from one variable region, the L, the light, and one variable region the heavy, the H, and so P x Q – you can get a lot of variation that way, but it still wasn't enough.

After showing that we could recombine the chains, our task of course was to show how the individual amino acid sequence of each individual antibody differed from the next one, and that, we proposed, was the result of somatic recombination – an event that geneticists have obviously understood for many, many years of work outside of the soma in... in evolutionary time and in inheritance. So this recombination was proposed in the way of a theory that, inside each cell, recombination events caused the variable regions to vary. And, as I said before, this was three quarters right, but there was another addition which we hadn't explicitly mentioned – namely that there's also somatic mutation. So that meant there were special enzymes treating the DNA for antibodies.
It was an extraordinary piece of theoretical challenge and it was very pleasing because this was one case where theory mattered. Not only Macfarlane Burnet's theory but a whole bunch of people arguing about how you got the origin of diversity. The pun was that you needed a generator of diversity, G-O-D, and so everybody was looking for G-O-D. In fact, I had the privilege, in the middle of this somatic recombination theory of discussing it with my friend Jacques Monod, the great molecular biologist in... in France, at the Institut Pasteur. He and Jacob had invited me at this stage to give a lecture there and Monod and I particularly became close friends and we used to argue like crazy about the details of this... and I won't go into that now, but I do think it's worth a side bar to show how personalities differ and how people differ in respect to intellectual accomplishments.
We used to talk about different minds and one of the minds I brought up was Sigmund Freud, and he said, 'Gerry, Sigmund Freud is not only silly but he's a charlatan.' And I said, 'Jacques, what are you talking about? He wasn't a scientist even though he thought he was, but he was a great intellectual pioneer; he did more for understanding the notion of unconscious... the unconscious than anybody, even though other people had the idea before him.' And he said, 'Look, this is ridiculous.' And we had quite a heated exchange. At which point in exasperation I said, 'Jacques, all right, let's put it this way.' He said, 'Look, I have no unconscious; I'm responsible for everything I do.' By the way, he was of Huguenot extraction; I don't know if that had something to do with it. He said, 'I am responsible; there is no unconscious. This is Jacques.' And I finally said, 'Jacques, let's put it this way, everything Freud said applies to me and nothing to you.' And he said, 'Exactly, my dear fellow.' So, coming back, we used to argue about this origin of diversity and it remained quite a dilemma as to how to show it, until Susumu Tonegawa used molecular biological techniques to show how you had recombination of so-called V, D and J portions as well as somatic mutation occurring in the antibody genes.

Well, that is a really nice piece of luck isn't it – to have to be in a domain closed enough and contextually connected enough so you could see what happened, from the beginning problems, all the way pretty much... not to an end but to a framework. And I like to say this. People misunderstand me when I do but I'll take the risk. There are open sciences and closed sciences. When I went in, immunology was an open science – that is, the central principle of specificity had not been solved. They knew about it but they didn't know how it came about, biologically and genetically. By the time all story was over as a result of the work of large numbers of laboratories and all kinds of fancy genetics, it pretty much was understood, that the origin of specificity went as I said, and immunology in that sense became a closed science. There was still lots of things to do but the central principle was grasped. I can give you an example in the medical field: nephrology – how is urine made? Well, what happens is, blood pressure drives in the glomerulus of the kidney, drives proteins sometimes, if they're small enough, but fluids and electrolytes through and to make a different kind of composition fluid; but then you still don't know how urine is made because that doesn't agree with what you measure. What happened is Richards, the great scientist at Penn, discovered tubular reabsorption, and when you tubular reabsorb the right number you get exactly what you get in urine. So nephrology became a closed science as a result of Richards' work. Well, in the case of antibodies, of course was the work of a large number of people, but it was a rather beautiful experience to see that happening.

That brings me to the fact that, by that time, having had this privilege of colleagues of such remarkable talent, I decided that I didn't want to stay in antibodies and in immunology. I never thought of myself as an immunologist anyhow and I never even thought of myself as a physical chemist, although that was a closer draw, but at that point I started to think in a way that has pervaded everything I've done ever since, plus or minus. I started to think of recognition, the problem of recognition, and that turned my attention to a field which is in some sense overlapping with immunology, at least in the early stages, and that is the whole field of embryogenesis and morphogenesis: how do you inherit your great granddad's nose; how do you make structure out of cells and cell systems and tissues etc., etc.?
Well, the problem isn't so remote because some great scientists had specified how you might do it. So I have to go back here to history and sort of say, well, one scientist, Haeckel, had this ontogenetic law – the law that ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny. If you accept Darwin – and he was a great fan of Darwin's – then he said, ‘When you go through and look at embryos, they go through the early stages of evolution until they come to... so you get the frog stage and the chicken stage, I suppose, and whatever.’ It turns out that of course that's not true, and there's a great book by Stephen Jay Gould called Ontology and Phylogeny which describes why it's not true in a very beautiful way. But then there was the fellow, von Baer, who was actually before Haeckel, who said, ‘No, each one does it individually’, and that came out closer to be the truth.
But then embryology in its later history took a funny turn because it became mechanized and the scientists His and Roux who opened a whole journal, concerned with what they called Entwicklungsmechanik – the mechanics of structure; how do you put the whole structure together? You will remember that during embryogenesis, what happens if you have a flat plate or a round bowl of cells, something called gastrulation sets in and you make a tube, and it has a head end and a tail end, at least for our kind of creature, and they concerned themselves with that. But then they moved away from the genetics, and so the true problem on morpho... morphogenesis – not fully solved by any means today – is how do you in fact inherit the structures that this morphogenetic mechanics gives rise to? How do you reconcile the one dimensional structure DNA and its message with the three and four dimensional structure folding up an embryo so that, in some way, the... for instance, if I had twins and I had identical noses, at least from a plastic surgeon's point of view, and I had the ability to color the cells in each twin's nose, or number them, how come the noses are alike but the cell color distributions are different, and yet you have it?
Well, as I said before, some rather great scientists – for example, Sperry for the nervous system – came up with notions, the so-called chemoaffinity hypothesis, which looked a little bit like antibody recognition... not quite. But the idea was that right down almost to the level of each single nerve cell and neuron you'd have a specific marker that would say, ‘Plug this guy in, that guy in, that guy in.’ Well, that of course fascinated me. At the same time I was fascinated by the fact that people who had been working on this business of putting together an embryo really had some rather vague, not vague but general... too general, non-biological theories – namely that the way you made an embryo was by non-specific forces, so-called Van der Waals interactions, and hydrogen bonds, and it was never attributed to a molecule. I remember, and this connects me up with my latter-day career, going to the Neurosciences Research program... I'll come to that later because I'm now a chairman of it... going and hearing Dick Sidman from Harvard talk about a mutant in a mouse... staggerer: a mutant in a cerebellum in which they could have point mutations and it would cause big differences in the structure of that brain and finally the behavior of the mouse. And I remember on the airplane back thinking, well, look, if it's a molecule then there has to be molecules that do it because you can't get point mutations under Van der Waal's force. So let's look for the molecule. And that's what I started doing. And I remember the same kind of reaction from some of my colleagues, which is... this is a waste of time. And for a year and a half it did seem that way.

I was searching for a cell adhesion molecule, and I remember working with a Chinese post-doctoral student who never wrote anything in his notebooks but scribbled things on post-its and threw them around the lab – that was the striking set of events. And we had devised a sort of assay: how would we find out how one molecule was responsible for sticking one cell together with another? What we decided to do is make an antibody against the surface antibodies, against the surface molecules of a cell, and then search for fractions from the cell that would inhibit the antibody, and that must have been the one that blocked the... the adhesion molecule. Well, for a year and a half it was a totally vain search, and then one day, the serum from a set of an animal that was the worst possible protocol you could ever use which would have been thrown out of a grant right away – that one came out positive, and we discovered the neural cell adhesion molecule which linked all the cells of the retina together from chicks... from chick embryos. At that point an explosion occurred in our lab, by the way. We would have a thousand chick embryos, lots of eggs, so the whole place looked like a chicken farm... I mean, no, the early part of a chicken farm. I guess in a chicken farm you don't do that: if the egg has an embryo you throw it out. But whatever is the case. We got very, very excited and we found this molecule.
Now, I have to stop and tell you another story. I was invited to go to the University of Rochester to talk about this. That often happens, you know; in those days it happened when you had some announcement of some singularity and I'd just published our first paper. And I got up and I said, 'Okay, this is going to be about cell adhesion molecules and the molecular structure of one which I think opens up a whole new vista, but this really isn't as important as the first work in the field, which was done by a very great embryologist, Holtfreter, who's dead now and no longer with us, but he showed that you could pull apart all the three germ layers of an early embryo, stir them up, and they'd recombine in such a way that you get the layers back again... an incredible experiment.' And then I went on and I gave my lecture about how it's mediated by this NCAM, the Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule. At the end of the lecture an old man who was partially blind came up to me and said, 'I'm Holtfreter.' And I said, 'Well, sir...' I tried to mitigate my error. I said. 'All great men are dead aren't they?' And we became friends and we talked about... he told me about his experience.

Here comes another epiphany. We worked along and, again, science is we, art is I: there was a group of people. And we worked out the first clone and sequence of the gene for this cell adhesion molecule and then I got hit in the head again, because, guess what? It turned out to have the structure of an immunoglobulin, of an antibody. And I remember what went through my mind at that point – 'In my end is my beginning' from TS Eliot, The Four Quartets. Because here it was I was away from antibody and it came back, and it came back with a vengeance because it had been determined just by then that fruit flies... your field, Ralph... fruit flies had molecules of this kind. So it looked like the precursor to both antibodies and cell adhesion molecules had the kind of primitive, as it were, fundamental structure of an antibody domain; which was sort of like a real deep lesson in science. You can't be too smart. The fact is unimaginable things occur, and even if you're interested in theory, it's never exhaustive – there's always a surprise. So, that began a very intensive effort in determining the nature of cell adhesion and the problem of morphogenesis.

At this point I became intrigued with what I still think is an unsolved but central problem of embryology development, which is: how in fact do you inherit these changes, you know? And here I had what I might call an impoverished but I think definitely tenable theory of morphogenesis which I called the morphoregulator theory. It was this: that cell adhesion molecules governed where their cells stuck together or whether they... when the molecules went away, they moved and we did know all these things happened. And so if you could find out how the genes for cell adhesion molecules were controlled in sequence, in terms of a loop of behavior, that might regulate how it happens. Let me make it very clear, I hope, by giving you an example.
The cells of the spinal cord... remember I said you have gastrulation, then you form something call the notochord, and then you have nerve cells that present themselves to make a spine... at the top of the spinal cord are a set of cells called neural crest cells – neural crest because they're at the top. What they do is they disassociate from the cord and migrate in definite pathways to form the peripheral nervous system – in fact some of the bones of your face – and they're very well-known, and they're in fact the source of melanin pigment, etc., in one branch. So what we found out was they were held together at the top of the spinal cord by this neural cell adhesion molecule, but the minute they were to migrate, the molecule disappeared from the cell surface, the genes were turned off, they'd migrate, go to a certain place, turn on this gene, put themselves back together again. Now obviously that doesn't explain the whole of shape. And since then it's been a brilliant set of efforts on the part of a variety of scientists to show that there are other kind of molecules that attract the cells in particular pathways, etc., etc. But I think the whole notion that the problem is to link the genetics with the mechanochemistry still remains as the central issue. And one of my colleagues here, Fred Jones, and I worked a long time on this and we showed that some very important set of genes that were determined by people working on fruit flies.

Wieschaus and Nusslein-Volhard showed that there were developmental regulatory genes, now known for example as Hox genes and Pax genes. And we were able to show that Hox genes and Pax genes controlled the genetic expression of certain cell adhesion molecules, which is sort of one quarter of the way there but it's by no means the full answer. Indeed, making an organism is a pretty horrendously complex thing. Not only complex because each individual cell is a whole universe of complexity, but because of the dynamics of these so-called primary processes of development which are cell division, cell motion, cell adhesion, cell death, and finally embryonic induction where one set of cells sends messages to another to convert its fate. We got to a certain extent there and it was really rather... rather pleasant, and a really different kind of problem than the antibody problem, because you notice that it is still not resolved. In the meantime, however, some remarkable genetics has been done. The problem is, I think, and this is worth mentioning, that when you get success you've got to watch out because it blinds you and certain problems fall by the wayside. You're so sure that what you've got is the whole answer that you have to sort of occasionally back up and ask what's going on. That isn't being done terribly much these days in my opinion. I think partly because the technology is so superb you can just charge ahead and think, well, you're getting things, but the problems of biology remain very deep.

It's true that Nusslein-Volhard and Wieschaus developed in a most extensive and precise way the variety of these genes and showed how it relates to... related to the so-called syncytium – the fertilized egg of a fruit fly – but it was in fact Ed Lewis of Caltech who was the first one who dealt with the Hox gene and Pax gene with his work on fruit flies, and he had this remarkable observation that the ordering of the actual structures had its mirror in the ordering of these genes.

If I look back on my scientific career which, such as it is... I see it's been dominated by one idea and that's a Darwinian idea – the idea of what I like to call the sciences of recognition; the idea that is underneath those sciences which is the idea of population thinking – namely, what you saw in Macfarlane Burnet's and previously obviously in Darwin's work, that biological systems generally work by selection. That you have a generator of diversity, some variance, G-O-D in evolution's case; mutations, recombinations etc. Then you have some kind of polling in which an environment is challenged or the environment challenges your system which has been made independently, and then certain differential amplification or natural selection. In evolution it's differential reproduction: the progeny of those individuals who have genes that give them a phenotype or a body capability able to be fitter and respond to that environmental change better, that progeny increases, that changes the gene frequency, etc. So you have this threefold thing or this two-step of Darwin – namely: variation, selection; variation, selection. That idea informed my work in immunology obviously, thanks to Macfarlane Burnet and Jerne, and also it informed my work and the work of my colleagues in cell adhesion molecule and embryogenesis. It still dominates my work in the nervous system to which that embryogenesis work led.

The interest in cell adhesion molecules was at its peak in about 1974. I'd spoken about the sciences of recognition which are to my mind evolution itself – development, immunology, and finally the brain... and finally neuroscience. And by that I mean in every case there is a kind of confrontation with an unknown which is solved in one way or another, depending on the mechanics of the system. And I told you that I was deeply influenced by this idea of population thinking, which I think pervades all of these efforts in one way or another, although not everybody would agree with me about that, particularly about the brain. So, as time went on, it became more and more obvious to me that I was going to have to bite the bullet and confront, not only the origin of anatomy which is morphogenesis, but the origin of function and dynamics and all of the things that go along with having a brain. I'd always been interested in this but obviously was filled with trepidation at the thought of having to go near it.
I will date the beginnings of my theoretical interest to an airport crisis which happened in Zurich. In those days we didn't travel as much as we do these days, but a fair amount of my time was spent going back and forth to various places and particularly to Europe, and it was in the Zurich airport that I missed a plane. Now, you have to understand that the texture of travel was quite different then. There was not the same degree of terrorism and fear of it and so you could sort of say, 'Well, you know, I'll wait for another plane.' Well, in this case I couldn't because I'd had the last plane of the day, and I was quite irritated with myself for not showing up on time, but I did have what I think is an original thought. It was: stop being so compulsive, don't worry about going to a hotel; just hang around the airport the way the kids do; sit in a corner and write down your thoughts about the brain. And that's exactly what I did. I stayed there for something like six hours of that effort, and another two hours before I could get another plane. And, in that time, I wrote down what were the skeletal aspects of a theory, a global brain theory. How does the higher order brain work? How does a vertebrate function? And I have to say that this was prompted by two things: the first is my work in embryogenesis which was very focused on the nervous system and on how you made neuroanatomy, and I'll come to that in a moment. The other was the fact that I was a very early member of the Neurosciences Research program.

The Neurosciences Research Program, which I mentioned briefly before, was started by Frank Schmitt who was a great scientific impresario at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]. He was a person who was interested in the biophysics of collagen – of these long molecules and muscle and things of that kind – but whose brother, by the way, became very famous because he invented a circuit called the Schmitt trigger; was also interested in neuroscience and Frank had the imagination to... and analytic power to see that neuroscience, which was not called that then, was not in good shape because the anatomists were not talking to the physiologists, the physiologists weren't talking to the chemists, etc., etc. And so he started this unusual organization called the Neurosciences Research Program, which was housed in the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Jamaica Plain, which was in a lovely French kind of mansion – you could have been in the Loire Valley. And I think MIT was rather glad to get Frank out of their hair for this purpose. But whatever is the case, he had the imagination of conceiving of a kind of small academy, the NRP, which would consist of people in all kinds of sciences interested in the brain, not just any specialty but a whole bunch of thinkers who were interested in the brain, and so it ranged very widely. For example, why would they call me, recognised as an immunologist, to join them?
Well, I found out for the same reasons you imply – namely that ideas come across boundaries, and sometimes the best ideas come across boundaries, when you think of two different things interacting. And so that was a remarkable time. It was an awful lot of fun to listen to people. And the contrast with the present is worth making – namely in the present case where I'm now chairman of it, I've inherited it; people are very expert but a little more cautious. In those days people weren't all that expert but there was an enormous amount of fun to hear somebody like Manfred Eigen describe what goes on in what some people call the soul in terms of fast chemical reactions, without knowing anything about synapses at the time. In any case, that interest and my work on the nervous system which became very clear that during embryogenesis nerve cells or neurons that fire together wired together – in other words they work epigenetically. Those two things tended to converge. And the more and more I thought about it, the more and more I thought: no way the brain can be a computer. It just doesn't make any sense. If you look at the biology of it, it just doesn't make any sense. I'll come back to that too. But first I must say that, at the time, the word neurosciences had not yet even been invented. I learned later by dint of an honorary degree ceremony in Sardinia, of all things, in Cagliari where I reserved a degree... did I say reserved? No, deserved... no, I got a degree; I learned that in fact the Italians had invented the word neuroscience, but I never told Frank that – he would have been dashed. In any case, it was a remarkable group of people: open and willing to consider way out things in a way that again was a little bit like immunology at that golden period... golden age.
[Q] Who were some of the others?
Well, there were... there's Francis-Vernon Mountcastle, a very great neurophysiologist; Floyd Bloom, who then became later on head of... editor of Science magazine and not neuropharmacologist extraordinaire, etc. So there was this just great expanse of different people, including some, for instance very great physical chemists like Lars Onsager, who is one of the giant figures of the last century.

More and more that I thought about it, the more I became convinced that this is an area where you really need to have a theory. Well, why would I say that? Particularly since the accepted and received idea was that the brain was a computer. And you know this problem of every great invention of the age becomes the model for your next biological phenomenon; to Freud it was some idea of the pump, a hydraulic thing, having to do with emotions and what have you. Nowadays, or then at least, it was the computer. And the more and more I looked, the more and more I saw that this just doesn't make any sense. Why doesn't it make any sense? Because even at that time, when we don't know... when we didn't know as much as we know now, the individuality and variation of each brain was absolutely overwhelming. It was just amazing how clear it was, at every single level, from the single cell to the synapse, to the collection of the different anatomical areas, to the whole relationship to the body and behavior, every brain was unique. Indeed a certain calculation can indicate that it's unique in all of the history of the universe – that all of us can take solace in the fact that there won't be anybody like us, even twins. And so that struck me as a very major issue, and one that had to be confronted.
Now people don't generally confront that kind of complexity; they don't like it. In science you search... you search for generality and you look for rules and laws, and this didn't look like it was susceptible. But then Darwin came to the rescue; in my opinion Darwin had confronted exactly this problem and supervened by showing his fundamental idea – namely that variation is not noise. That variation is a shot on the future, if you will, in a selectional system. And so more and more these ideas pervaded my thinking and, in that time – a little between 1976 and 1977, I don't remember the exact date at Zurich airport – I sat down, I wrote this thing. And I let Frank Schmitt know that I wrote it and so he invited me to one of his intensive study programs at Boulder, Colorado, where he'd invite about 100 scientists to spend two to three weeks with their family and present a whole view of neuroscience.
Well, he had me start it out and... and Mountcastle as second, and I... I presented this theory. And then Mountcastle presented his theory of the distributed nature of the nervous system – namely, it isn't in just in one place; that a function can be carried out all over. And it was received with a great deal of interest and excitement and without either Vernon nor myself knowing it, Frank proceeded to clap the two presentations together and produce a book with MIT Press. Then he called me up after he'd produced the book and ready to have it go into the publisher and he said, 'What shall I call it?' And I didn't even know that there was going to be such a book. I suggested The Mindful Brain and that's how this little collaboration occurred. Neither of us actually collaborated but the ideas were, how shall I say, complementary. Well, the book got reviewed – marvelously for Vernon and dreadfully for me, particularly in England. It was considered a disaster. They considered who is this upstart and what is he talking about and all of these words and what have you. So it was not particularly popular. It's true that Vernon was a great recognised master in neurophysiology and his work was more focal and related to particular structural features of the nervous system – mine was a global theory. Well, in effect, ever since then I've been doing nothing in the theoretical field but trying to perfect this notion.

In the first place, what is the theory presume to say? Well, what it presumes to say is to turn the problem on its head and say, instead of being like a Turing machine... which is what a computer is – a finite state automaton with a program with a tape head that can read or write a zero or a one and then move one step or move in the other direction one step and change its program again, and in fact even expunge a zero and one and replace it, which Turing showed, in fact. If you have an effective, unambiguous algorithmic procedure, you can have a universal Turing machine; you can show mathematically that there is not problem you can't solve except certain ones which he showed were insoluble. So this idea pervaded; I mean, people still in cognitive science consider this the central idea: namely, if that's what you can do with a computer, then why not the brain as a computer?
Well, it turns out, when you look at the actual biology and you go back, and there is a suggestion here to embryogenesis, things happen uniquely. And then you have the problem of... well, that means you have a kind of ambiguous situation – you have mistakes, so-called. Now what do you do with a computer when it makes mistakes? Well, you put in error correcting programs. But when you look at the biology, the number of possible error corrections would become unbelievably large. So this theory, which was called the theory of neuronal group selection or neural Darwinism in honor of the great man, said the following. That there were three fundamental stages: the first was the stage in which you lay down the neuroanatomy which was following those kinds of rules I mentioned about in morphogenesis – namely you have cell division, cell motion, cell adhesion, cell death, and... and the interaction amongst different parts, embryonic induction, in which one set of cells influences another by signaling. All of this is true in the nervous system, but you have to remember the nervous system is made of very special kinds of cells which are extremely polar, which have long processes called axons which go from one cell to connect to another through a synapse or connection, and also have other kinds of processes called dendrites which receive that connection from axons. When you look at it, it sort of scares you. The numbers are truly scary. Let me give you a feeling for that.
The cortex of the brain has about 30 billion neurons. It has a million, billion connections. If you count one second... one connection per second you will just finish counting 32 million years later. That's just counting them. If you calculate how many different ways they can connect, it's ten followed by a million zeros. There are ten followed by 83 zeros, give or take, of particles in the known universe. Gives you a lot of respect. So here you have this problem, that in each embryo, when you're making the nervous system and its connections and its neuroanatomy, it's true that these genes we mentioned before, Hox genes and Pax genes, constrain the fact that say it's a human brain rather than a chimp brain. But in very short order the whole process becomes epigenetic; it becomes that neurons that are connected, even at a distance, that fire together will... will influence which neurons wire together. That first step has to necessarily introduce variation. So even though all brains are alike in the way the faces are alike, they're also different in the way faces are different, even in twins.
The second step is related to the first: namely that, even after you have the anatomy, that there is differences in the strengths of the connections. There are differences in the strengths of the connections. So that the influence of particular events on a synapse are such as either weaken it or strengthen it. That's essentially like putting a traffic cop on each of the highway points, to let it go through fast, to let it go through slow, or to stop it completely. And neurons come in two flavors – excitatory and inhibitory – and all of the things I'm mentioning refer to both. The fact is this second process is occurring right now in our brains and is the basis, in large extent, a necessary basis at least, for things like memory, learning and what have you. So that is the second stage. So the first stage is what I call developmental selection, where you change amongst the different embryonic processes; the second stage is experiential selection, because obviously your experience of the input to the various neurons changes which ones fire together and wire together. But neither of those really covers the essential point that you... you're faced with when you give up the idea of a computer. A computer works by logic and a clock. Now I've given up logic and I've given up a clock, and I've said brains don't work that way – they work by pattern recognition – so what gives you the equivalent of time and space? The answer to that is the hard part of the theory, I'm afraid to say.

This is called re-entry and I suppose I can convey the idea by an analogy and also by setting up some structure. In your brain there are vast parts of, say, the cortex of your brain – that wrinkled structure I mentioned before – which are connected back and forth by parallel fibers, massively parallel fibers. They're also connected side to side. For example, your right cortex is connected to your left and vice versa though something called the corpus colosum. The corpus colosum has about 200 million axons going back and forth in both directions, mapping maps that are similar but not identical on each side of your brain. So when inputs come to those they send inputs back to the other side of your brain.
Well, imagine all these things happening at once and never staying still. Well, this is quite different than what you have, say, in this camera in some of the electronic devices. It's not feedback. Feedback is when you try to put an error signal in, after you've put an input in back to the original case with a correction; say, if you put in a sine wave and you want an amplified sine wave, if it's an error you send back the error and correct it, etc. In this case nothing of the sort is possible because we've assumed it's not a computer, it's not an electronic circuit; it's a selectional system. So when inputs come in to the two sides of your brain and they send inputs to each other over this massively parallel set of fibers, what's happening? Well, it's re-entry.
Re-entry is a recursive process of changing synaptic strengths across massively parallel connections in different parts of the brain. And what it tends to do is synchronize the circuits that connect these things in such a way that, out of the myriad numbers, certain ones are picked over others so they're selected. So here we have a kind of analogy with immunology; but we have to be careful here because the analogy's also with evolution. All of these selectional processes have three steps: the first step is the origin of diversity – you have to have some way of making differences. Second, you have to poll that which is going to be recognised by the recognizer or vice versa. And third, you have to get some form of differential amplification of ones that fit the past. In evolution you get the diversifier by mutation; you get the circling from behavior and competition in the environment, and, finally, in the third case, you get differential reproduction of the progeny of those animals that are more fit.
In immunology you have this process of somatic variation I talked about, where you make a whole bunch of different antibody combining cells, each 10¹¹ of them – 10 followed by 11 zeros – of different cells, each with a different antibody, one each. And then you pick those that bind a particular foreign molecule, even one that never existed before, and you stimulate the production of those cells, so that the next time around you see more antibodies of that kind. Well, in the brain what is it? Well, in the brain it is that a developmental and experiential selection cause an enormous repertoire of variant dynamic circuits. But here it's much harder. You have to think of the whole thing as very dynamic because there are signals flying back and forth all over the place in this closely coupled anatomy. And what seems to hold the whole thing together is this business of re-entry – namely... and we've tested this here in a series of theoretical models, namely the idea that, through re-entry and constant correction you will get synchronous circuits that work to be part of that repertoire and are selected. How are they selected? Because the synaptic strengths are increased mutually.

Well, there's one thing I've left out and it's a very important thing philosophically speaking or morally speaking... I don't know how to put it. And that is the so-called idea of value. All of this occurs somatically in an individual according to this theory but it can't occur unless you've already inherited something that we call value. Let me illustrate that by a concept... how do I put it? By... by saying there are, there are anatomical structures in the brain, about six of them, called value systems. For instance if I go like this, your locus coeruleus which is a set of little blue spots about 6000 neurons each, release noradrenalin all over your brain through a leaky hose. If I have you tested and you're trying to perform something for a reward, you release dopamine through another set of signals coming from parts of the ventral tegmentum and also something called the basal ganglia. If I go to other parts of the brain, it's acetylcholine. There are these diffuse ascending systems that you are born with that have been selected by evolution to give you rewards or punishments if you will, according to your behavior. Those condition the selection I mentioned in this ternary relationship, developmental, experiential and re-entry. So you have this system working together and that was the gist of the theory I put together in Zurich.
Well, since then it's been elaborated much more completely and, indeed, in 1987 I published a book called Neural Darwinism. Well, that released a bit of a storm and I found out that, independent of its merits, if you want to have a lot of disturbance around you, theorize in biology. There's no doubt that it's a little bit different than in physics. In any case the book gave a much more extensive analysis of the situation from more points of view and of the developing theory, and it also of course looked for evidence to support the theory. Now, as you know, there's no way you can prove a theory in science; there's only a way you can perhaps disprove it. And so far I'm happy to report the theory hasn't been disproven. I personally believe it is terribly important to have that theory because, unlike the other organs that develop, as complex as they are; say the kidney or the liver, the brain is after all giving rise to these amazing properties of knowledge, consciousness, all of the philosophical notions etc., etc., epistemology, how you know, how it all goes together, language. So how does this all go together in this disparate mess? There are so many different levels of organization in that brain that you're struck through with awe when you really look at the complexity of it.
Well, the position I took on the theory was this: that maybe we can't prove it, because you can't do that with a scientific theory, but at least we can show it's self-consistent. And so, as a result of that, my colleagues and I have run a series of brain models. We've made models of these different processes that I talked about, and shown that at least the theory is self-consistent. If you try to express a theory like this just in words, the complexity is not embedded. You've got to go into details and see how that goes, and in a series of publications we did just that. Again you notice the word ‘we’ because in fact I've been fortunate to be joined by a number of people, particularly at this institute, who are interested in this issue.

I mentioned that one of ways in which you can get fervor and sometimes negative fervor, is to produce a... produce a theory in biology, especially a global one, because you're accused of hubris, of extraordinary overarching ambition, even though it isn't ambition – it's more like aspiration and seeking to understand. But there is something else about it and I respond by saying that, in addition to its range, this book Neural Darwinism that I wrote was considered to be hair-raisingly dense – in fact, one famous neurobiologist said to me, ‘I put in on my night table and I try to read one page, and it's like trying to read a whole book; haven't you got any mercy? Can't you open this thing up?’ And it's true that there was an extraordinary amount of consideration of dense subjects. But I, in fact, told this chap that, when I finished writing this book – even this book, never mind the one that I did way back in 1977 or [197]8... when I finished writing this I felt like a Roman centurion at the time of the Caesars, battling each other, and I came home, they said what was it like and I was full of blood and mud and all kinds of things that were not at all resolved and that involved enormous amounts of struggle. Because what my chief motivation was in writing this book was the idea that a theory in biology above all, even if it can't be predictive, should relate disparate findings. They should make understanding possible. And it seemed to me the things that I was considering were not held mutually. In fact, I considered that the field was in crisis. What do I mean by that?
Well, crisis in biology is not the same as crisis in physics. In physics for instance you had that famous one that took all of classical physics down called The Ultraviolet Catastrophe, that Planck first addressed, when you had a black body radiator and you increased its temperature according to the so-called Wien law, what happened as you approached the ultraviolet is the solution became infinite and it was a catastrophe and only by assuming the energy was put forth in quanta could you solve the problem of radiation from a black body and that began quantum mechanics. And you had to take down all of physics at that point.
Well, in biology you can always blame the other guy, and I say there's a crisis in cognitive science but, thank God, not in anatomy, or there's a crisis in neurophysiology but, thank God, not in cognitive science, etcetera. And here I was trying this very effortful thing and I admit that, to this very day, it has a flavor of... the sense of an ending is not fully there. And so you have to be a little more careful about what it is you're saying and you can't look back retrospectively with the same kind of satisfaction as you can, say, with the antibody problem. And that came out very clearly to me and it's still true... it's uppermost in my mind right now. But I did feel there was one thing about this theory that did depend on the others, not on me, and that was to get a group of people at the Neuroscience Institute particularly to do these models which are based on the theory and show that they work. So, for example, one of the hardest things to show, and one of the hardest things to understand, is this problem of re-entry.
Well, we actually made models of re-entry, and maybe the best way of conveying what entry... re-entry is doing in a selectional system and a brain theory like neural Darwinism is to use the analogy of a string quartet. Consider that you have a string quartet consisting of four very stubborn individual players. And each one decides he's going to play in the meter he wants and in the melodic system that he wants, diatonic or otherwise, and when you listen you hear just a discordant mess. Now supposing some genie comes along and hooks up every part of the body of every player with minute, almost invisible threads, so that when a violinist leans forward to do X and a cellist moves backward, that's conveyed to the other guys. Well, pretty soon you will notice that what happens is they tend to play more and more in synchrony – they tend then to approach each other at least in partial forms to create circles of what I'll call the re-entry. That's the closest I can come, because in fact it is sitting still is one thing, it's not a solution like in physics – for feedback, you have something called first order lag with dead time; you send a correction function back on one circuit and you fix it so your sine wave is now more accurate. Here it's this incredible complexity. But gradually, as a result of dynamic interactions and simultaneity and in the nervous system changing the synaptic strengths, you get coherency, you get simultaneity, and it's those things that act as part of the repertoire that you're going to put out that is selection on your behavior.

There is one more very important point to make, and that is that in neural modeling above all, you can't just do many models abstractly and expect to get deep answers and that's because of the following: the brain is embodied and the body is embedded. What do I mean by that? I mean... well, let's take the example I love the most – for example, as a violinist... when you play the violin, it's a rather unnatural position; your elbow's all the way over here and the other one has got to be, at least according to the Russian schools, that you move in a plane and you don't lift your shoulder too high or knock your elbow down too low. When you look at that you... you have to convey that there's... there's a considerable problem and the problem is this: that if I, for instance, had an octopus tentacle or a squid tentacle that was extremely good at certain kinds of things, I could never play the violin, no matter what. And the reason is I have no joints, and if I want to play so-called spiccato or staccato and I have to have this kind of almost digital change in emphasis on the bow, having something without a joint will never work. Well, if I did put one in, my brain would change. And that's an important point that I want to mention.
And the reason I want to mention it is the work of Michael Merzenich at the University of California, San Francisco, was the first piece of work that I felt configured a real support for the idea of neural Darwinism. What he showed was that if he had a monkey tapping, say on a table, and he measured the response of neurons in the part of the brain called the somatosensory cortex, which is responsible for getting the messages about tapping and touch, he found an astonishing thing; namely that if he tapped on different fingers it would be a map that was individual for that monkey. So digit one would have this map for the smooth side of the hand, digit two another, third, etc, and you could make that map and no two monkeys were alike. But if, in fact, you had the monkey tap a lot, say with one finger, that the map responding to that finger would take other neurons away from the ones that are neighboring. Indeed, some would even take so-called face neurons away and make them hand neurons. And when you cut the nerve to the hand, one nerve – the so-called median nerve, that serves this part of the thumb and the first part of this, this finger and the first part of this finger on the smooth side – when you cut that the whole system rearranges its borders and smoothly. Well, the only way you can really explain that result is through something like neural Darwinism, that these neuronal groups are competing to grab hold of other neurons in such a way as to make a new kind of map. And that was a very satisfactory finding. Indeed, it's been reported ever since that violinists have an incredible large map for their left hand.
And this all fits this notion of neural Darwinism very well. So the brain is altered by what kind of bodily reactions you have and, indeed, if I wanted to get very much more severe about it... I'll say it another way. It is so strong that even cognitively a patient will react differently to what happens in his body with his brain. Perhaps I should use that example. There is a disease, in a field called neuropsychology. Neuropsychology studies in large measure things that happen to you for example when you have a stroke. Now if you have a stroke on the right side of your brain... in the part of your brain called the parietal cortex, right over here above your ear, a little more posterior, you have what they call hemineglect: you do not see one half of the opposite part of the world. So if it's on your right cortex, where it usually is, you don't see the left half. So when you look at a clock you see from six to 12 or from 12 to six, either way depending on how you're looking at it, and not the other side.

Well, there's another kind of disease related to that which is that, if you have a more extensive stroke, you have something called anosognosia, in which you don't even realize that you're paralyzed on your left side. So let me tell you the story of the neuropsychologist and neurologist Bisiach in Milan. We had a patient of this kind who had anosognosia, had a massive stroke on the right side and he came up and he said, 'Look, I've got these two cubes, they're identical; I'm going to put this one in your left hand and will take it in my left hand the other one. Now copy what I've done.' And he moved his hand around. The patient said, 'There, Doc, I've done it.' He said, 'No, you haven't.' He said, 'Sure I have.' He took the patient's hand and put it in his right visual field and said, 'Whose hand is this?' And the patient said, 'Yours.' And he said, 'I can't have three hands.' And the patient said, 'Doc, it stands to reason, if you've got three arms you have to have three hands.'
Now, that theory is a very deep theory that would explain that, and we don't really have that theory yet. It would be almost like what Freud said... would be the equivalent of what he called Anna O – a kind of paradigm case that, if you explain that, you have the whole picture. So the brain is embodied and it depends in its dynamics on the kind of body you have. But the second thing is: the brain and the body are in the world, and the signals that go to your brain, unlike what we do in our laboratories, are enormously diverse and complex. If you came in this room ten times and I changed the chairs or the... the table, you don't really believe that you keep every single detail of the last time in your mind, yet the number and diversity of different kinds of inputs, even at the same place, is absolutely astonishing. So how can you put a brain theory together unless you consider all of these things?

Maybe I should talk about the Neurosciences Institute and how it got put together and how it's influenced me. Because this speaks to some other aspect of my life which I hadn't thought much of until I've had you people provoke me into this, and that is: what the devil have I been doing with myself or, as my wife says, 'On your dying days can all you look back on is grey academic scenes? Let's go have a vacation instead.'
Well, I thought about this when Tamara... you invited me and it comes down to this: I've never served on a scientific journal in a board of editors. By the way, that's a quasi-political affair because not only are you judging papers and trying to be decent about it etc., it also is quite political in the sense that you have a lot of power, at least recognized power by other scientists. I haven't done that. But what I have done is I've served in a variety of scientific institutions on the boards. For example, I served on the Basel Institute of Immunology; on the Salk Institute, I was Senior Governor to the Scripps Research Institute before I came here; I worked at the Jackson Lab board; I worked at the Carnegie Institution, etc., etc. Why did I do that? Well, I haven't really figured it out but I think it has something to do with the story I'm about to tell. It has to do with my feeling that a certain way of organizing things is better than certain other ways of organizing things in particular scientific fields. And through this implicit experience I think I've had some benefit.
In any case, I mentioned Frank Schmitt, this great scientific impresario. In 1982, after being on the... in the group of the Neurosciences Research Program for 20 years – because he started that in 1962 – he came to me in New York and he said... at that time I was professor at the Rockefeller University, the Vincent Astor professor... he came to me and he said, 'We don't quite see where we're going; what should the Neurosciences Research Program do?' And like some kind of fool – I guess I didn't learn in the army – I volunteered an answer in which case I had the burden. I said, 'Well, I think we're not spending enough time on integrative matters and on things that are really matter... matter a lot to people. So you and I are both interested in molecules but you know maybe we should have some approach to dealing with things like sensation, perception, consciousness and all of that stuff.' And he said, 'Well, what do you mean?' I said, 'Well, why don't you go and ask the guys... the neuro... the associates of the Neurosciences Research Program what they think about perception, for example – how are we doing? Are we there where we can really handle it scientifically?' He came back a week or so later and he said 85-87% of them said there's going to be a revolution. And I said, 'Well, that's terrific. So here's what I suggest: why don't we make a scientific monastery – why don't we make a place that... where people can come and where it's small, just like the early Rockefeller or something like that, and people can come and do whatever they please and be as crazy as they want but deal in these kind of larger issues, because otherwise I think we're losing an image of... or picture, a pattern.' And he said, 'Oh, terrific, you do it.'
Now, at the time I didn't realize what he was really interested in had to do with some fundraising since in fact the Government had just created... had cut off his funding for the Neurosciences Research Program. But he had a larger motive than that and after a certain amount of effort I was able to get enough support, particularly from Brook Astor, a great philanthropist in New York, to start the Neurosciences Institute. And what was that Institute? Well, at that time it was purely theoretical. It said, 'We'll get a bunch of bright young people and we'll have them develop various theories using computers to deal with the complexities of these neural systems and see how it all works through... works out; not just the theory of neuronal group selection or neural Darwinism but a lot of other theories.' We did that for a good ten years at the Rockefeller and at the same time we became the home of NRP. By that time Frank retired and turned over the head of the NRP, the chairmanship, to me, and we still have it to this day. At the same we'd begun this scientific monastery. Well, by '92 it became perfectly clear that we were probably going to have to move, both for positive and negative reasons. The first negative reason was that fundraising could not any longer be attempted in good will without coming up against the needs of the Rockefeller itself. So we had to develop another horizon. The... the second reason was constructive: we had an opportunity to get funding sufficient to build the kind of place you see here, this beautiful architectural collection and set of buildings that is the home of the NSI, the Neuroscience Institute.

We moved from the Rockefeller to this place, for temporary quarters and then, within a year or so, we built this and we then could introduce scientific research at the experimental level. And my aim was to develop a group of people who would work as they pleased but, above all, not rewarded to be specialists but rewarded because they were either interested in solving a problem, a very challenging kind of problem, or to clarify a question. And more or less, give or take, that's happened since then, so I do want to say something about the nature of this kind of place; and I've learned a lot of things from people like Professor Rogers Hollingsworth of Madison, Wisconsin, of the University of Wisconsin, about the kind of characteristics these places have that are effective.
First of all, we're small; we have only 40 scientists. We do not pick people according to specialty per se. We are privately funded in large part, although we're now beginning to expand a bit in governmental support. We do not accept grants that are, how shall I say, connected to careerism, or the idea that your merit depends on how much money you get from the Government. We are very interested in having visiting people come from various areas, particularly older people to tell younger people some war stories about what they shouldn't do; telling young people what they should do is usually a mistake – it doesn't work. But we've had a visiting fellows' program since 1982 of over a thousand scientists from all over the world, coming here to do as they please. The only thing they can't do is have a scientific meeting which involves any kind of politics. And finally we are still the home of Neurosciences Research Program which appoints people by vote to a term of seven years, so we get an access to remarkable specialists from all over the world in an international frame. So this little scientific monastery with these characteristics has been able to do some remarkable things.

We were able to show, for the first time, that invertebrate animals like fruit flies can sleep. Now that is a remarkable achievement – not only because you can now do the genetics related to sleep and its control, but also because it simply had never been surmised. And what it's done is provoke an extraordinary set of experiments of Greenspan and his associates, particularly Bruno Van Swinderen, in which you actually can look at selective states that really resemble attention, even if it isn't quite like attention, in which selective effects can be seen in perception of fruit flies in virtual reality mazes. So that's an example outside of my own interests but deeply arresting to my interests, and I'll come back to that. But the one I want to pay attention to has to do with a remarkable problem I think probably unique to the nervous system.
I mentioned the complexity and individuality of every nervous system. I mentioned the number of connections which are simply staggering. I did not mention the fact that these connections are degenerate – namely that the same structure can give rise to different functions and vice versa; that the same function can be connected or correlated with a whole variety of different structures. This is a very important concept in biological science but before I deviate and describe that, I want to stay on the ball and really describe how we attack this problem of originality and uniqueness and degeneracy in the nervous system. You see the immune system was sort of easy because one cell made one antibody. When you got the antibody and you got the cell you could follow things pretty well. But in the nervous system you have these immensely connected graphs; you have these circuits which have innumerable connectivities and paths – a highway system the likes of which just absolutely even probably is greater than what you see on the internet in terms of connectivity. How are you going to deal with that? Well, one problem is this: that if you're even the most advanced kind of neurophysiologist who's measuring the electrical activity of each neuron in a particular part of the brain... in a particularly defined task, you can only sample hundreds of neurons at one time, but you're sampling out of populations of billions, and so you're never sure you're covering the waterfront. Second of all, the system is very changeable, so from animal to animal, even though you get the same function, you're not sure you're testing the same circuit. There's a push, of course, to make everything look very uniform but it really isn't.
And so that forced us to think very hard about this problem: if you have the fact that the brain is embodied and the body's embedded, you have this complexity but you can't sample them all, how are you going to write a model that would only look at, say, synaptic strengths, or a model that only looked at the body/brain interaction, or a model that looked at this environment by modeling it? Well, we came to the conclusion that we'd have to invent a whole new approach, and that approach falls under the rubric of brain-based devices.

What we did is we invented a system in which you could develop a device – it looks more or less like a robot in fact but it's not a robot – and instead of running it by a computer with logic and programs, you simulate a brain in the computer and have the brain controlling the behavior of this device in the real world. You don't simulate the real world; you actually have it in a platform where it searches in space for different objects and what have you. Well, this seemed like a sort of quixotic episode because, first of all, you're not going to be able to get 30 billion connections, even with the most powerful computer. Second of all, it hasn't got a body like ours. But third of all it does have a brain that's very similar to ours in the sense that we use the same principles and we never cheat. We never do a computer program with written algorithms or anything like that to control things. Now that's radically different from what's called artificial intelligence. The artificial intelligentsia actually control robots by writing logical programs and feedback circuits and things of that kind. In the case of brain-based devices, or BBDs as we call them, you have a brain which actually has synapses, real neuroanatomy of this kind, resembling this species or that species, and an environment in which it moves and samples and gets input, and finally it has a built-in value system just like you do, which you inherited from evolution. And what we've been able to show is that these devices... where we can look at every single neuron, these devices will actually learn. They will condition, they will do just what Pavlov did with his dog: get... get particular responses and correlate their visual responses, say, with their taste – I'll come to that in a moment – and they can actually even locate themselves in a room. So let me use the example starting with so-called Darwin 4. By the way, we name these things after the great man; we're up to Darwin 10 now and working on Darwin 11.
Darwin 4 was the first time we had a real-world device; looks a bit like R2D2, in which it had cameras for eyes, it had microphones for ears, it had a value system built into its nervous system, it had a nervous system with definite anatomy that controlled its wheeled movements right, left, sideways, it had reflexes just like an animal, but it was given a scene in which for instance blocks could be picked up by something called a gripper at the bottom of its structure, and when it grabbed the block, it would feel the resistance or the impedance of that block or the conductance. And things that had a low conductance, these metallic blocks, would be bad-tasting, and things with a high conductance would be good-tasting – could as well of been the other way around. Now the fact is each block had a different design on its top, for instance stripes or blobs, and it turned out we assigned blobs to be bad-tasting. Well, what would happen is Darwin 4 would patrol around, look at things that reflected light, go toward them, pick up a block, say, that had blobs on it and was bad-tasting, and that would change its neuronal circuits. It would then patrol to another block that was stripes, parallel stripes, and it would... that would be good-tasting and that would change positive circuits. And pretty soon you would notice that what it would do is avoid blocks that were blobbed and pick up blocks that had stripes, all on its own without instruction, and we could find out everything that was going on in that case. And we found out that we could even get it to condition secondarily; once it was visually conditioned to like stripes and not like blobs, we could hook that up to high tones and low tones that the blocks emitted, and it would condition to those too.

The most recent example is truly gratifying because there's an organ in your brain called the hippocampus – which is right here on the lateral margins and inferior portion of your so-called temporal lobe, and this is called the hippocampus or the seahorse because if you cut it and section it half across, it looks like a seahorse in its shape. It is the part of your brain necessary for long-term memory, and this particular... you may have seen a film called Memento. Memento is about a chap who had what these people have – an operation to keep him from fatal epilepsy, in which both hippocampus or hippocampi were removed. Now what happens to a patient who has that is very interesting; first shown by Brenda Milner at McGill University in Canada a long time ago, the patient is freed from his epilepsy to a large extent but the patient can no longer incorporate short-term into long-term memory. So up to the time of the operation they're fine. After the operation you come in and talk to them, they're conscious, they deal with you, you interact with them, but when you move out of the room and come back a minute later they don't know who you are; they cannot put down long-term memories. So we actually simulated a hippocampus in one of our Darwin automata, Darwin 10, and what we did is we had it perform a task in which it located a target in a room, according to what was in the room.
Now, what a patient with no hippocampi can't do is have episodic memory. It cannot remember sequences of signals or sequences of recognizable events. What we did is we, based on the neuroscientific research done in many laboratories, made a model of the hippocampus, put it into this brain-based device and had it challenged by a task which is based on something called the Morris water maze. Morris is a Scottish psychologist who's a member of NRP, by the way, who invented the following idea. He put a rat inside milky water underneath which was a hidden platform. Rats do not like water and so they swim around a while and when they find the platform they stay there. Meantime, however, they're registering everything they see, so the next time you put the rat in he goes straight for the platform on the basis of his episodic memory of those cues. Well, we made a dry version – we don't want to put our Darwin automaton into water. We made a dry version in the pen of a round area which has the same black color but different reflectance, and we allowed the value system of Darwin 10 to respond when it's over that. We then put it in and at random it explored, seeing these signals from outside – different colors on the wall, different stripes – and when it finally found the platform and stayed there and got a positive value, it would remember all of these things, so no matter where you put it, it would go in a very much more direct fashion for the podium. This is really quite exciting because it said to us, aside from computer power, there's probably no limit to which we couldn't bring brain-based devices.
Now, what did we learn? The brain-based device is not a real brain. However it is based on the rules that we understand brains to be and we look at every single thing that happens, from the molecule to the behavior, and so this is, I think, a very definite advance. What it's also advanced to... will be is in computing. Computers cannot be pattern recognizers. Let me open that up a little bit. Computers can do theorems – they can even prove theorems – but they can't select axioms. Computers cannot deal with novelty. You have to program them on the basis of what you know; they work by logic and they work by a clock. But these Darwin devices are not that at all. They learn by making mistakes. They don't crash by making mistakes; they're more like us. And so imagine that some day we may be able to construct a new kind of hybrid machine which consists of a Turing machine or a computer which has all this data and all this logic, hooked to a brain-based device which is exploring a set of novelties, so the two speak to each other the way we speak to computers. That would be I think a very, very important jump ahead in our ideas about how you learn things and how you make patterns and how you relate patterns and creativity to logic.

[Q] Can this approach, both theoretical and as instantiated in devices, ever get you to the issue of how consciousness works, of what consciousness is in a biological sense, or in any sense?
Good. Well, you've asked a question about something that has been considered to be outside the pale of scientific approach for a long, long time. Independent of the movement of behaviorism in the early 20th Century which distorted the subject mightily, the fact is that consciousness was the province of philosophers, wasn't it? Pretty much. Particularly of what we'll call of modern philosophy starting with Descartes. Let me see where I can begin. Let me do it this way. Let me start with Descartes and say how he posed the problem – because even though one doesn't agree with him, it sets the context actually very beautifully; it sets what the problem is. Alfred North Whitehead in his book Science and the Modern World made an interesting statement. He said, 'At the very beginnings of Western science in the 17th Century, two figures removed the mind from nature. The first was Galileo and the second was Descartes.' Now, both of them tried physics, you know, but Galileo was a much superior physicist whereas... and not a philosopher, whereas Descartes had some physics but he was of course... in a way that Galileo was for modern physics, he was the founder of modern philosophy. And so they removed the mind from nature for different reasons.

Whitehead pointed out that Galileo and Descartes removed the mind from nature, but both for different reasons. In the case of Galileo, he removed the mind from nature because it was in a sense none of his business; in his book The Assayer, he says, 'I know without animals you wouldn't have things like warm and green', or whatever he said, 'but that's none of my concern.' Whereas Descartes made it his central concern. He said, 'If I think and try to develop a method without doubt, a fundamental or a foundational method, what can I say? Well, I can say, "Cogito ergo sum, je pense, donc je suis: I think, therefore I am." And even a demon couldn't confuse me; even if he tried to confuse me I know I exist because I think.' And out of that came the philosophy of dualism, namely that science was not able to penetrate the issue of consciousness; that science had to do with res extensa, extended things, space and time; whereas consciousness was obviously not in space and time, and it was therefore outside of science, res cogitans. And thus began this whole philosophy of dualism which lives to this very day, and which is I think a common part of our language. Most people inherently one way or another are dualists without realizing it. Well, that's a good thing, because if they became propagandists for it, it would be really not too pleasant. Well, there are some. I forget... I forget our age and I forget the newspaper.
In any case, Descartes set the problem and so the problem is: well, how can you put the mind back into nature, all right? Because if you can't put it back into nature, science can't deal with it. Science is in fact... science is imagination in the service of the verifiable truth, and the verifiable truth relates to nature. So what do you do? Well, another figure came and I think he's largely responsible, even though he's beyond a philosopher – he was a psychologist as well – and that's William James. I'd say he's one of the few who put the mind back into nature. He said, 'No, you can actually study consciousness; you can actually do psychological studies and behavioral studies, etc.', and in his beautiful work The Principles of Psychology he outlines this thing very nicely. Now, this fell into oblivion with the early development of behaviorism, not in neuroscience but in psychology, where he said, 'None of that mental stuff counts; it's just not even... even in consideration, even as far as talking about it – you don't even talk like Descartes, you just ignore it.' Well, thanks to the cognitive psychology movement in the last three decades, that's been replaced, but unfortunately I think a lot of cognitive psychology treats the brain and mind as part of... as a machine model, as... as a computer, a Turing machine. So the question I've been interested in is: can we go beyond that and can we relate the brain theory I talked about to the issue of consciousness? And, above all, can we in fact even consider the heretical notion that some day we may be able to make a conscious artifact?

In 1978 or so, when I published this book The Mindful Brain with Vernon Mountcastle, I did discuss the issue of consciousness briefly. But it was only in 1987 and on, and particularly 1989, in a book called The Remembered Present, that I gave forth a theory of consciousness that was based on circuitry, dynamics, biology and, above all, evolution. And let me sort of outline that and then come back to this business of how a conscious artifact might relate to BBDs – brain based devices. The idea was something as follows: that yes, we could argue for ever about whether a table is conscious or a lizard is conscious or even a dog is conscious, but we sort of accept the idea that we are conscious, and we do that because we have a homology in our nervous systems and we also have a language for report and we can exchange back and forth and notice there are similarities in what philosophers call qualia – namely the experience of green, the experience of warmth, or the experience of a much broader experience.
And so, starting there, the idea that I developed was as follows: that some time in evolution this process of re-entry became commanding. That at a time when reptiles were precursors to birds on one hand and mammals on the other, there was a huge expansion of particular circuits of the brain related to a structure called the thalamus and the thalamocortical circuits. So I have to tell you about that. The thalamus is something not much bigger than a circuit of your brain – not much bigger than the end of your thumb, which relays everything but smell to the cortex in a vast set of connections back and forth re-enterably. So there are corticothalamic and thalamocortical connections. And there are... there are also cortical... cortical connections which connect the cortices to each other that I mentioned before. And the idea here is that the so-called specific nuclei of the thalamus – the ones that handle smell and... excuse me, not smell... the ones that handle vision, hearing, touch, etc. – that these specific nuclei speak to the cortex but not to each other. But they're enveloped by another nucleus called the reticular nucleus which inhibits them and makes sort of dashboard changes, can pick which ones are more active than others. That particular set of circuits and specific nuclei expanded in both numbers and types at a certain point in evolution; I would figure about 250 million years ago... maybe 225 million years ago, I can't be exact with these numbers. And at that point it was possible to have a re-entrant connection between the more posterior parts of your brain that mediated the sensory elements like vision – I'll give you the example in a minute – to more forward parts of the brain that have to do with memory, that have to do with memory conditioned by the matter of values that I mentioned before. So value, category, memory and perceptual categorization were related by re-entry. That was the idea. What was the value of that idea? Well, it was that when you have a system like that, compared to an animal who doesn't, you have the capacity to make an enormous number of discriminations.

You can distinguish things that are real, unreal, patterns, all kinds, in a very high dimensional space. Remember the numbers of connectivities that I mentioned before about the graphs of the brain. So this animal had an advantage. What was the advantage for? Well, the idea was: with those discriminative capabilities an animal could plan. It could not only just respond to the immediate present; it could have a remembered present. It could actually plan ahead to some degree. Now here I made the distinction between what I call primary consciousness and higher order consciousness and the reason it's important is, if you discuss the subject without making the distinction, you very rapidly become confused. Primary consciousness is just what I described. In that case the consciousness for planning and the scene that's created of discriminations is like a flashlight in a dark room: wherever the flashlight is you light up that but not the whole room. But a certain time later – perhaps a couple of I don't know what, million years ago, not exact – in hominid and hominine evolution, a new set of re-entrant circuits connected conceptual and the parts of the brain responsible for language to these other systems, these perceptual systems, and thus you could have higher order consciousness and be freed from the prison of the remembered present of primary consciousness.
[Q] And perhaps made language possible?
 Indeed that may have come.
[Q] It may not have arisen from language but...
 It didn't originate from language at all because in fact language is probably an invention based on these... these and other evolutionary events; in which, for instance, your larynx dropped down, you had a super-laryngeal space, you had the capacity for imitation; all kinds of things of that kind. In any event, when you have higher order consciousness you have what are the equivalent of words, let me call them tokens. You now can replace the input from the outside world with your own internal input of the named or token objects. Now chimps have this. Chimps have that semantics; they have meaning attributed to objects or codes but they don't have syntax. They can't recombine the whole thing in a structural way that we do with grammar. So they have higher-order consciousness but not like ours. By the time you get to us, after we've invented language during evolution – I don't know when, 70,000 years ago, 100,000 years ago, whatever it is – there's an explosion of terminology as it were, you have the stuff in your head and you can imagine all kinds of fantasies and your qualia or even more. Now let me settle that question.
People make a great fuss about qualia... they call it the explanatory gap. How can the firing of neurons give rise to these warm sensations, these green sensations, etc.? Well, that question is ill-posed in my opinion because it misunderstands what science does. I'll get to that. But let me make a flat statement. According to this theory based on the neural Darwinism and the theory of neuronal group selection, consciousness is the qualia; the qualia are the discriminations. And you differ from a thermostat when you record heat in the following way: with the thermostat it's two positions – with you it could be oh, you just crashed your car or had someone bump into your car, you just had a problem about collecting a cheque, you were thinking of this and, God, isn't it warm in here? You have an immense multi-dimensional interaction of discrimination states and those states are exactly those discriminations and we know, neurologically speaking, why they're discriminant, because the nerves that come from this, from the visual centers are not the same patterns as the nerves that come from the auditory ones and their targets are not the same. So what have you got here? Well, what you have is what we call a dynamic core. This thalamocortical system is essential for consciousness. It's known that if you have a stroke in the thalamus you can become completely vegetative and not have any consciousness ever again. If you have a stroke in the cortex – for instance, the V1 where you handle vision primarily, on the path from the thalamus, V1 – you're blind, okay, but you're not losing consciousness. To get the cortex to have you lose consciousness you'd have to obliterate most of the cortex. But the thalamus is another story. The thalamus has particular nuclei which are responsible for setting the thresholds of these discriminations. That is the theory and the key part of the theory is this key event having to do with re-entry.

I believe fruit flies can't be conscious – discussably conscious in the way that we're conscious – because they lack the anatomy. It's a little bit like Jonathan Miller who discussed as a cockney in his wonderful Beyond the Fringe where he said, 'I thought to be a judge but I didn't have the Latin.' Well, fruit flies don't have re-entry in my opinion. And if you don't have re-entry you can't have consciousness of the kind that we have – primary and secondary, higher order. So what is it that's going on here? Well, we actually did an experiment in which we tested this and asked the question: when you become conscious of an object, do you have re-entry? What we did is we used a modern invention called the magnetoencephalography unit, a magnetometer, which can measure with, thanks to the modern physics, with exquisite sensitivity, the magnetic fields created by the electrical activity of groups of neurons, as few as 10,000 of them. And it doesn't locate things all that well – maybe within a centimeter and a half – but temporally it's very, very good. It connects up things in microseconds. So we have a machine which has 148 electrodes and here's what we do. We present a vertical red bar in a grating, and a horizontal blue bar in another grating, overlapping each other. Now, your eye and brain cannot make those fuse, they're too much at right angles with each other, so what happens is you suppress one while you see the other.
[Q] When you're wearing glasses.
When you're wearing glasses which are in one case red for the right eye say, and left blue. Now that means your brain is receiving those inputs from both the red and the blue bars but you can only perceive red bars followed by blue bars followed by red bars, so we stick you in a room, we put the magnetometer on you and we have you record in a switch when you see or are conscious of red or when you're conscious of blue. As distinguished that's between the unconscious state so when you're conscious of one you're not conscious of the other. And we apply some magical mathematics Fourier analysis to look at the intensity of the responses of all the parts of your brain and we also look at something much more to the point – we look at the so-called coherence, which means the simultaneity, the synchronization of distant parts of your brain with each other when you become conscious. Well, the findings are easily stated. In the first case, when you become conscious of, say, the blue bar or the red bar – it doesn't matter which – there's a very sharp increase in your brain response in very local areas. No two individuals have the same combination of local areas; you have a kind of brain fingerprint. But the second one is the truly exciting one: when you use the mathematics to look at the coherence of the synchronization, you find that when you become conscious there's a big burst of re-entry forward and back and sideways, showing a huge distribution in that moment of when you're conscious of that particular object. So we have at least the beginnings of some hint of how this whole thing may work, but of course it's very, very early in the game. And I hope you notice... whoever is listening and who bothers to listen... I hope you notice the tentativeness that's entered into my conversation because we of course are tentative. We don't have the whole answer. But we think we have a beginning to deal with Descartes' foundationalism.

[Q] Where in the brain does consciousness lie? 
Ah, well, that's of course a mistake that's made broadly by people who've entered into the field in thinking that there are consciousness neurons, whether the consciousness is here rather than there. Consciousness, as [William Bo] James pointed out, is a process not a thing. And it's a dynamic process according to this idea of the dynamic core, which means a huge number of events all over in this re-entrant circuitry and, because it's degenerate, never even for the same experience, twice the same set of events. So the question is essentially in a way meaningless. Yes, it's happening in the brain – that makes me what's called an internalist – and I don't think the thoughts are out in the world but it isn't in one part of the brain per se, although there are parts of the brain that do not contribute to it – for example the cerebellum, for example the basal ganglia, things that are related to movement and episodic things, those may not be related. But you can't say there are consciousness neurons etc., etc. Incidentally, Freud made that mistake forgivably, when in a cocaine fit, after three weeks of taking cocaine... during three weeks of taking cocaine, he wrote what's called the Project for a Scientific Psychology, in which he attacked the problem of consciousness, and he said there were consciousness neurons. That seems to be not really the case. My colleague... former late colleague, Francis Crick, very much pushed for this idea because, in his work in molecular biology, that would be a sensible form of reduction, but I haven't... I don't know if I'd managed to persuade him completely, but I think to some extent that you can't pinpoint it that way.

What I'm stating is that the fundamental process underlying consciousness necessitating a... a particular kind of anatomy exemplified by the thalamus and the cortex, the thalamocortical re-entrant connection, is the process of re-entry. But that re-entry of course had to develop through evolution to give an adaptive capability that was... that enhanced fitness of animals – and that is that the ability to make huge numbers of discriminations through such a system, the dynamic core, which is highly dynamic and changeable; that that allowed planning and thus advantage during evolution. And that, subsequent to that, the invention of language across some other re-entrant domains allowed us to go to where we are – the ability to deal with truth and fiction and science and art and what have you.

This has to do with the very famous problem in neurobiology, which is the problem of the homunculus. And in psychology as well. And also the grandmother neuron, as it's called. The homunculus is the following: that if I think that there's the self in the way of an actual personage or whatever you want to call it – spirit – then of course inside that spirit has got to be another system which recognizes what the spirit is reflecting ad infinitum and so you get an endless regress; you get an infinite regress, and that's not possible. But you notice that in a selectional system you don't need to do that, because there's nobody instructing anybody. What you have in a selectional system is no design – that was Darwin's big thing; the argument from design... by the way, we're plagued by it, aren't we, today, intelligent design? People somehow find it demeaning that we might have happened as a result of mutation and selection. Well, the evidence is pretty strong, isn't it? So you don't need a designer in a system of that kind because already you have the repertoire as against some uncertain future, and whatever matches is what's amplified; so of course the size of the repertoire matters. But the repertoire in the brain makes the immune repertoire look silly; I mean, it's just huge numbers of possible states. So, yes, in another way, and I would say the huge number of states is very consistent with the idea of a selectional theory.
[Q] It's also one of the most... isn't it also one of the most obvious ways that you can get the enormous sophistication that we have as humans, in comparison to what animals, nonetheless even intelligent animals, can do? In other words, a dog or a cat, with a fair degree of... of complexity, the repertoire just in terms of anatomy.
Yes, there is an evidence and that's been known prior to any theory of... of consciousness or what have you. It's been known by the anthropologists and by neuro-anatomists that what we have, in the way of the huge advance, is in the prefrontal cortex. We have an enormous expansion during evolution of the size of our brain and particularly of the frontal and prefrontal cortex; where... in fact it's known by the way in patients that go into vegetative states and coma... beyond coma, that the frontal and the parietal areas are the ones that drop out, and so it's pretty clear that consciousness not only depends on them but, in the sense of higher order consciousness and the invention of language, that this is very curious combination of an event that depends on how you feel about language, which is a dark subject. But I happen to believe that you do not have a language acquisition device – that language did not evolve as such – but that the devices that enable you to have language evolved, and that you invented it. By the way, Joe Gally who argues this point with me – I think possibly with you – argues that those hominids or hominines that had language were sufficient to have it happen once because they killed all the other guys without the language.
[Q] Well... and they could... once invented it could have had enormous selective advantage.
Sure.

In 1869 Darwin had a... how shall I say it, was vexed. He was vexed by what Wallace did. You remember that Wallace independently created a theory that amounted to natural selection. Darwin, when he received the manuscript from Malaysia a year and a half later after it was penned, felt forestalled, he felt his posterity was gone; the only sign of human weakness I've seen in the man, but we'll come to that. In any case, in 1869 – well after Wallace was back... admired the great master and everything, Wallace writes to Darwin that he's going to publish something in the Quarterly [Review] that indicates that the mind of man could not possibly have happened, or the brain for that matter, as a result of natural selection. Darwin had a fit. Darwin really cared about this. By this time by the way Wallace was a spiritualist and Darwin wrote back: 'I hope you have not too seriously murdered your child and my own', meaning natural selection, and Darwin understood. What was Wallace's argument? His argument was: 'Well, the brains of savages are just as big as those of Englishmen, almost, but they don't have mathematics and abstract thought, therefore...' This is a bit like saying if God had intended us to fly She [sic] wouldn't have invented railroad trains. The logic is faulty but never mind. Darwin tried to correct him and he saw that what happens during natural selection is very many neutral traits come along with the selection; there's correlative variation, and later, 200 generations later, those very neutral traits become just what you need. So you don't need math and you don't need abstract reasoning – if you have language alone it would be enough – and in The Descent of Man he sort of implied that, I think. So, yes, this is all a nice kind of harmonious way of looking. It may distress people, however, to think that there isn't any sort of witness in there, huh? They don't like that idea.
[Q] I think it distresses people quite a lot.
Yeah, and so that's a deep problem one is going to have with all of this.

Let's talk for a moment about the Self. How do you get a Self? Well, if this is that consciousness arises out of this re-entry and reaction of the posterior and the anterior parts of the brain, the perceptual ones with the memory ones. The first thing you have, even in the fetal state, is nerve signals that discriminate you from the outside. For example, if a fetus moves, which they do a lot – remember the mothers who say feel it thumping – the proprioceptive system is already sending your brain different signals than the kind that you get when your mother pushes on her belly, right, so there's already that distinction of the inner and the outer. And as it develops after birth, certainly, in an explosion of activity, these fundamental parts of your body – remember how your body affects the brain – antecedent, they are well before anything else. And they're with us all the time, even though they're not as, how shall I say, as strong and evident as say a visual thing. You're aware of your body; you're getting proprioceptive, kinesthetic, and all that stuff, and that is a kind of contextual foundations of self. Now the problem is this: once you get language you've elaborated self in a completely different way – for example it's hard for me to believe that a mother pushes on her baby that the baby be insulted, but later on with higher order consciousness, if somebody calls you a fool you are insulted.
[Q] So with language you get ego?
So Mr Freud said. Or the other way around; I'm not sure what he said. But... but in effect, yes. The issue is... and that's a very interesting issue because it brings me to the next statement which is by way of conjecture. If you have a solid notion of consciousness and how it arises, and I have no doubt that that will happen, what, what is the impact? What does it really mean, all right? Now, if I have Einstein in Berne doing E = mc², which wasn't in the original paper but which is essential in the special theory... well, you know what happened, nuclear energy and atomic bombs and things of that kind; a deep... a deep change also by the time he had the general theory in all of physics. But what can we say about what a consciousness does, what a knowledge of consciousness would do? Well, that's interesting, because as we said before, ego... people work I think by what philosophers call propositional attitudes: beliefs, desires and intentions. Is it likely, if I know all of how my brain is conscious, that I'm going to stop working by beliefs, desires and intentions, when everybody who's speaking to me is working the same way? Well, I don't think that'll work. It won't change our basic nature, will it? But it will change how we approach psychiatry and psychology. It will change how we do teaching maybe and, above all, it's going to change the whole view of what things are like if we ever make a conscious artifact.

People make a lot of fuss about SETI – intelligence from outer space and all of that, exobiology. I think just as exciting is having some... there was a movie, wasn't there, about space... a lady astronomer who has an idea and she's in touch... I forget the name of it. Anyhow...
[Q] More than one. 
The fact is... the fact is supposing we had a conscious artifact. Well, would you be terrified? No, I don't think you should be, because first of all you heard what I said about the body, it would not have our phenotype, it would therefore have a different kind of consciousness; who would have in my opinion philosophically have got to have something equivalent to language so it could report like in that experiment about the blue and the red bars. But imagine what it would be like for the first time to ask another critter, who could correspond with you, what they think the world is like. What are the boundary conditions? Now, they might slice up the world in an entirely different way than you do, and if they did I wouldn't be surprised. And this brings us to a very interesting point I think about all of this promenade I've exposed you to about the pursuit of particular subjects and different subjects in science in different stages of knowledge. And that is: what is the basis of knowledge and how do we know things and how exhaustive is the scientific enterprise? Maybe we can talk about that later but I... the thing that naturally comes from this issue about conscious artifacts. I think I'd put it this way. No-one is going to be changed, I think, by having a truly established or solid or reasonably effective science... scientific theory of consciousness, but if they're told there's a conscious artifact I think they will certainly react, don't you?
[Q] Absolutely.
Yeah. So this brings us to this larger issue of... of what is it; how does all of this biology affect the way we are? Right?
[Q] And our concept... our concept of who we are.
And the concept of who we are, all of the above, and it's of course a, how shall I say, an incredibly potentially explosive subject isn't it? And I don't mean it in the same sense as molecular biology is a potentially explosive subject when it's applied to human reproduction.
[Q] No, because this one is far more threatening to people. 
Well, yeah, and it's threatening possibly to belief and it's threatening to a lot of things. On the other hand it's clear that, given the history of the way we've always worked as human beings... that it will happen. So there's another related question which we might discuss or we might not, and that is: what's the really challenging next problem? I mean, someone would say, ‘You're not satisfied with consciousness – you have to go to the next problem’, but I would say, if I were pressed, the next problem's to understand the complexity. The complexity that arises out of the process of evolution and how that affects how we do science.

I mentioned complexity. One of the most extraordinary challenges to science in general – not just biological science – is this whole question of complexity. The laws of physics are true laws; they're what philosophers called nomothetic – the law... for instance, the laws of thermodynamics are hard to evade. The second law of thermodynamics is a gorgeous instance. But the question of whether there are laws in biology and above all laws in psychology, that have the same – oh, how shall I say – warrant or force is a debatable issue. But let's come back to Darwin because I think this is very important.
Darwin left a work unfinished; he knew that. We are in the challenge of trying to complete Darwin's program. We're trying to do it, even to the point of The Descent of Man and the origins of consciousness and the mechanisms, etc. I think there's a very important thing to say – whether you believe that there should be nomothetic principles in biology, orderly put, so it's like physics – and I think that is that you... you have to understand that there is a component of Darwinism that is truly extraordinary. It never really existed in the same sense in physics: and that is the idea of history. That what Darwin did is he introduced history into science. Now, not all of history as it's understood in the dictionary, but the idea that there are historical events that have immense consequences later on in terms of the outcome. This is the basis of many arguments about whether, if we had to begin all over again, would human beings emerge from evolution. The argument I think between [Stephen] Gould and several other what he calls Darwinian fundamentalists, right? Dawkins and people like that. In any event, I think you have to keep that in mind, but you also have to keep in mind that the laws of physics, being very general, also don't deal a lot of them, with very complex events, even in physics. This has been pointed out by a Nobel Laureate in Stanford, Robert Laughlin, who's a physicist who won the Nobel Prize I think in the field of superconductivity, that even in physics you have this kind of thing. And so the idea of the exhaustiveness of science comes up: can you in fact say that science is exhaustive? Can you have a theory of everything?
Well, as I see it so far, as an amateur, because now I'm looking at fields I'm no expert in; it seems to me that if you did have a theory of everything in physics, the only thing it would leave out is a physicist. That's perhaps not the best deal. So we do... we are now confronting certain kinds of limits to science – some of them parochial, some of them economic, but some of them really quite fundamental. The parochial and economic are obvious. If, for instance, in order to get to a certain distance called the Planck distance 10¯³³cm, you need to have two supercolliders a light year apart, you've had it. What are you going to do? If you have to have string theory with a billion billion billionth of the size of a proton, and you need energies just beyond all belief, are you going to settle for a theory that's mathematically complete but not in fact decidable one way or another by experiment? In biology we have... not quite so critical, but quite a serious situation and it comes as a result of our progress. Our progress has been immense in the fields of genetics and molecular biology. We have techniques to do all kinds of incredible things easily, so that people, for instance, can start right in the middle; they don't even have to have the fundamentals of molecular structure in their head. They have techniques and they can buy kits and they can do all kinds of things – sequencing molecules and what have you. And there's a plethora of data; it's an absolute inundation of what I see in the journals. More new journals, more pages in the journals, more data, data, data, data. But what's in common in all these cases is a surprising set of affairs – namely, things are not connected up as much as people would like them to be.

So I'd like to contrast that with my own experience when I entered science – if I might use myself; I hope, as a humble example. We had to memorize the Krebs cycle and the glycolytic cycle, the cycles having to do with metabolic energy and ATP so-called, its origins of biological energy, and they sort of had a neat – how shall I say – causal ring to them. But now, when we look at so-called signal transduction, what happens when something binds to a molecule on the surface of the cell, which starts up a whole bunch of chemical events inside the cell, which finally sends something to the nucleus, which finally turns on transcription and that goes back to the cytoplasm and does translation; things are no longer neat. The number of molecules just is mounting enormously, and there's a terrible danger which I believe, Ralph, you've mentioned, by saying everything seems to be connected with everything. Well, if it were that way, that would be cool because then it would be N2 and you know the answer. But in fact everything isn't connected to everything completely, but to enough somethings to make things very confusing, number one; number two degenerate – namely, we already know there are many different ways of achieving the same thing in a cell; and third of all, we don't have the methods as good as our methodologies to look at the cell as a dynamic processor within the 200 milliseconds... a fifth of a second at a time.
So we have an immense challenge in front of us, and the challenge is posed by what Darwin already knew – namely, you select, and it isn't the case that there's one gene, one protein, one disease. In fact, Ralph, you've worked on this issue. It's that that the gene networks are not fully understood and they are perhaps maybe not as complex as the neural ones I've talked about, but they're pretty darn complex and we do not understand all the possible equivalence. We don't know which gene in the context of which other gene is leading to a particular effect. Now it's very important, I think, to understand our predicament because if you don't understand what the question is, you'll never get the answer. So the question is: well, what is necessary and what do we have to give up? What notions do we have to quit by looking at this problem of complexity?
Well, one of them is, I think, the one gene, one protein, one disease idea, even though that may be extremely lucrative for... for a big pharma, or whatever... pharmaceutical companies. There's going to be a point at which we must do some reflection. My own... my own reflection on the subject – which is purely a question of an opinion, not as an expert – is that we are in a stage of molecular natural history. We're really not doing fundamental work in the full sense of what's possible; we are, because our techniques are so easy, just generating vast amounts of data in a system that is sort of recognizing that as if it were an end. But it isn't an end, and I have to remind you that Wallace was off in Malaysia collecting samples out of the jungle with endless numbers of variants. In just this way that finally led to what he did with the natural selection... what Darwin did. In the same way I'm hoping that it will be recognised that, in biology, the problem of the 21st Century is going to be: how do we cut through the complexity? Now, there is a concept that people have pushed, the philosophers of science and historians of science called emergence, and this is the idea that at a certain level of interaction in ensembles, new properties emerge that you don't see in the elements below. There's another related element which says that, even if you know what the element below is contributing, it's not the language to use. For example, protons and neutrons are made of quarks. Well, you don't do chemistry in terms of quarks. That would be just too complicated and... and wouldn't really yield anything. So there are really immense problems of taste and challenge which I don't believe are being explicitly met and maybe there's nothing we can do about it now. But eventually I think we are going to have to address these problems if we're going to complete Darwin's program. It's already clear, for example, in consciousness work that the... a complexity of the integration involved in the dynamic core, the numbers involved, the hyperastronomical numbers involved, in integration, and then in differentiation from minute to minute, are so large that it's not very likely we'll ever have the opportunity to itemize every single thing.

This brings me to another point that I mentioned when I was discussing consciousness and that is the argument that people have in which they don't really understand what science is about. As I said, science is imagination in the service of the verifiable truth, and I want to put an emphasis on imagination which I've done maybe excessively now. But you have to do the experiment, so you have to... how shall I say? You have to think, you have to observe, you have to experiment, and you have to meet the right kind of colleagues, and then have a lot of luck. But the main point is that science does not promise an explanation of everything you can compose with your dynamic core and your... and your ego. What it does is something else, and if people expect that I have a theory of consciousness that, when I explain it to you, gives you the idea of warmth when you don't have the receptors, that's nonsense. For example, supposing I have a theory of hurricanes... this is a good time to talk about that... you have a theory of hurricanes and you have a computer program that will predict hurricanes 99% of the time. When it does it, do you get wet? Do you feel the wind? Science doesn't replicate the world; it describes the formal conditions on which events occur.
[Q] Isn't it also one of the challenges, the characteristics that you brought up earlier of the intrinsic importance of the heterogeneity in these biological systems, and how that confounds standard physics type approaches?
Yes, this is a very important issue. I'm not sure of the extent to which modern physics and engineering won't go in that direction, but it hasn't... you're quite right: it hasn't so far. It goes in the element of uniformity, because of the idea of control theory and the idea of circuit design has that property. The reasons I believe in that case have to do with something not realized. They make a big fuss about nanotechnology but it's not there. But when it does become cheap then you can build repertoires, you might be able to do it; but right now, in biology, that's the heart of the matter. And the heart of the matter is that you don't have a predictive detailed theory for which mutation's going to be best next, do you? And, by all means, no two individuals are alike, even twins; by the time it's all over would that be genetic events? And one of the great promises of modern biology will be, when we get to this stage, is to know what to give up. To know not to make certain demands, because they're silly. For example, in physics the one was very clear: a perpetual motion machine. The minute you understand the second law, you save an immense time by an axiom of impotence. You say don't bother, right? We haven't gotten there in biology and I'm not sure in fact that we will completely; but we know so much from Darwinian evolution that heterogeneity is the shake on the future. That's sort of the issue.

First of all, it's always struck me that the remarkable advances that have been made in linguistics and the hope that by making those advances you'll understand the origins of language may be a mistaken hope, or a misplaced hope. And the reason is a little bit like confusing the product for the process. I'll make that very clear by saying: supposing I had a Stradivarius which has gorgeous varnish and I chip off a piece of the varnish and I put it under a mass spec, and under a spectrometry and modern chemistry and everything and try to deduce what the formula of the varnish was and the family Bible that Stradivarius used. Not very likely. It's a huge series of irreversible events would have occurred. So I've always found it a little vain to think that by talking about generative grammar and language acquisition devices – sort of putting them off to biology – will really give you any insight. I think what's really much more important is to try to understand the process of discrimination... categorization we were talking about in consciousness; how you assign meaning through value systems to particular events, whether they're words or not. There are cases you know of individuals who have no language; they're human beings who have no language. There's a case of a Mexican man; there's a case of some people who have Waardenburg's syndrome.

And these... these individuals are born with blue eyes, although they're brown-skinned and they are congenitally deaf and everybody knows they're deaf, and they form colonies in which they mime... is that how you pronounce the word, or is it meem? They mime with each other but they don't have any syntax as sign language does. Once you teach them sign language they have language, but before that they don't. And so it's rather interesting to say, well, then you mean they're not human, they don't have memories, etc.? Of course they do, but they certainly don't talk in the way we're talking and they cannot refine concepts in the way we're refining. So I believe the issue of this language problem, which is one of the really outstanding problems of our time, is how you connect up the assignment of value, emotion, self, and meaning to a token, whatever it is. And the second problem is one that Mr Chomsky... although I think he's wrong, Mr Chomsky at least identified, and that's the problem of syntax, which is an essential for true language.

I would add that to the problem of complexity because indeed it is complex. And the reason that it's complex fascinates me because it's something that just goes a bit against the grain, doesn't it, in science? What you want from science is a kind of certainty, right? But if someone says to you, 'Well, wait a minute, what you have to have in biological system is degeneracy.' Let me explain that, because it won't work otherwise. Even evolution wouldn't work because you'd have too many mutants that are lethal. What is degeneracy? Well, degeneracy is what you see very clearly in the genetic code. You know that the code is a triplet code – there's the letters G, C, A, T, okay, and they base-pair à la Watson and Crick. Fine. Now you realize that the third, that there are 64 code words, and if you take out the three stop codons there are 61 code words for 20 L amino acids. So that means there are too many code words if you will on a one-one basis, and so what do you see? You see that the third position of every code word, every triplet, can be replaced by any one of the letters and it doesn't matter, in general. That means, say, to make 100 amino acids of particular protein sequence I need 300 nucleotides, roughly 3100  different possible chains can be made that all specify the same darn amino acid sequence. A truly degenerate situation. Well, what Joe Gally and I and in our conversations with you have developed is this idea that at practically every level of biology you see degeneracy, even up to the ambiguities of language. So my challenge to anyone who says otherwise is to go as follows: supposing you were just born with ordinary algebra and not with the capacity for language as we know it – natural language. Well, if... if you were born and could speak that language what would you say? You'd say (-B + -v(B² + 4AC)) ÷ 2A, the discriminant of a quadratic equation. I'd say, 'Write a poem', and he say (-B + -v(B² + 4AC)) ÷ 2A. You would not, in effect, really be able to deal with what's involved in poetry – namely, a huge richness of implication and reference.

You've been very kind to have even let me rave on like this about my own scientific career and I have a number of things to say. First of all, I don't think I've done very much, and the only solace in that, if there's any envy in it, is nobody does, because science evolves this dealing with what is the case, the truth – so-called the verifiable truth. Andy Warhol once came to me, the artist, and he said, 'Can I ask you a question?' I said, 'Sure.' And he said, 'Why does science take so long?' And I said, 'Mr Warhol, when you do a Marilyn Monroe does it have to be exactly as she is?' He said, 'Oh no, I don't even do it; we have something called a factory and we do silk screens.' And I said, 'Well, in science it has to be just the way it is.' He said, 'That's horrible, right?' So, in effect, to do something in science takes a rather long time even with the help of your colleagues, which is necessary. So that's the first thing. The second thing is, of course, in scientific work there are deep elements of luck. But, like everything else, I think, creative, you start the way an artist starts. Of course, the way I think you end is as a paragraph somewhere. Because in fact it is a web of knowledge in which the particularities and story of your particular quest might be interesting in programs such as this, and might be interesting in a human point of view, it's irrelevant to the actual knowledge and the way that would be transformed by others, even if it remains true.
For example, Maxwell's equations are not written the way Maxwell wrote them, but they're still Maxwell's equations. They have the meaning of it, even if you don't remember who Maxwell was. So I think I must say that, because it means to me that any kind of epistemology or theory of knowledge that is very severe, sort of logical, is if... in itself correct, quite insufficient, because knowledge is generated from experience; experience builds on this Darwinian base; and in all selectional systems you start with range, the repertoire, and then get specificity as a result of selective events, some of which are not even controlling.
So I would say... if you ask me my view of the acquisition of knowledge and of true knowledge, I would say I'm very lenient; I'm extremely lenient. I would think that you'd have to start with the infant, go into the society, interact, refine according to criteria, but never be ruthless – so ruthless that you say that all of knowledge is just justified true belief. If that's all, then it's not much and I don't think it's very creative. So I think creative people always start with this ambiguity, not the other way around. If you start with clarity, where do you go from there? That isn't speaking against clarity. As I've tried to tell you in these stories that the clarity of immunology was certainly a signal and lucky event in my existence because you could see with sort of an almost aesthetic glory – something like a Greek temple, okay? This extraordinary thing. But that's not true of everything we do, and it's certainly never true in the beginning is it? So, above all, biology, and maybe to some degree physics, although not as much, has got to pay attention to this, to this fact, that not everything has to be expressed as laws; not everything has to be reducible to simple elegant equations, although that's very beautiful when it can be done; and that it's all, how shall I say, open-ended and before us like a land of dreams.

There is an issue of choice in science, and what is the problem that you pick, and why do you pick it? Well, very often you can't answer that question because a lot depends on serendipity or accident or luck. But I have been reflecting, as a result of this conversation, on the whole issue of what I felt I should do in science. And part of it, as you know, has been to be concerned with what might be called theoretical matters – at least conceptual issues – starting from the theory of antibody diversity, the evolution of multi-gene families, which is related to that problem, to morphogenesis and morphoregulatory theory, and finally to neural Darwinism, to consciousness, to effectively the notion of degeneracy in biological systems; and finally to some extent and reflecting on your field, which we haven't mentioned and I may come back to it, sleep – coming up with a theory of what sleep might be for. And this brings me however to a contrast, because while theory, at least concept, is terribly important in science because of the imaginative component, above all you've got to do observation and experiment. So if you have to give up something, you'd better give up just vain speculation and go... go at an experiment. And that is by way of introducing what I'm doing now, without too much apology, although it's not clear now where what I'm doing will lead.

Let me say that if someone asked me ten years ago would I be working on translation, which is the process of reading out the sequence of messenger RNA to make protein sequence – finally to yield functional protein products – I would say they're out of their mind. But it turned out that that's the way it was. And it might be worthwhile saying how I got into it because it is by error.
One day I said to my friend and colleague Bruce Cunningham, 'You know the ribosome', which is that structure which is involved in actually reading the sequence of message, and it's quite an intricate sort of super-macromolecule made of sub-units, quite definite with both so-called ribosomal RNA as its component as well as protein. I said, 'You know these ribosomal proteins must be very critical – we should make antibodies against every one and see what that means for translation.' And he started to do that, at which point X-ray studies appeared from other laboratories, particularly that of Steitz, and those X-ray studies indicated that, by golly, it wasn't really the protein at all although the protein has an unknown function; it was the actual ribosomal RNA that was involved in the translation process. So to make it clear, let me say what translation is and involves.
As you know, the sequence of the DNA in the gene, in the genome, in the nucleus, is read out by a process called transcription, and there are several intermediary steps when you make the RNA out of that that I won't mention. But eventually you get a so-called message. And that message contains essentially three types of components. One is called the 5 prime untranslated region – that's right at the head-end – and at the tail end is the 3 prime untranslated region, and in the middle is the coding sequence. And what really is supposed to have been happening in the field is that in eukaryotes – that is organisms with true nuclei, not just bacteria – the... the message has something called a cap, which is a modified guanosyl residue. And then what happens is you're supposed to bind at the cap the ribosomal small sub-unit and then it dances along in something called scanning until it reaches the first start-code on UAG that really counts and then you're off to the races, reading the code and inserting amino acid after amino acid according to the code. Well, that's the dogma.
It turns out however that, once I learned that we were wrong about assuming the role of the proteins, we got sort of interested and, in the course of doing that, we found something quite startling which we still don't quite understand, and that is, if you look at the actual sequence of the ribosomal RNA in specific portions, you find that sequence represented right inside the message, or inside the 5 prime or 3 prime UTR of various messages that don't seem to be related. They're sort of like sequence ladders and they're very homologous or complementary. But that I mean they're either the same sequences you find in this 18 SRNA of the ribosome, which isn't a coding structure but is involved in translation, or they're complementary to it in the sense of Watson Crick, they have the opposite kind of reading for the code. And we still are nonplussed. We don't have any idea of how that happened.

At the same time something else happened in the field of neurobiology. It became increasingly significant that synapses were unbelievably complex structures; that synapses changed their strength through a whole variety of different mechanisms, but the one that arrested my attention and that of my colleagues, Peter Vanderklish and Vince Mauro, was that the RNA was sometimes brought right to the synapse from the body of the cell. You remember the cell of a neuron is over here, and then there's an extended structure called an axon, and there are a set of structures called dendrites, and I remind you that axons make synapses with dendrites amongst others. And what was astonishing was this. That sometimes ribosomes and message and other proteins were brought along these... these linear structures from the soma – from the body where the nucleus is – to the synapse, and then when the synapse becomes active, translation begins right there. That was astonishing. And it does change synaptic strength; that's well-known. So we got rather interested and we started to work.
What we have found so far is a bit out of the ordinary but not yet open to a full picture. And what we found was that it isn't necessarily so that you work by cap scanning; that in fact these sequences, particularly the ones that were complementary – in other words wherever there was a G there was a C, wherever there was an A there was a U, etc... when you looked at those you could show that, having certain of those sequences was enough to enhance translation. And so what we came into was the discovery of a whole set of translational enhancers. Well, we aren't finished yet, but it looks like that this process is much more predominant than people have thought, and in fact the idea is that these complementary enhancers which bind the ribosome don't necessarily do it at the cap, and there's really very little evidence so far that there's this true scanning. So we're still in an indeterminate phase where we trying to find out all the mechanisms... but the name of this story is one of opening up a whole reinterpretation of translational events themselves.
Now, I don't know why he said it, but Woese – is that how you pronounce his name, Ralph? – said that as far as evolution is concerned, translation is the key process. I don't quite understand that myself but it is of course terribly important in realizing what the genes have to say in making it function... what they have to say... function in the cell. So we actually came – because of my tendency to think in terms of theoretical matters – to a notion that the ribosome is actually a control element. It actually controls its own fate. And so Mauro and I put out a so-called ribosome filter hypothesis which said that. That it isn't just a little tape head and that's all; it's a most sophisticated structure, and indeed I hope that we may even be able to show those proteins which were the site of my wrong-headedness, turned out to be modulators of how this thing controls what's happening when the message comes through and gets read.
Anyhow, I come back to this notion that I started with – namely, why did I ever get interested in that? Well, partly because of darkness. I am attracted to this notion that... that style in science differs amongst different people and I know that my own, as far as I can diagnose my own, involves a certain romantic attraction to darkness. Wherever I see the contradiction or unresolved issues that can be subject to experimentation, I am attracted. So I'm often asked this about my own work; why did I leave immunology? Well, in one sense I never left it because I never entered it. It was... I don't want to be condescending about that, but I really didn't feel that I wanted to be in science a specialist in some particular area. I was much more interested in the idea of saying, 'Well, what defines the difference between an open science and a closed science?' And if it isn't that grandiose, what makes the difference between a problem which you advance the thing step by step, versus a problem where you say, hey, you know what, this just doesn't make sense. And I'm much more attracted to that. Sometimes, of course, it's nonsense but... and sometimes the work I do is nonsense but in... in effect, it is valuable I think to reflect on cues and clues as to how you want to work, and it may even be, although I've never exercised this, useful to young people, to give them a kind of picture, a panorama, of types of science.

[Q] It also brings you once again into conflict with accepted dogma, which also seems to be a recurring theme.
Yeah, I never thought of it that way but of course that's a risk, isn't it?
[Q] Well, and the question then becomes how... how to... how to handle that? How to deal with it. 
What is the picture of that Italian artist that you have in your office?
[Q] Morandi.
Morandi, yes. My friend Milton Glaser, who invented Pushpin Studios and is a great applied artist and etc., told me about studying with Morandi and I said, 'What was it like?' And he said, 'Well, you know... he didn't say anything. And finally he did say something.' I said, 'What did he say?' He said, 'He came into the room, he saw me painting, he put his hand on my shoulder and he said, “Coraggio – courage.” That was all he said.' He said, 'But I got something out of it and I don't know why.' Nonetheless you're right, I hadn't thought of it that way. But there is a piece of advice there. You could say whenever... say to a young person, whenever you see in the literature and in the report of the day some kind of contradiction, don't just gloss over it. Don't attribute it to error or whatever; go and ask, 'Well, what's missing? What is going on here? The thing doesn't gel.' And there are a lot of... contrary to public opinion, I think there are a lot of received ideas in science that are like that; they get inserted and they hang, and no-one picks up the contradiction.
[Q] Well, there's also... maybe also there's another... another angle on it which has to do with not taking a Panglossian view of the progress of science. Or as Barzan once said, 'The march of science is less an orderly parade than it is a mad dash for the open spaces ahead.'
More than that, and modern life is like confetti without the parade. But be... be that as it may, I... I would go along with that. I think that there is a kind of a triumphalism that comes from physics, right? It's sort of amazing how human intellect and experiment has been able to give you a picture of the world that's so inobvious, so different than our commonsense view of what reality is so called. There's that famous case of Eddington's desk. Eddington the physicist said, 'You know, here I am looking at my desk, but if I go down at the quantum level there are all these electromagnetic repulsions and movements and uncertainties and weirdness that I can't...' Now what's going on here? Well, when you look at the triumphalism of physics, the grand space of cosmology and the microscopic way down into the quantum field you say... you have to say that's fantastic, but if it reflects too statically on the notion of how you acquire knowledge, and what the question is, then I think you can get in a lot of trouble. And I think in biology – again because I think Darwin introduced history into the whole issue – you... without obscurantism, without saying you can't understand it, you have to be much more modest in a certain way because there are things that don't make any sense at all, and that is the whole point. The point of evolution is that...
Well, let me stop and say there's another way of looking at it. Steven Weinburg, who's a pretty great physicist, once attacked me in the New York Review of Books. He said, 'Edelman's theory may be right, speaking about Neural Darwinism, but he has to understand the whole thing has to be expressed in terms of a super-symmetry relationship or the four forces of nature. He is an extreme reductionist.' He said, 'Except for historical accidents.' And so I actually sat down to write him a letter: 'Dear Steve, you are a historical accident.' I didn't send it, but when I saw him in Sweden I mentioned it to him, and his position was that the universe is essentially pointless and meaningless; but if you look at it as a biologist, that, this can't be the case because of the introduction of value that says run, mate, eat etc., that is a value system that is absolutely built in to the notion of Darwinian selection and fitness. And so I'm not saying that our moral values come directly from there because I don't believe that ought comes from is. I think Hume was right. On the other hand not everything of science is value-free, and not everything of morals is free of facts. And so there is this interesting balance that biology and maybe especially neurobiology poses: that you have to look at the acquisition of knowledge and truth in a not more... not in a sloppier way, but in a more lenient fashion, because in fact not even physics has really analyzed super-complex situations and we've talked about that.

[Q] Does the notion of how the brain processes the world and how we acquire knowledge and certainty then run afoul of the sort of everyday necessity of working in the world and of dealing in the scientific community?
Well, those are three different things, aren't they? First of all, working in the world, for sure most people work in what you might call the common sense mode, right? They don't worry about quarks when they go to work. They don't consider the second law of thermodynamics as an axiom of impotence or anything of the sort. And sensibly so. They deal mostly in fact with other human beings, right? Speak about culture and co-evolution. In... in the practice of science, coming back to our issue of style, it does seem to me that style is in some degree field dependent. That if you try to apply this style that you apply say a high-energy physicist to say genetics, your field, you would not really be equipped to get very far. And the physicist might say in return, ‘Neither would you get very far if I used your kind of approach which is by my standards quite sloppy.’ But I believe there isn't the contradiction. I believe that there's something interesting about it, though, which I think I've said before – namely that you proceed from ambiguity to clarity, not the other way around. And if you try to say, ‘Oh no, we'll be clear right from the beginning’, just like mathematics might seem to be, you get into a little bit of trouble. And the trouble has to do with the unknown; the fact that... and that may be worth pursuing; I never thought of it this way. But in Darwinian terms the future environment is unknown, isn't it? And the mutation and the set and ensemble of structures you have selected are a kind of shake against a future which you can't even really predict because it's not even cognitive.
Now, what happened with cognition is you added to that a power of prediction though consciousness of a certain kind. We were talking about music; I'll give you the example. If someone says what's the function of consciousness since... maybe I haven't said this, but it takes maybe up to 400 milliseconds before you formulate a true conscious image or whatever. The... the function of consciousness to me is simply a little bit like this. Supposing you were a musician and you were practicing for a concerto – let's see Beethoven's Third with an orchestra – and you take a particular sequence of notes which you haven't seen before and consciously learn them until they go... become unconscious, procedural memory, and then you rattle them right off; and then you do the same with another phrase, and then you hook the two together again consciously. Now you go into concert; the last thing you want to do is think of your fingers moving up and down, right? But then supposing the conductor lags the beat... oh, boy. You get an alert and say, ‘I'd better do something about this’ – that is what consciousness is about. It's not for the immediacy of moving your fingers at seven hertz per second; it's more the fact of projecting what compensation has to be done if things deviate from expectation.
So it is interesting to think in a Darwinian mode about Darwin's natural selection as being a ruthless but nonetheless most remarkable way of saving value if you will; and, at the same time, think of what happened that evolution made these selectional systems somatic ones like the immune system and the brain, to deal with conditions that could not be predictive during natural selection; for example, it could hardly be that natural selection could define an antibody combining site in detail for a molecule that never existed before, any more than evolution could deal with what happens in cognition when you think up, say, a James Joyce novel. But to me I think it's all of a piece – that... that in effect it has to be said that the physicist precedes the physics; that in effect it doesn't go the other way around; you just can't turn a crank and get new ideas. The way new ideas appear is in some degree mysterious but certainly never super-precise. Now people might argue about that, I'm not sure, but it seems to me there is a cogent picture here, and it's what I call a picture that supports a notion I'll call – for the moment, I've never used it before – lenient epistemology. Namely the way you learn is first blunder and not blunder randomly, use every cue you have, but above all use the human capacity to consciously, in higher-order consciousness, make whole new constructs and then see how they fit. I think Planck was really not very happy with what he did. When you read about it, he really was a bit demure, even though what he did is create an extraordinary revolution.
Now, that... that's another point that I think is worth putting next to lenient epistemology. By the way, I call it lenient because I believe that the classical picture... we talked of Willard Van Orman Quine, who insisted that what you should do is naturalize epistemology, make it part of psychology, and thus not get into these sterile arguments. But even then, he pretty much belonged to the school of the idea of justified true belief – that snow is white quote unquote, it is true if and only if snow is white, and what you do is prove propositional statements. But that's very severe and it seems to me that... that the idea is you want to go much more leniently than that.

It seems to me that there's another issue of scientific style – the thing you mention, and that is the... the place of crisis in science. And I think I mentioned before that the idea of the ultraviolet catastrophe which was one super crisis. There's a beautiful book – I don't remember the author's name – on Night Thoughts of a Theoretical Physicist. He was a Princeton historian of science who wrote it – forgive me that I don't remember his name – but it was about this German during, just before World War I who was a classical physicist, a smug professor, and all of a sudden came the ultraviolet catastrophe and Planck's idea, the quanta of energy. And his whole world crashed around him.
Well, physics has no choice; it's so tightly coupled that way that, once you destroy some big fundamental issue, you've got to re-examine everything. I think because of the adventitiousness and history... historical properties of evolution, you can evade that at least for a while, or as Joe Louis once said about Max Schmeling: 'He can run but he cannot hide.' You can run for a while but you do have to face it. And because of the extraordinary specialization and – how do I call it – sub-discipline requirements of certain biological efforts, you always can say of the crisis, 'It's the other guys.' I notice that people don't like the idea of crisis, but I think that on the contrary that's just the higher-order equivalent of what I'm talking about is when you see a contradiction in literature. It's a wonderful moment. It says, 'Hey, now you really have a problem to think about.'
Now I have to say – and we've talked about this – that the antibody case that I discussed happened to be singular in respect to the fact that the history of previous researchers and the work on the subject, and the fact that it's a very special evolutionary system, made it tightly constraining so that once you got the structure, the darned thing just opened up like a periodic table; you could see what happened. A guy once came to me and he said... after the Nobel Prize, he said, 'What do you... what... what disease did you cure?' I said, 'None.' He said, 'Well, then why the heck did they pay any attention to you?' I said, 'Well, there was chemistry before the periodic table of Mendeleyev, but once you had the periodic table, chemistry went 100 times faster.' And that's true about what happened with antibody structure; you... you could just see clearly all kinds of things to do in any case where antibodies were involved, in any disease. But that doesn't happen often and sometimes... and I think it's very often the case of luck that I fell into that... because when you look at, say, cell adhesion molecules... yes, that was a discovery, and it did change the way people thought... thought about the subject, because it wasn't just weak forces; it was molecules that were very specific... homophilic in their binding each to each etc., and very revealing... but not closing out, for example, the problem of morphogenesis, which is still an open science.
And I guess what I'm doing now could even be looked at as parochial in comparison, although it's a very fundamental molecular biological process and sure does matter about synapses and their strength. So there is this wonderful issue which I just can't really penetrate of how do you choose? How do you choose? There's another I think salient issue, one that's related, and that is: how many things do you think you can do in a scientific life? Well, don't speak to Einstein; he'll make you feel bad, because of course in one year annus mirabilis he put out five papers, three of which were totally revolutionary, and I believe without reference to anyone else – not out of selfishness but just out of his sheer originality. In general it takes a long time, and it takes a fair number of people, and it is an interesting and fascinating question to go to a third subject which is: what is the role of the individual, the individual talent; what is the role of the tradition of the field, you might say; and what is the role of happenstance of groups of people meeting in a particular historical time... when they're ready? And then at that point you have to add... and maybe the guy who's picked to be the leader doesn't even know it at the time, that it's not malipulable. So there is a wonderful, sort of almost romantic mystery about the creative part of science, isn't there? Like every creative issue.

I served on the advisory boards of scientific institutions – I think largely out of curiosity of how these organizations and clotting... clot... clots of people worked in a particular domain. Part of it is historical but part of it is sensible and logical and came out of the thoughts of leading scientists. So the question is... Rogers Hollingsworth's comment as a visitor here, that we sort of instantiated the Neurosciences Institute, what he's found in his sociological studies. I should say Hollingsworth is a Professor of History and Sociology at the University of Wisconsin... in Madison. And he has studied the sources of the greatest biomedical breakthroughs of the last century in a very serious set of studies, and he comes up with the notion that there were really three organizations that met the... the test. The first was the Rockefeller, the early Rockefeller University, which had more of these...
[Q] Rockefeller Institute.
Before that, excuse me, you see what happens when you're conditioned by your own experience. Yes, it was of course the early Rockefeller Institute, the University didn't start till 1959 or something like that. The early Rockefeller Institute, the early Caltech, and Cambridge University in England in a few colleges; and he found that the thing they had in common... the things they had in common were: one, they were relatively small, so there was communication distance that was not too large; they were freely funded, whether from government or private sources, but free in the sense that there wasn't any lawyering going on and manipulation and PR and all that; and third of all, they were diverse but not too diverse, so you could cross fields... which is, by the way, a subject we haven't mentioned... the crossing of fields is damned important. So, in effect, it turned out that through Hollingsworth I realized that I'd been speaking prose all my life, because it never occurred to me, and I had no knowledge of his work, when we founded the Institute, that they... that founding embodied all this kind of stuff. And really what influenced me, I suppose, was sort of unconscious issues from my own experience. For example, it was my experience at the Rockefeller that conditioned many of the things we instantiated here. We didn't make it all up. And in fact you might say it this way: we happened to be unique without being original.
And there's an interesting process there. How come these places and that style of organization disappeared? What happened in the process of science? And... and one answer is: oh, it was because science became successful. In a certain way – you might say ironically – that certain times success is failure, because the minute you get successful you stop hunting and thinking about what there might be in the way of other modes. And in effect I think what happened – although I'm no expert at this – is that the huge increase in the number of scientists in the technology of doing biological science particularly overwhelmed these small centers, and their new generations were not tempted to be rewarded in the same fashion. That may be a superficial analysis because, in part, some of these places rested on a certain paternalism that would not be popular here today. There was a sort of paternal or father-son... forgive me, it wasn't maternal – the only woman at the Rockefeller at the time I was there of major significance, according to them, was Rebecca Lancefield, in... who typed all the streptococci and was a great scientist. So these components drift and it is an interesting thing to think about: whether the social structures and organizations, in the way Hollingsworth would put it of science, guarantees greater or lesser degrees of success.

[Q] It's to some degree a matter of contention and controversy amongst scientists as to the value of writing books as opposed to publishing research papers, and you've certainly devoted a fair amount of energy to writing books. How do you see those issues?
I see a mixed picture of pleasure and pain. You're quite right. I think that the... if I took what I'll call the reduced picture – and this is probably wrong and maybe Jacques Barzun should be in the room to say what's really right – I think the professional scientists, the idea of the scientific profession, which we might even discuss in terms of Sir Humphrey Davy, for example, who tried to do that for the first time... the idea of professional in science says, look, pick one field, stick with it, dominate it, and write papers, don't write books. If you write books the delay is too great. No-one's going to listen. Who reads anyhow? Etc., etc., etc.
I think there's a certain truth in that because the notion of urgency and speed has entered into science. There's a necessary concomitant of this large-scale incredible increase in the number of people in that fancy technology they can use by going in the middle. Indeed I think it's worth mentioning that. That in the old days you really had to master the fundamentals of a field before you did anything because you mostly had to build your own stuff. But now, by golly, you can actually hire somebody to do parts of your experiment. When that happened in my laboratory across the street at the Scripps Research Institute, when my kids said to me, 'We'll just have these guys... we'll pay them to do this gene cloning for us.' I said, 'What, you'll pay some commercial outfit to do what is your experiment?' And their comment was: 'Boss, you want the Japanese to get ahead?' And that was what I remembered and I had to acquiesce; and, besides, they told me it was cheaper.
So, you see, this peculiar set of flavors that never really were felt back then are being felt now. And so certainly your comment about books is true. There's another issue. The longer the book, the smaller the number of readers. There is this terrific thing of what I'll call sort of the museum-goer who says in Holland, 'Where's the night watch? Quick, I'm double-parked.' There is this terrific sense of urgency that has always puzzled me because, in effect, there's a kind of obsessive notion about deep ideas, right? I mean, what kind of technology, besides lens grinding, did Spinoza have? Or how come you have these extraordinary thinkers of the past that didn't have all of this, and we had the thinkers of the near present anyhow like Einstein and some of the great physicists. What's going on? Or you had Darwin – obsessive to such a degree right? And in a sense forced to write that book by the events, by the fact that when Wallace came along he thought he was forestalled and he'd better get it all together: years and years of notes. The atmosphere is not favorable to that, but it is favorable to, for instance, writing very popular books in which you bowdlerize the ideas, or you try to sell a disease or something.
Well, I've made every possible mistake a person can make. For instance Neural Darwinism is a book of high density and, as I think of it, without making excuses against negative criticism, I felt when I'd finished that book, like a centurion full of blood, and mud and having come from the marshes and sort of fatigued, and saying I got to get to bed. Very challenged because it was coming to the edge of a whole set of concepts. Certain books I've written are not like that. I did write this trilogy in which I tried to embody this whole view of science and I don't know to what extent it's been really accepted or acceptable. The first one was... not necessarily in temporal order... was Topobiology – the idea of morphogenesis, gene expression governing molecules that converted the whole message into mechanics of cells and how they stuck together or didn't stick together and moved. And then there was Neural Darwinism. Finally there was The Remembered Present. That trilogy was saying, 'I want to go from the form in Darwin's program which was certainly selected, all the way on up to these very complex events of mind like... like consciousness.' And so, yes, I've done that, and I've also, as Chairman of the Neurosciences Research program and of the Neurosciences Institute, edited along with others... with Einar Gall, Max Cowan, edited ten other books on symposia that we had here. So, yes, I've been embedded in that, but I think the implication of your question, isn't it, is that papers are more fruitful in the scientific domain... in the sense of conveying ideas.
[Q] Or at least, that's what some think, and the question is, are there things that can be done in a book that can't be done in a paper?

Sure, absolutely what you can do is die and hope that someone will read them. I mean, effectively they're a longer range instrument; let's put it that way. That it is a subject in itself to ask what makes books disappear and what makes certain books reappear? In the scientific world, something specialist happened again that didn't have the same implication. Let me give an example. You had a great thinker like JBS Haldane in your field – well, you remember he wrote these wonderful essays, and then the essays were compacted into books; that it wasn't that he was so, sort of, trying to do a sexy thing for the public, although those books really made an impression on scientists. And from time to time this happens in science; something... is it Williams's book on evolution? Things of that kind where it just grabs you at the right time.
[Q] The Origin of Species.
Well, The Origin of Species was something unbelievably beautiful of that case; it sold out in a day. That didn't mean by the way that people accepted Darwin, and there's a whole story there. So I think maybe what you're bringing up is the question of the temporal range of an idea – namely that certain ideas come and they're embedded and then they're not even recognised as such. Other ideas are not recognised but, in due time – like the idea of natural selection, one of Darwin's theories – it becomes appreciated in the light of genetics and vice versa in such a way that now it's inescapable. And I don't know that any one person sort of governs that event, right? Things have to dip. It's like when you do camembert cheese you've got to age in the cave, right?
[Q] But then also, aside from that sort of temporal trajectory there's the whole business of what's required to develop an idea. How much... how much space does it take to develop an idea, and can it be done briefly? I know some things that defy being done briefly. 
Well, for sure there's a contrast between observation and experiment. Darwin first and foremost was not an experimentalist. He did a few experiments on seeds in salt water and things like that and plants, but he was the greatest observational scientist this side of Aristotle; he was amazing. And this is something which is really interesting to me, because there are parts of biology that remain observational but they're not in the mainstream. They are fundamentally; evolutionary ecology is an example. There are some things you just can't do as an experiment, but what you can do is observe like crazy and come up with a way of interpreting them. In general what we have now is terribly focal, and very much related to practicality.
Now, I think that's a shame because while the greatest by-product of science proper is technology in the everyday sense, it isn't what science is really about except in the recursive sense that you need it to do more science. What science is really about is understanding, generality, predictiveness and, if you will, I'll add the word strangeness: an unusual set of thoughts, of which, for instance, quarks are an example. So I guess the picture we're talking about is a picture which says, look, you're not really in control. You're part of your historical web. You have some good luck if you find the right colleagues and you have some taste and you've thought about what other people have done, you come up with some kind of constraint. But you really don't know until it's all over. I'm reminded of the fact that recently I tried to trace down a quote that I attributed, and other people have attributed, to EM Forster and particularly to his book Howards End, his novel where the lady is supposed to have said, 'How do I know what I think until I see what I say?' Well, I've actually pursued that for a whole week, and everyone agrees it's Forster but no-one can find out where he said it. In any case, I think it's like that.

Again have a problem with quote. I think I may be in error in quoting GK Chesterton, the belletrist and essayist, the English writer, who said, 'I thought to go into philosophy but cheerfulness kept breaking in.' I'm not sure; I can't find that one either. But in any event the idea's amusing. And it is true that at one time in Italy, where for some reason or other there was a kind of burst of interest in my work, I was privileged to have two historians and one philosopher of science who were going to comment on my lecture. Italians, distinguished scholars, and you know every once in a while you lose control or something; I got up and I said... with genuine gratitude, I said I was very gratified that they would spend the effort and think about what I have been working on and comment on it, but I had to say that, you know, all my life I was always interested in bookstores, and when I was 16 I would go straight for the pornography section, but when I was 40 I would go straight for the philosophy section, and in neither case did I get very much satisfaction. And what happened was: one of these Italians actually changed the title of his lecture to Edelman, Pornography and Neuroscience, and that takes me more seriously than I should be taken.
So, you know, it actually happened, and here is my point about philosophy. If you consider that philosophy really doesn't have a subject matter per se, in the face of what science has, but that it is an effort to refine thinking and clarify your thoughts, well and good. Unfortunately it's had a history of... how shall I say it, at least in the Western world, which has forced it, too, to become parochialized in a way because great systematic philosophers like Kant and Hegel not have fallen so much into disrepute but something happened in the business. And I quote, I guess, Wittgenstein: 'Philosophy is when language goes on holiday.' Because he believed, as you remember, that there were no philosophical problems – only puzzles which were occasioned by a misprision and the use of the language game.
Now, I don't know if I'd go that far but, in effect, there is a frustration involved in philosophy because ... and that's the one that's made up in science – namely in philosophy you can generate an idea but the question is can you ever test it and find out, you know, besides self-consistency can you find out how it refers? And science has filled that gap and there is an uneasy, I guess, interaction now in neuroscience between philosophers and neuroscientists and I guess that's where I stumbled in. So I don't think that... although my colleagues disagree, I don't think you can dismiss philosophy but you have to be a little ironic, perhaps. And what Wittgenstein said is worth quoting too, about... he said, 'The whole point is to let the fly out of the fly bottle.'

[Q] What should be the ultimate relationship between neuroscience and philosophy? 
Well, let the facts not be ignored by philosophers – that would be the chief thing that... and of course there's always room for interpretation but when we get more and more facts about the brain, you will not any longer... despite the great... for instance, British empiricists and Immanuel Kant himself, you will find that a lot of the things they said were postulated on the basis of no knowledge direct whatsoever, so the very last thing you'd expect is that they can flourish and just make up things in the face of a set of facts that say it won't go; this is the way it really works.
Now, when you get to things like consciousness of course, they will always feel a way out because they will make this comment that I mentioned before – that you really haven't explained how neurons give rise to feelings. I think a good example, to bring it together, is the case of Molineux. Molineux is a friend of John Locke, the great English empiricist, and he posed the question to John Locke; he said... and this is a good story because there's actually a modern equivalent. He said, 'Supposing a person had congenital cataracts and was blind but he had hearing and touch, so he had a sense of space from hearing and touch. Now, supposing you could remove his cataracts...' Which they couldn't do in those days the same way we can today. 'Suppose we removed his cataracts – would he see visual space?' And... and Locke, I believe, answered, you know, with reasonable modesty, that he didn't really know but he suspected he couldn't – not right away, not really. Well, there are cases now where in fact that's been done. In fact, Oliver Sacks has written about this. When you take away the cataracts the first thing that people see is just a scattering, a pitch of color and shapes and no integration at all, and then gradually they get from haptic space, the touch and the hearing, to this visual space and they begin to integrate objects as a result of motion, vision and everything, but it's not necessarily lacking in pain, and some people never do it and plead to be made blind again.
So that's sort of a beautiful example of how... look, in Locke's case he was pretty smart, he didn't overdo it, but there could be cases where people... and I believe there are in continental philosophy amongst the existentialists and... and phenomenology, such excesses as to go beyond any credence. And so Peter Medawar, the immunologist, once said, 'Why do you... Gerry, why do you even discuss the brain?' And I knew my customer, so I said... he said, 'It's a perfect waste of time.' And I said, 'Peter, I'll tell you what,' and I knew this would appeal to him, 'when we find out more about the brain, at least we'll get rid of a lot of lousy ideas.' And he said, 'Okay.'

Science is a formal description of the world in terms of generality, predictiveness and interest, fine. It's a constraint. But I do not, as you know, believe it's exhaustive and, yes, there are limits of science; it's obvious where they are. For... for example, the known universe at the speed of light, we know, what is what now 13 billion years or something like that, but we can't get beyond and there's no way within our known physics that we could ever get beyond that particular light barrier. And when we come to the Big Bang there... there are going to be people who are saying, 'Well, yes, what it is is a fluctuation in a false vacuum and that's how it all happened.' But the idea that somehow we would be able to get beyond that without asking silly questions like, 'What was time like before the Big Bang?' And the answer according to what we presently know is: 'Don't be silly, there is none.'
There's also clearly the notion that science does not replace the world or duplicate it in giving it its formal properties, and that's a pretty important thing too. And then if you put that together with our idea about how creativity rests in a certain sense on metaphor and ambiguity, both of which are lousy as scientific theories but as a beginning, and then get refined according to procedures, depending on the history of that science, etc., and its modes. When you put all that together I think you get a lenient, more modest view of what we can do. Now, I know what the answer could be from a skeptic. It would be: 'Well, you can't tell what the future will bring.' And that skeptic would be perfectly right; it could be that everything I say right now is nonsense. It could very well be that 200 years from now science will uncover things that we just absolutely couldn't even have thought of.

[Q] What about the view... the... the reaction to all of these ideas that says: is that all? 
Ah, well, you know the human need to make sense of the story is something that I have observed as a doctor when patients are subjected to real serious disease and possibly even dying, because then the question comes up: 'Well, what's it all about, right?' And we know... well, I think one of the best cases is... I should stop and say it's a hobby of mine to collect dying words so I don't duplicate anybody else's. It's a little bit like Thoreau... Henry Thoreau – his sister shook him out of semi-coma and he opened his eyes, looked at her. She said, 'Henry, have you made peace with your Maker?' And he said, 'I was not aware we had quarreled.' So if you look at Gertrude Stein when she looked up at Alice B Toklas and said, 'What's the answer?' And Toklas shook her head: no. She said, 'In that case, what's the question?' So people have a need, a narrative need... this is an observation of psychologists, right? Of Jerry Bruner... for example, that people... that human beings rely enormously on narrative structure to make sense out of things, and one of the things is not to be able to make sense of your own life story is an extremely distressing thing and it probably is one of the motivations for religious belief – I'm not sure.
You remember the one book that I think Freud wrote that was pretty impressive is Civilization and its Discontents, and it begins with this beautiful statement that says, you know, 'I have a friend who is trying to explain the religious impulse.' It happened to be Romain Rolland – the man who won the Nobel Prize in Literature and has never been heard from since. He said, 'I had this friend who thinks that the religious motif comes from the oceanic feeling of the baby fondled, perfectly harm free, at the mother's breast. I disagree with my friend. I think religion arises from fear of the father.' And he goes on in typical Freudian terms to describe. And so there... there is an issue here, and it's an issue that's facing us right now at this moment in our own history, isn't it – namely the need of human beings to have some kind of belief and that belief that transcends any evidence, credo quia absurdum, however absurd I believe. And, if taken to extremes, we know what that's leading to right now: a set of tragedies. So this is... this is a really interesting thing because if you take it to the human mind, and you say your question about neuroscience, even after you've explained it all, do you really think you're going to change what evolution implanted by selection in any finite time that you can affect, except in a negative sense of drugging people, do you really think you're going to... that knowledge will change the basics of how we are? Given the rate of evolution I think probably not. However there's always this issue: hey, if you went back to, what, 150 years back, there were horses in the streets, not BMWs and Rolls, and so who knows? I mean you... you have to keep an open-ended view, I think.

I think of the crossing of fields is interesting in a variety of ways: one of them is that sometimes... and I think there are historical examples of this... sometimes a guy has to come as an outsider in a field. He has to look at the problem with his eyes peeled, whereas the guys who are in it have their noses so close that they don't quite see its relationships. And I think that doesn't happen all that often but it does happen and I guess there are many cases: in chemistry the law of combining proportions, or something like that. In my own case which... and it's an invidious comparison, but in my own case I told you what it comes from: it comes from the fact that I... I tend to be romantic and look for the dark corners. I believe that curiosity in science is like looking under the skirts of nature, and so if you see what you see, well, okay, fine, go on and make more and more description – I want to get to a place which is dark. But I... I think there's a good example, isn't there, Ralph, about molecular biology?
Salvador Luria and Max Delbrück are two examples. They were trained as physicists and they came over to look at the stages when molecular biology was just beginning. In fact some people would say they began it; I'm not sure that's true. But whatever is the case they came over and then used certain of their ways of looking, but they were patient enough to find out what the deal was from the biology side. I knew... I knew Sal Luria as a friend – much more closely than I knew Max although I knew him – and both their personal style, which was quite unique in each case, and this business of coming over from another field, certainly gave a boost. And certainly, speaking about books, did a little book by Schrödinger called What is Life? And Matter and Mind was another one that he wrote. Schrödinger was an interesting case because in fact what he wrote about was very important. What he said was obviously off the beam because there weren't the facts. I mean DNA is an aperiodic crystal. But then he mentioned Max Delbrück, remember that. And then in some way that little book influenced people without being really direct or a real hint as to what to do. It just sort of said, 'Hey, wake up.' So sometimes crossing of fields involves a wake-up call, and I certainly don't want to say that in my case that's the motivation but I think it's an attractive notion and it comes back to this idea of Hollingsworth about organization – diverse but not too diverse. You come to a university, a multiversity today, and it has so many damned departments and so many damned specialists, nobody speaks to anybody. It's just amazing how compartmentalized the whole thing's become. On the other hand, if you have about the right size and a bunch of people with different backgrounds and it's part of a family interaction, some exciting things can happen.

I am no expert on sleep although my interest in consciousness has made me think very hard about the subject, because we all know what consciousness is in a certain sense, and this bears on what you mentioned before about going beyond the science proper. We all know what consciousness is. It's what you lose when you fall into a deep dreamless slumber and what you regain when you wake up. Well, that doesn't really help, does it, scientifically? But then the question is... what Crick used to call a scandal. To speak the way he did for a moment, in the name of his ghost... it's a scandal that we know so much about sleep and we haven't got the slightest idea what it's for. All right?
So, in fact, Gally and I – largely because there was an environment here of people like Ralph and his colleagues sort of working on sleep – we sort of thought, well, look, there are loads and loads of theories of sleep but none of them is particularly satisfying and maybe the one we're going to put together isn't either. But the idea was what we call the reapportionment theory of sleep – neural reapportionment: that when you're awake, it isn't so much a matter of your neurons getting tired, but they use up certain compounds like glutamate, which is a neurotransmitter at the synapses, in such a way that the cycle means that the glutamate has to first go through glia... glutamate and come back to neurons, not to the same place where it's released and when you look at that whole analysis, you see that the neurons that are the most active are the most impoverished in glutamate. That ain't so good. But if you fall asleep and you go into this slow-wave sleep where you just have this periodic stuff, then you tend to even up or reapportion the glutamate. We also extended the idea to certain structures responsible for energy called mitochondria which give rise to ATP – adenosine triphosphate, the fundamental energetic molecule – and we said, ‘What happens there is maybe the mitochondria move and you have to redistribute again’, and we put forth this general idea. Now, that was good for slow-wave sleep but I don't think we've really explained dream sleep, REM sleep, rapid eye movement paradoxical sleep, and it still remains a very great mystery. We know that it's about a third of our lives, isn't it, if you really add it up.
[Q] For humans, yes.
For humans. So then the question becomes, well, how far back does it go, which brings me to your area. And... well, then it becomes this question of fuzzy definition, doesn't it? You're going to get into the same problem you get with consciousness. You're going to find states that share certain properties of sleep, but how do you know it's sleep? And I guess the... the drosophila story is a very good example. They do show a lot of the properties of sleep, but you're not particularly going to become the drosophilas Freud, are you? Not going to look into dreams.

[Q] So many people have commented on the unusual nature of this building.
Right.
[Q] Could you say something about how it got to be the way it is and what the effect of that is on what goes on?
Yes. Well, thank you. I welcome that opportunity because my previous experience was, if anything, based on a welling of ignorance. I didn't know much about architecture, but I did know that I wanted to have the Neurosciences Institute have a... an experimental arm. And, as a result of a series of fortunate events having to do with fundraising and some agreements we made with the Scripps Research Institute for long-term leasing, it was possible to put together and embody this idea that I mentioned before about the Neurosciences Institute organized this way. So we had an architecture committee composed of people – and this was very fortunate – who'd had a lot of experience at this. Their advice was: do not pick a very famous architect because the project is so small that they would assign somebody, and it's not likely that somebody would have the requisite degree of passion. That what we should do is pick young architects who are sort of approaching the heights of the thrust in their field and, as a result of a couple of recommendations, we came upon the names of Tod Williams and Billie Tsien – a married couple, Williams and Tsien out of New York City – who still worked the old fashioned way, they didn't use cad-cam programs, they actually had people drawing and doing that kind of thing, and whose work did have an extraordinary aesthetic quality to it, a kind of refinement.
And so I was finally put in touch with them and I told them what I wanted, after they asked me. They said, 'Well, what do you want?' And I said, 'I want a scientific monastery.' And they looked at me and said, 'Well, that's not quite enough, I see; what else do you want?' And I said, 'Well, I want every view to be either beautiful or geometrically interesting.' They said, 'That's more like it.' And we had a little colloquy back and forth and in about a... little less than a month, they came up with this idea of three buildings, not one. And I was absolutely shocked. I said, 'Wait a minute; I mean, there's only 40 people plus support staff.' They said, 'Yeah, but what you've got here is a remarkable opportunity for an architect.' I said, 'What is that?' They said, 'Multiplicity of functions. You have a concert hall that you're proposing and a meeting place for scientific meetings; you have a place for doing scientific research; you have a place for computing; you have a place for doing neural modeling, and for these brain-based devices; all of this is just wonderful because our problem is: how do we put all of that together and still retain the notion of this scientific monastery?' And you notice that what we did is put it in this place as a sort of perfect cloister in this little hill, in this declivity here. And so... and so it went. They tell me I was a good client. I think most of the time was because I shut up, and had I spoken more as I'm doing now they might have changed their mind.

I really only had two statements during the whole process, one of which is to complain about the cost of the diving board outside this window which points to the mountains. It was a piece of rock from... very polished, from Italy and it really was quite expensive. And they said they absolutely felt very strongly about this – that if we had this sense of thrust that was going to be very important. And then it came to the water feature outside, and I realized that the bane of interaction in architectural discussions is water features. They're very beautiful but they're very costly and hard to maintain. We finally came to peace on that one and I came to admire what they did immensely because they were a beautiful case of what you sometimes see in science – namely, a perfect creative marriage. And I don't mean their real marriage – I mean their actual marriage as partners because in their... in the architecture, because he was very romantic, and tended to swell out in his views, whereas she was extraordinarily meticulous and had a great sense of texture, and so the polish of this place came as a result of the tension between those two modes and I think, as you go through this place, you will agree, that it's almost like a Bach fugue: wherever you walk you'll see verticals or horizontals in different kind of combinations endless. No matter how much you move around, there's always a new vista... and they did make either beautiful or very interesting things geometrically speaking. So here's a little anecdote about what happened after the event.
Oh and, by the way, after the event it's become one of the more famous buildings in America. Architecture students visit here, oh sometimes as much as twice a week, from all over the country, and I'm a bit dismayed because I'd like that much attention from scientists, but be that as it may. I was invited by Washington University in Saint Louis to give a lecture on this subject and I turned them down. I said, 'You know that's ridiculous; I don't know anything about architecture.' And they said, 'No, no, you really must come; we... we...' And I said, 'Well, I'll tell you what, I'll... I'll make a deal with you; I'll give a lecture and show some pictures, but you can't count on any depth here, if you will invite Tod and Billie to come, and stick to the agreement that they will be the only ones who answer the questions, not me.' And they agreed.
And this was based on a very famous story having to do with a rabbi in St Petersburg in the 19th Century who'd go around from Jewish family to Jewish family, giving advice about their tortured life, and divorces, and things of that kind. And at a certain point in the snowstorm the driver turns to the rabbi and says, in the sled, he says, 'It's not fair, rabbi'. He said, 'What do you mean, it's not fair?' He said, 'You go in there, you listen to all this stuff, you tell them a bunch of stuff, it doesn't matter what it is; they give you wine, they give you money, they give you kisses, and I'm sitting out here shivering.' So the rabbi said, 'What shall we do?' And he said, 'The next one we change clothes and let me go in.' So he agrees. So the driver goes in, he gets into a family, which is unbelievable. Divorce isn't the case, infidelity, embezzlement, all kinds of horror, children who are behaving criminally, and he looks up and he says, 'Ha, that's so simple even my driver can answer it – call him!' So this is exactly what I did with Tod and Billie. And it was an exciting adventure because I'm used to talking in science about concrete data and here was an aesthetic issue.
So it has worked out very well indeed and the buildings have fulfilled their use, although... although, you know, there are some things you could say. The fact that the lab building is strung out perhaps reduces collision frequency, but we find ways of making that up, and it's certainly worth the inspiration people have, and I have to go back to my friend Detlev Bronk, who did the same for the Rockefeller, and he would, in his genius and his irascible nature, walk down the... walk with me and complain about a certain faculty member, and said, 'Each pine tree that he plants was the cost of one ultracentrifuge.' And he said, 'Who is that fool?' And he really did create a sense of pride in the environment, and I think there's some of that here.

Well, we had something to do with neuro architecture, didn't we? I was visited because I think I told you I wrote this... I don't think I said this on mike... but I wrote this Biennial Catalogue piece for the Whitney Museum in 1995, which I mentioned my wife and my son laughed at because they know art and I don't. It was called The Wordless Metaphor: Visual art and the brain, and some architect had read that, and he asked me could he replace everything that I said roughly with architecture examples? And I said, ‘As long as you don't call on me – as long as you leave me alone and do as you please.’ Well, he came to visit us and he became fascinated by this idea of neuroscience and he actually began to create a field, or to suggest to his colleagues, something called neuroscience in architecture. But the problem of the perversion of labels persists, doesn't it? For example, I've said that every age uses a machine of its age to explain the mind. Well, now we have something called neuro-marketing. You put someone in a FMRI scanner and you ask him about Coke and Pepsi, and you see what lights up, and it's made a splash. I'm a little skeptical, that's all I can say. But it does bear on one point – that my personal belief... and this is purely belief not founded on anything except maybe some non-verbal experience... I very much doubt that we will ever have a cerebrascope... that we will have a device that looks into the brain of an individual, can see all these little fluctuations at the hyperastronomical realm and speed, and then say Ralph Greenspan is thinking about Vienna in the following sentence. I just don't believe that will be achievable, and it's not because of any mystical notion that the neurons don't lay the basis for that thought... it's just that going backwards is going to be impossible in my view... maybe there's some relief there.

[Q] Maybe you want to comment on two, what I think are actually related topics, which are the basis on which science is supported these days, and also where science seems to be going. 
Well, that's a very large set of questions isn't it? It's sometimes difficult to develop enough of a detachment, because I'm still in the middle of it, and only from time to time, because of, I guess, age, I can see a change, and certainly there has been a change – in biological science. What is... what is in the key ingredient?
Well, one of the key ingredients is... is size: the fact is the numbers of biological scientists have increased mightily as compared to when I started in, say, 1954 at the Johnson Foundation, in 1960, '57 to '60, at the Rockefeller Institute. The numbers have increased. Secondly the technology has become extraordinary. It's easy to... in fact marketable, you can buy the kit. You don't have to do anything yourself synthetically; you buy the kit, you pay a little lease, but then it speeds everything up and you just have to look at the profusion of journalists in specialization to see what's happened.
An example: when I dropped out of college and my mother insisted that I'd have to go back or else I'd have to work, I went to Berkeley and took two, two or three, two and a half chemistry courses to make up the time, and I remember the bookstore there. Well, there was Linus Pauling's book. There were a couple of books: there was Shakespeare, there was Thoreau, speak about names I've mentioned before, but nowadays what you'll see is, oh, Quantum Electrodynamics for Sophomores, or a huge... So if you look at the booklist, for example, at the invoices of the Berkeley bookstore in 1960 or 1955 even better and compared them with the invoices now, you'd see a symptom of what I'm talking about. An extraordinary explosion of specialties, an extraordinary increase of the number of details for young people who maybe should have been more instructed in how to write and think; but who perform in these specialized courses, which are usually taught by assistants rather than by the great professor himself.
So there are these big changes, and certainly part of the change is economic, isn't it? That the National Institutes of Health is a major economic force supporting this kind of work, and we're talking over $20 billion a year expended on this, and a whole system of gradation and decision about how you do this, supposedly fairly. But what happens I think is a vast bureaucratization and a careerism sets in. I mean, young people are not allowed to be crazy enough I think early enough, the way it used to be in the good old days.

It may be that my judgments on the subject are governed by nostalgia which I consider to be a potentially dangerous emotion, but I think there is some warrant in what I'm saying: that, in effect, what's happened is a gigantic speeding up and maybe even a superficialization and a contraction of the time at which you have to perform a certain function. And, you know, thinking deeply is like making a baby. I don't... I hope that this isn't interpreted prejudicially but you don't make a baby by getting nine women pregnant one month each. It takes nine months and, even if it's premature, it requires very special traits; you can't go below a certain time. So there's a kind of movement of pregnancy – a kind of developmental period that is not favored by the present set of criteria. And I think that's unfortunate because I think really the great hope of originality in science does start with youth, with the new look, with having people who have enormous energy in whatever their motivations, and not necessarily directly, although it's never been absent, by careerism: pure and simple. If you have careerism pure and simple you push the peanut the next step... yes, you can do it very well, but you're not inclined to sort of back up like Einstein and sort of see things in a very broad way. So I would hope that there would be some effort or means or accident even that would open up this notion of the more tranquil set-up in which older people and younger people could move, to try the business of craziness.
