gulammohammed.sheikh

Gulammohammed Sheikh is an Indian painter, writer and art critic who has been a major figure in the Indian art world for half a century.  His artistic career is closely associated with the renowned MS University of Baroda in Gujarat where after gaining his Master's degree, Sheikh went on to teach in the Faculty of Fine Arts, and where he was appointed Professor of Painting in 1982.

Well, it is a small town, if one were to use that word. It must have been, I think the population must be around 30 to 50,000 at that time. It has grown larger over the years. I was born in a sort of lower middle class Muslim family. We lived in a kind of a, what shall we say, a small place which was part of a kind of a, we call it a Khadki, which meant that five or six or 10 families lived together, and there is a common kind of a ground in front, and it was covered. It had a sort of a, there were houses in front and there was a doorway on the left. Two rooms. Four brothers, one sister, all older than me, and I think that served to be fortunate for me and I feel in a strange way grateful that I was able to study further. I was able to get out of that place whereas my brothers all, after their matriculation, that is finishing the school, they all sort of had jobs, usually government jobs. You know, they all went in for... My father was a self-made man. He, I think, learnt English on his own. He served as commission agent for a while and also did odd things but eventually even became involved in local politics, even stood for election in the municipal committee. He tried to do his bit, you know, for cleaning up the extremely poor and very, very dirty place where we lived. Well, it’s not unusual in India to find such places where there is no toilet. You live in a house where toilet facilities is not known. But, like many families, we also found it sort of in a way going out, you know, to relieve ourselves a kind of an outing. My earliest memories of wandering around the river, riverside, which was nearby, it’s a dry riverbed, looking at vegetations and in a way learning to dream of sort was part of that routine. You know, one went out. Everybody in that sense went out. At home it was very simple. The family went through difficult times. At times father had no job or no commission, just after the war, but I know that he travel at times, you know, for whatever commission, whatever kind of work that he was doing, and he would come back occasionally with money and there will be great jubilation and we’d all be sort of eating good food. But at times, you know, one went without. It’s still difficult for me to understand how five of us fitted into that, you know, two-room.  In fact, it was one room. It was divided in the middle with a kitchen at the back where mother would be cooking and three brothers older than me who were all studying. A sister unfortunately was not educated. I find it slightly difficult but that was the time I suppose my father didn’t think it appropriate at that point of time to educate a girl because an educated girl at that point of time might have found it difficult to find a groom. Even boys were not educated but he saw to it that all my brothers were educated. You know, matriculation was a big thing. So, they all joined government jobs, I being the last I remained around.

And I went to the school. It was first kind of a, what you call, a district school but it was a private, first it was a private school. And it was the time of change when independence took place that new schools, well, even old schools, some of the old schools and government schools started education in Indian languages. Earlier there were many schools which placed a great importance on studying English and then the textbooks changed. I remember that the old school did not wish to change, for whatever reason, and the entire school literally left and we were housed in some kind of an odd place where for a few months we were nowhere. It was sort of a strange feeling of migration and as a young child, boy, I didn’t understand what was happening. Then we went to the new school. It was called NPM High School but it had middle school as well and I was in middle school. And I found that there were new books. As you know that, everybody gets excited with fresh, new books and I was delighted to sort of see that I could study a number of subjects. But it was difficult. I saw that I couldn’t do maths. I couldn’t do science. We had a very nice maths teacher but then I couldn’t make it. So, my interests sort of moved towards languages. But I do remember that we had a teacher, born an Anglo-Indian, who taught us geography and I loved it. And that is the first time when I saw an actual British watercolour, in his house. We had a drawing teacher but drawing teacher was not well-trained. In fact, most of us had played in the examination together at one point of time. But there was a senior drawing teacher who had studied in Ahmedabad, in the art school run by a great teacher called Ravishankar Raval. Now, this man called Tuljashankar Trivedi was my first art teacher and he sort of literally helped me how to do watercolour and I remember that I went to his home in nearby town called Wadhwan which is an ancient town. It’s called Wardhmanpuri. It had a temple and it had a step well and it had, there was a little tram where, that you could go by and there was the shrine of Gebanshah pir, you know, which everybody sort of revered. And he took me home and from his little trunk he brought out this small watercolour painting. This was like in the old sort of quasi-Bengal style wash painting. But he was very dextrous. He was very sort of accomplished and I was very, very impressed. And he helped me a great deal. Well, then there was, no, he... in high school I had... No, he was in middle school but I then continued painting.

Town was sort of a kind of a middle order, lower middle grade town with a large population of a mercantile community, the Jains, as we called them. It’s a very well-known, you know, term. I mean, Jains are generally merchants. And then there are a few other communities. A large number of Dalits, or what we call Dalit now, they are the repressed, but it’s not a farming land. It had some...in the street had, actually had a cotton mill and majority of the population worked there. It was just across the street. In fact, it was in front of the street I lived in. And there was a wall that separated our lane from the mill. I do remember all those dreams that we had of what was beyond the walls. So, there was a river on the right, the town on the left, wall in front. We walked around the town and I do remember that on the whole it was a kind of a very broadly liberal sort of Gandhian type of a... atmosphere. You know, it was, communities generally sort of managed their sort of, you know, managed living to... but still there were ghettoes. The Muslims lived in a quarter which was a poor quarter, near the mill or around the mill. A large number of mill-hands were Muslims. On the other side was a rather... kind of a area where many Jain families lived and then there were many others, you know, around. I had a great friend and benefactor who was a Jain. His name was Shantilal Shah. And in my early days I got interested in different belief systems. I was curious as to who these Jains are. What do they do?  And when I got interested in art, I must have chanced upon some paintings. And once he told me that in my, in our temple we have paintings, would you like to see?  I was quite scared but I went and I... he showed me some old things that they had. He was a kind of a, what you call, a culture man, not interested in business, although he ran a business. And he sort of had a few boys around, mostly my generation, my classmates, and we formed a little culture group there and he would organise activities. We used to have some kind of a... what you call it?  We call it a fair. It’s sort of a mela and Shantibihai would be involved in organising it and all that. At a later stage I learnt that my friend Hasmukh Shah, you know, who became secretary of the Prime Minister in India and all that, was originally from Surendranagar and he also was part of that kind of, you know, activity.

But my great friend and mentor,teacher was my, one of my teachers in the school. His name is Labshankar Raval. He wrote poetry under the pseudonym of Shaayar. Shaayar means in, it’s a Persian word. It means poet, and he was very handsome. He had long hair and he walked around... and literally he was sort of, I think people stood up and looked at him. And he had a beautiful voice. He sang. I think when he joined the school, he came from I don’t remember which town but he joined this school where I was studying and I think as part of the sort of initial joining programme, he was supposed to conduct a class and he recited a poem and he sang. I was literally thrilled with that. And I used to scribble myself. I used to write poetry. And we became great friends after that. And then he would say, ‘Well, let us meet and write together’. He had a little room in the school and on Sunday I would go there and we would both write. I would go to his place and eventually, until I was there, until I did my matriculation, I had a very close relationship with him, he with his family, a very strong strict Brahman family. I would still be given, when I was served tea or water, in different utensils. But I was absolutely thrilled when he came home. It was not common for a Brahman to visit a Muslim home. Even if he visited, it was not common for them to either drink water or have anything and my, Bhabhi, that is my brother’s wife, served him tea and he drank tea in her house. So, it was in a way, you know, what I’m trying to say, that there was that kind of a cultural whatever... bond which broke the divide, which went against that kind of a separation and also, because, you see, it was not only the religious separation, it was also the economic separation because Muslims were very poor. And also at many other levels, you know, you found that you could still manage to enter into each other’s territory. So, in school I... there was a, what you call, we used to call it hastalikit, which means handwritten and hand-painted magazine. I became regular contributor to that, even paint that. And then Labshankar, my mentor, had an idea that why don’t we do our own magazine?  I said, but where?
 
What age were you then?
 
I must have been 12 or 13. And then he said, okay, why not? We both decided we will do a magazine, put it in the public library. We made it, I think, monthly and then made it a fortnightly and I would paint right from first page to 12 pages all the titles and even a frontispiece, a painting, and then also sometimes my poems. And then we collected two or three other friends, a chap called Mahasukh Gandhi and some others, and then we ran it for... I think that was around the time when I was in high school, and we even made it a fortnightly and at one point of time there were two libraries and they said one was not enough, so we made even two copies. It was fun.

It was after George Birdwood. And Birdwood Library is also very central to my education. I read everything, whatever that was, I mean, I couldn’t read English books, but it had best of journals, including some Hindi journals, and I became well versed in Hindi. I even passed Hindi examinations during that time. And so I came to know about work of Shrikant Verma, Sarveshwardayal Saxena [sic – should be Nirmal Verma], many other Hindi writers, while I was in school. But there was another, a kind of an encounter which is very central to my life as an artist. Ravishankar Raval I mentioned is known as the great teacher, Kalaguru of Gujarat, the writer, he had written his autobiography, and I think it’s quite remarkable, from late 19th century until that time, he became editor of a journal around 1920, a journal called Vismi Sadi, which means 20th century, and he was art editor. It was not known in those days that you could have an art editor. And he then started a journal called Kumar, which is still running some 80th year or so. And we all grew up on Kumar, that magazine. It was sort of a digest but it had world literature. It would have information on history and, you know, they would reproduce a colour... painting in colour in every number. Like there was an English journal from Calcutta called Modern Review. So, Ravishankar Raval was, you know, the founder of that journal.
This was in Gujarati?
Gujarati, yes. Well, what I’m talking about is all Gujarati. Well, Ravishankar Raval had contracted either, something like TB, I don’t know whether it was TB or similar, and he was advised to go to a place with dry weather. Now, his son was a public servant in, he was an IAS (Indian Administrative Service), and his son was posted in Surendranagar. So, Ravishankar Raval came to Surendranagar for a few months to sort of, you know, recuperate. Well, he, because he was a man of both art and literature, he would visit the library. The librarian was a very fine, very nice man and his son was my classmate. So, I was introduced to Ravishankar Raval that here is a young artist. So, Ravishankar looked at me and he said, ‘Ah, let’s do something together’. I said, oh, what is this great man asking me to do together?  He said, ‘On the outer wall of the library we will do history of the world, history of civilisation’. I said, ‘How do we do that?’  I don’t, you know, I didn’t know what to do. He said, ‘We’ll do silhouettes’.  And then he took out pictures from books and things like that and then, it was a great experience. I still don’t remember what I did and how I did and whether it was worth anything, but we did that. Then Ravishankar Raval became, it looked that he became quite fond of me. When he left he said, ‘Write to me a postcard every time, a reply postcard but with a sketch in it. If you don’t sketch, I won’t answer’. So, I made lots of... I must have done lots of sketches for him. And we continued a dialogue, you know, that correspondence for several years, and I remember very vividly that he sort of, you know, whatever little that I was painting in the magazine or the school magazine, whatever that I showed him, he said, ‘You must go and study further’. So, I said, ‘I don’t know how’. But then it reached my father and my father said, ‘Yes, well, I can’t afford your college education’. Because he had educated three sons. He said, ‘But can you manage by yourself?’  I said, ‘How do I manage?’  But my father was very helpful. He said, ‘Look, if you apply for a scholarship or something, I’ll help you’. And his English was okay, quite good. Because he had dealt with business, he would help me write applications. So, I said, ‘Why not?’  And in my last year in school I remember I was feeling very disheartened and it got... it came back to me when I discovered those few postcards that I had received from Ravishankar Raval that he had written to me. He said, ‘Don’t be disheartened’. You know, I have still these postcards with me. ‘I have made even people who were in thrice worst condition than you to get educated. This man is now a collector, this man is doing that. If it is in you and if you fight, you will make it’. I was, I must say that it must have been a great thing. Then I said, okay, I’m going to go out and study further. Well, that is one experience which is associated with Birdwood Library. You know, that is where it happened. And he remained my... as kind of a benefactor.

It was very difficult time. Economically we suffered a great deal, until my brothers got jobs. So, the early period was of, I would say, you know, living in difficult times and the family, as you know, because of the economic problems, you know, there would be all kinds of... and there are even quarrels. So, then we, you see, it’s a family, it’s in a way disassociated itself because of education, from the larger community of... you know, we were a community that dealt in oilseeds. So, we had the oilseed mill. That is a kind of a manual, you know... preparing oilseeds, and some were farmers and the rest of them had the community, had gone to Bombay and they were all dealing in what we call nut-bolts and things like that. Some of them had made money but most of them were either very low middle class and poor. So, in a way we were looked upon, yet perhaps slightly seen as outsiders, you know, even with, because also we had adopted a new surname. Sheikh is not our surname. I think it must have happened in my father’s time. My father must have adopted, many such communities in Gujarat and perhaps elsewhere have community names, but then, during the time of independence, I think, with some new opportunities coming their way, or idea of an identity emerging, which was a Muslim identity, and many communities adopted Muslim surnames. So, that is how this surname was... so, my father in a way was trying hard to make the community come out of, you know, it very, very, not only poor but also ignorance prevails and he wanted, you know, people to go send their children to school, you know, to come out, and I think he faced great resistance and even now, I would say, this community has remained almost at the same stage. After I came out of Surendranagar I have noticed that in the 50 years there have been less than 50 graduates. So, you can imagine, well, so we lived our life in a way.  My father was very keen that children got jobs and government jobs which was secure jobs. My two brothers, when they got jobs, they both were married and that marriage took place, I think, together. And they lived in the same area, the same lane, and also in little hovels, you know, little... I think what we managed was in summer when we could sleep out. Again, that was a sort of outing. You know, it allowed you to dream because you slept in the street. But when people get married and they have children, how do you...?  Well, it was a story of conflict also between brothers and father at time because economically we were not doing very well and my father had not managed his affairs. He was not a good either a, you know, businessman or, I don’t think he did ever any... he didn’t do any business but he didn’t make much money. So, I do carry some of the memories of the family conflict and, well, that is one. And I got my sort of support from external factors. So, I would spend time outside home. I’d go to either Shantibhai’s, I’d go to Labhshankar’s, you know, so, that were, these were kind of respite. These were kind of, in some ways they were sort of, what you call, proxy families. I became very close to Labhshankar and his wife. They literally sort of you know, I would go eat there and then became more and more involved in other activities. I think in a way my writing and painting, you know, became, you know, I could pay far more attention to that, you know, because I wanted to keep away from the problems at home. But my father was very sensitive to that. So, we had a little... we had three little, eventually had three little, what you call, house, homes, the rooms. They were our room. The one room was outside the, in the lane, and when I was very young, my grandfather lived there and he was there. When he died, I used that place for painting. I was able to sit there, you know, for hours to get the paint right etc. and I greatly enjoyed that and I liked people walking by, you know, on the street. And then I could go out and all that. So, I had my life. But my father was also a devout Muslim and he became more devout at the end of his life. So, he wanted all of us to pray. I, being the youngest, I was around, so I also prayed five times a day. I put on a cap. I hated that.

The practices in Islam, you know, require that you pray five times a day and... but I do remember that my father subscribed to a magazine which was called Muslim Gujarat which had, among other things, the poetry of Rumi, Masnavi, as they are called. Well, this is Sufi. So, it’s a different kind of literature and he often told me that since you are interested in writing poetry, why don’t you read that? I didn’t find that translation very inspiring or attractive but that was my first brush with some kind of a Sufi tradition.
And did you read the Koran?
We were all made to read Koran. All children have to learn Koran and memorise it sometimes. I could memorise several chapters of it and when I was very young, I could literally recite several chapters. As a young boy they would even ask me to do it in the mosque and I would even do it. I became great friends with one of my classmates who, even until he gave up his studies, but he was son of the priest who was the head priest in the mosque. So, I spent time after the prayers in the mosque and I remember this was a wonderful experience, to be there. You see, the mosque in those days or mosque that I knew didn’t have either a dome or a, even minaret. It was like a house. It’s a green building, small, with a capacity of 100 to 200 people, but there was a little garden and there was a well and there were trees. It was so soothing and so quiet in the afternoon. I would spend my time there with my... and that I became quite close to. He eventually became priest, the boy, and I remember later in my life, you know, when I visited when my brother died, I was attending the ritual and this man was giving the sermon and I thought that he was giving sermon because I was there. He gave a particular sermon, which is a very interesting sermon, I remember it. He talked about prophet and prophet said that, I think the first mosque, when it was built, he, or... there was a question of choosing who will give the first call, first prayer call and he had his great associates, you know, around him but he chose black man called Bilal which is being sort of, you know, considered as a kind of a great act on the part of the prophet, that he was always, you know, he knew all his associates but he also knew people who, whom he considered to be great human beings, I would say. So, I’m just telling it, that he was, while giving the sermon he told this story. When I met him later he said, so he was very pleased.  But, anyway, I had to, I did all that during my childhood but then I gave it all up.

Well, Islam I knew from whatever the family gave us, but our Islam was a very different Islam. I think people living in UP (Uttar Pradesh) might not even consider it Islamic. Most of our rituals, in our family traditions, were mixed. That is one. We only learnt Koran, which we did not understand, because we only learnt to recite. We didn’t know the meaning of it. So, we, I didn’t study Urdu. If there was a Koran with an Urdu translation, I couldn’t read it. I could read Arabic because I was taught to read that and I could recite it but without understanding a word. But what is interesting is that at school, when I went to opt for subjects, you know, earlier Persian was offered as an option and there were either no takers or there were no teachers. Then Sanskrit became an option. So, I... was... I opted for Sanskrit and I studied Sanskrit. It allowed me an opportunity to study the Hindu and Jaina text, both religious and then, of course, the other literary texts, you know, it opened doors, you know, in that direction. In a sense I knew more about religions other than the one in which I was born. I became more and more interested. I learnt about Upanishads, I learnt about the way the... I mean, in whichever way, a young boy can at that point in time, because I could pick up books in Gujarati and I could learn about that. But I also learnt Sanskrit and Sanskrit came very handy when, at a later stage in Baroda, when I was teaching, I was supposed to teach Indian aesthetics and with my smattering of Sanskrit, I could do that job. But, anyway, so that was a kind of a mixed kind of a tradition. So, I was interested in other belief systems and I made a point to even learn about them, to know what they did. But, as you know, that it was a society which was in one sense, you know, divided but at the same time there were some crossovers and I could sort of use that territory, you know, to learn, to know more about other belief systems. And then I came to know later that our own, I mean, the Islam that, in which I was born was very different. You know, many of our customs were actually local cultural customs and so that’s what...
Was there also an element of colonial Christianity?
Yeah, there was an Irish missionary hospital and there were Christians around. As I told you, my geography teacher was Christian. I used to visit him. He was, I think, quite fond of me and he used to invite me home. So, I knew about Christianity.

All the books that I read during that time, I read a lot of literature. I read all in Hindi and in Gujarati that was available to me. But I also got exposed to, let us say, art. There was Marg. They subscribed to Marg, that journal of art, great journal of art, which Mulkaraj Anand edited. I remember having seen work of Francis Newton Souza as a young boy and these were Christian paintings, you know. There were so many other things. I think I must have on my own learnt or discovered. I was very curious, you know, that if there is something new or different, I wanted to access it and I... luckily the library was pretty good and the journals were very sort of, like they used to have a journal called Aajkal. Now, this is a government of India journal in Hindi and I remember in the later days of my school I read travelogues written by Ramkumar when he was in Prague or something. I knew about Nirmal Virma. I had read his stories while I was in school. So, in that sense West or Western culture, you know, was also part of my being to the extent that I even wrote, I wrote, besides poetry, lots of short stories and one I wrote which was based in America. I mean, they’re silly stories but they were all published, you know?  I mean, they must have been good enough for publication. And Labhshankar and I published a lot in those days. Labhshankar published much more. And so it was this, in a way it was literature and it was association with all these friends, you know, that allowed me an opportunity to know about different cultures.
Did you feel any conflict between the writing and the painting?
Well, people always ask that question, you know. I think that has never died. I don’t know why. I think it is more theoretical than practical. And I came to know, to my great delight, that Rabindranath Tagore, you know, in my school days I knew of his work, that he painted and he wrote. So, I didn’t see that kind of a conflict and it’s not possible to answer the question in black and white. There can be conflict, I’m not saying that, but it can be fruitful conflict. There can be overlaps, you know, you will do something what you do in writing, you may also do in, but that, there are certain things which you can only write and others you can only paint. So, there is a distinction between the two. And so over the years, when, but, you see, it was in that culture quite common to accept it. Labhshankar was very pleased that I painted and I wrote and, in fact, one of the things that I did when I was leaving Surendranagar was to prepare a handwritten volume, his poems which I illustrated. He still has it. So, in a way that conflict did not figure or did not cause any problem.

No, it was not a bleak childhood if that is the impression, that what I spoke about my family seems to emerge. There were many, many happy moments and instances. Living in a small family, living together, sharing sort of literally, you know, food every day from the same plate, then in my case, knowing my brother, the one who was older and growing up, you know, with them, also the various festivities, including weddings, going to villages to know the kith and kin there, even travelling in bullock carts and also going to the fairs and festivals, you know, with brothers or without, and also the community gatherings of various kinds. I loved the whole village from where my grandfather came, called Kankavati. It perhaps was a medieval town which still has number of monuments, ruins and a step well, an intact step well. Very beautiful.  And the riverside of that village. So, there are very, very beautiful and very cherishable memories that I have, and this was all in the company of family, in... within the family. And there, I think, role of mother must have been central and mother always around. But I don’t have very clear memory of how, you know, our relationship developed or grew. But in a strange sort of way I know that she suffered from sort of certain kind of body aches. She had some kind of arthritis and I would walk on her body. That was a way of relieving the pain.
But the best time that I remember is the time of food, usually evening meal, that she would serve us, you know, when we would sit around her. And she was not literate. She never got into even habit of praying because she could not learn it properly. Well, the father wanted her to. And she always remembered her past, you know, where she came from, from a village. She was married before she married my father and I think my father also had another marriage before. And my mother had a daughter, whose daughter is still alive, and I occasionally see her when I go to Kathiawad So, in a way it is story of families living in Kathiawad, Kathiawad or Saurashtra, as it is called, which had numerous princely states and many of them were very forward-looking and were sort of progressive, Surendranagar being one, and also there was this kind of a philanthropy and sort of establishing hospitals and schools. I think many communities, especially Jains and some of the other Bhadyar communities, had established schools and we co-ed schools. And these schools, like the one that I went to, was very liberal and very open. As I said, that we had teachers, you know, somebody who was an Anglo-Indian, and they all sort of, you know, I would say that the quality of education was pretty good and they did support liberal arts or liberal, let’s say, humanities, you know, which has become a bit of a casualty in our time, you know, because the schools nowadays are more or less sort of looking towards science and commerce, and now it is IT. And history or, you know, literature or such areas are more or less neglected whereas in those days I remember that opting for, you know, these disciplines was not frowned upon, although people knew that you would not make your money in that. Or painting, for that matter, had no money at all. So, you had to fend for yourself. So, Kathiawad in that sense had these pockets, you know, and each of these states, for instance, even a small state like Gondal was a very progressive state. And there were special schools, you know, like schools for princes in Rajkot. Then there is Porbandar and, of course, we know about Gandhiji.

When we refer to Gujarat, you know, the name that come to your lips, the first name that comes to your lip is Gandhiji. Well, I had double interest in Gandhiji because he was also a literary man. He was associated with Gujarati Sahitya Parishad, that is the Literary Academy of Gujarat, and he wrote in impeccable Gujarati. That is something, you know, which one admires. Even today I admire his writing. It’s... you can’t shift a word. You can’t change a word in his autobiography. It’s amazing. That man was almost legalistic, you know, that his language... and I love that because he must have striven for it. Maybe he learnt it from his legal practice or maybe he learnt it from whatever literature that he knew. And, of course, from life, that he had to be frugal. But it had also other dimension, that it is economic. The language is also, you know, related to speaking only that in which, so, you use minimum of expression, minimum of words, maybe English or British perhaps. Well, I got around to something quite opposite, as far as literature is concerned. I was never... I was not... my English... my sort of reading of English literature was very limited, except for textbooks. But I came to know of other literatures and besides Gujarati, I read Hindi, I read a lot of translation from Bengali, Tagore and Sharatchandra [Chatterji]. These are all staple. In fact, I devoured them, you know, all these. So, in a way both these, at one level the family was a kind of a springboard which allowed me to enter into some of these territories. The town, which was a small town, allowed me to pursue literary activities or paint and in a way Kathiawad, for that matter, also provided that kind of a backdrop. I knew another person, somebody called Abuhai Shekhani He was a poet. He lived in a town called Morbi, which was also a very progressive state. My brother was in the postal services and was transferred and I would go and spend my summer vacation in Morbi where I met this man who, again, was interested, like Labhshankar in making small books and he had these young boys who could, who painted and who wrote. And we used to make these handwritten magazines or handwritten volumes. So, in a way, you know, these 18 years that I spent there...  I mean, if I think of it, that from 10 onwards, from independence onwards, they were full of a kind of excitement also. I mean, despite the economic sort of kind of problems that we faced, there were many other areas, you know, which fulfilled. I mean, and our life was sort of not that bleak as it may sound from some of the accounts that I have given.

Going back to family, my eldest brother used to paint. He did painting on glass. I remember that when I was very young, but after that he gave it up. But there were others, you know, around who also painted. One of them was a family friend. And then there were those who did sort of signboard painting. One of my great friends was a signboard painter. He died a few years ago. And so beside the school, there was that connection. It was something, you know, which was associated with home, where I painted. And brothers were also generally very supportive of the things that I did. It must, they must have found it a bit different, even odd, I don’t know. And my eldest brother was also very, you know, I think, because he had tried his hand on that, so he was interested in that. So, even the family supported my studying further which none of them had the opportunity to, and in a way my father I suppose by proxy, you know, going to a college. Nobody had gone to college. So, he helped me in a number of ways and Ravishankar Raval, as I mentioned, he was a very crucial figure. He gave me a letter first that you could go and study in Baroda. I didn’t have the vaguest idea of what Baroda was and I didn’t know what I’m going, what I was going to do in Baroda. So, I asked my classmate, son of the librarian of Birdwood Library, to sort of accompany me and I remember we both travelled to Ahmedabad first and where we went to residence of Ravishankar Raval and with lunchtime they gave us lunch. Then they asked me, they said, ‘What are you going to do, where are you going to stay in Baroda?’ I said, ‘I have no idea’. It was crazy. I don’t know. I still don’t know how I would have made it myself. So, he said, ‘Okay, I’ll give you a letter. Here is this photographer who is in a place which is called Tower, Raopura Tower, and you ask him. He’ll put you up before you get some accommodation’. I thought that I’ll stay in a hostel or somewhere but you don’t get into hostel until you’re admitted, and I had to go through the what they call aptitude test. I had to give examination. So, I took that letter and went to the photographer and he was, I think, bit confused but then he couldn’t refuse Ravishankar Raval because he had asked him to put me up. So, he said, ‘I don’t have any place for you to stay but here is my studio. If you live in the dark room, will you be okay?’  So, I said, ‘All right, I’ll stay in the dark room’. The first two or three days while I was giving aptitude test I stayed in the dark room and then I got admission in a hostel, so that is how I moved into Baroda. Well, here is the difference. You see, Surendranagar, with all its, you know, educational institution, school, my friends, my teachers and all, was still a very kind of a... what shall we call it... socially a very constricting place. I mean, you make friends but you are, friends are mostly men friends, you know, boys. Baroda was a kind of a great jolt because here you came in contact with women, you know, and at a very personal level. You know, it was almost immediate, you know, that you sat together, walked together, and these girls came from all over India. They were all either English-speaking or Hindi-speaking. Some of, few of them that were Gujarati-speaking. So, in a way it was both a kind of a national kind of a school where you had literally, mini-India and then, of course, we had both Europeans and even Americans, teachers and visitors.

So, it was a very... in a way an experience which, I think I was taken aback. It was difficult to digest. And the first 2 years were quite difficult and also financially I was not supported because my family couldn’t support me. And I had applied for a scholarship, which I got, but only in few instalments and often I didn’t get the scholarship. So, I’d do, I did sort of portraits and, you know, somehow I managed, you know, with that. You know, that is the early period, but the very excitement of being exposed to art, to be in the presence of artists who, you know, they’re all sort of something like you eat, drink and sleep art, you know. It’s one of those things. I mean, to think of that, this is a place where... which you do not want to leave. You know, it was a college, small college, and I was for the biggest batch, about 50 students. Earlier there were 25 or less and it had started only 5 years ago. And there were these sort of, you know, teachers, you know, they’re all full of excitement because they were associated with a new situation. They were given free hand to develop an art school on different kind of... what you call... in a manner which they thought fit, you know, for an independent India. Amongst these was Shanko Chowdhury who was perhaps more politically conscious. He had association with many political leaders. He was from a very enlightened family. His brother is a very well known economist and all. And he had connections with Indira Gandhi, also the Nehru family. His wife had connection with the Nehru because Feroze Gandhi was a Parsi and Shanko Chowdhury’s wife is also Parsi and there were family connections. He eventually made even a bust or a head of Indira Gandhi. I remember. We all were part of it. You know, he made it in front of us. Bendre was a very quiet man, very... I mean, he had great authority. He was known to be a great artist and, you know, he had sort of won an award in competition with Amrita Shergill. You know, that was the biggest thing that had, you know, and known as a major figure, very highly accomplished draughtsman and a very fine sort of, you know... he handled his oil extremely well, also a good portraitist and landscape painter, etc. Subramanyan was a younger teacher at that time but we came to know him soon. But there was the first dean called Markhand Bhatt, also a Gujarati, who had studied in Bapunagar and then gone to America and worked, studied in Barnes Foundation, near Philadelphia. So, he had brought with him ideas of an art school and the first vice-chancellor of the university was a lady vice-chancellor called Hansa Mehta, herself a writer.
She had translated Alice in Wonderland into Gujarati. She was open to, you know, building up a new university, and in a way it was sort of part of sort of building up the nation, you know, up... that project, you know, it’s... they were all fired with ideas and imagination. So, Bendre had a background of indoor school, Sankho had from Shantiniketan and Subramanyan also from Shantiniketan but he had worked in Delhi, at least Bendre, no, at least Sankho and Subramanyan had Gandhian background. So, even... not in those days but until they were in college I remember Sankho, you know, continued to help the college clean up on 2nd of October, on Gandhi’s birthday. You know, we all did that. And also in a way very secular, very pronouncedly secular and so they were all interested in kind of a college which will bring everybody together. So, we had students from Kashmir, we had students from...  some students from, more students came from south at a later stage but there were many students from different parts of India. So, for me it was a great experience to know, so, I knew my first Kashmiri, I knew one Nepali Kashmiri, Santosh, GR Santosh, you know, was a government scholar and then I remember in second year he, along with my friend, Praful Davir, another painter, we shared, in fact, a place where we lived together for one whole year. Then there were these Bengalese, you know, Sarbari Roy Chowdhury, who became a great collector of music, besides being a sculptor. There was also an artist from Delhi. I think that was the first gay person that I ever knew in my life. Prem Saran, if I am not mistaken. He was also a government scholar. And there came many... then in those days, as I sort of continued, I even met or came to know people, you know, from many other regions. Eventually I also met British artists and also there was a Spanish artist, I remember, while I was in MA.
But what I was saying is that Baroda, this small institution called Faculty of Fine Arts, you know, was a kind of a, you know... it was a place which opened the whole world for you, something you had not even dreamt, that, you thought that you will learn painting, you will learn to draw, you will learn, but there was so much and you went to library and, as I was a kind of a library person, because I used Birdwood Library, I was absolutely thrilled to look at, and we used to have, you know, best European journals. You know, we had L’Oeil we had Aujourd’hui, we had Domus, besides Studio International. All these were there right there in front of us, besides some of the Indian, and they bought the best of books. You know, the volumes on Sanchi, volumes on Ajanta, they were all there. I think these pioneers, these four or five of them, including another man called Amberkar, who taught art history, who came from Bombay intermittently, he came as a visiting professor. He would spend a month and he would conduct art history classes. And all these teachers, their homes were open to us. So, it was not something you did only in the college or in the institution. It was, education sort of extended beyond, you know, to their homes and there were these kinds of, what you call, gatherings and I think that is where we also learnt, at least for me it was a new thing, to learn about exhibitions. I didn’t even know what an exhibition was because in a place like Surendranagar you had no idea.  And there was what is called a Baroda Group of Artists. That happened while I was in second year and my seniors like Jyoti Bhatt and others, you know, they all got together, Subramanyan, and I think we had a show in the Jehangir Art Gallery and where, when my work was selected I remember I was elated, you know, beyond... well, that is where, I think, it all started, in one word.

I think it also in a way opened doors for us to go out of Baroda to see, you know, places like Bombay and Delhi. And I think Bombay was closer because we had this Bombay Art [Society]... we had this show at Baroda, a group of artists, and we learnt, you know, about holding exhibitions, you know, we were all groomed into having a one-man show and we looked at this, you know... wide-eyed, you know, in a way we looked at all our seniors, you know, who had done that. Shanti Dave was a major figure in those days. Jyoti Bhatt was regarded as, you know, because he had won an award in the National Academy. And so I think it served us as a kind of a springboard and a lot of people came to Baroda. A lot of artists came to Baroda and in a few years time I realised that though I was very involved, very much involved in what was being produced, I had not found my way of how do I work, what do I do, and I must admit that I felt slightly constricted,  so, going out was a great experience. In fact, I went to Bombay and I saw this centre. It was in a place called Bulabai Desai Memorial on, I think, what is it, that area, Warden Road. It’s now called Bhulabhai Desai Road. That had literally, let us say, about 20 artists working, Hussain, Tyeb Mehta, Gaitonde, at a later stage Nasreen, then my friend Prafull Dave, who had studied in Baroda. I frequented that place. I used to go and look at, and they were very open. They would show their work, and I think it opened many avenues for me and I think perhaps it was Hussain whose work must have appealed to me and some of the earliest paintings that I did, you know, were of horses. Quite likely but then my horse was not like Die Brucke horse or it’s not anonymous running horse, it was perhaps, and I think I may not be wrong, it was a horse of a tanga, tonga. It’s a horse carriage. It was perhaps Surendranagar, of that region. In those days we didn’t have any of these vehicles, motorised vehicles, you know. You always travelled by tonga, and I think I was quite attracted to them. I had done a lot of drawings of tongas. Anyway, but that was just a kind of a beginning, you know, but when I had my first show I requested Hussain and he opened it. He even read out a poem at the opening of my show in Jehangir Art Gallery.
That was 1960, I think. 
’60,’61, I think. I must have second year or, I mean, or, yes, ’56 to that would come to that. And I met all these artists. Besides them I also met Alkazi. Alkazi came to my show and sort of was... seemed to be quite impressed. Invited me home, we had dinner with him, and then I got, he was conducting classes on modern art in Bombay at the Bulabai Desai Institute. Nasreen was showing her work in a gallery. She, what is it... ’59, whatever gallery, that, Bal Chhabra who was a friend of Hussain and others, opened there. So, it was a kind of a culture centre, you know, Bhulabhai Memorial Institute, and I greatly benefited from meeting those artists. And so I think in a way my work started or took off, from that.

I had three shows during that time. One was in... first in Jehangir and then in a gallery in Delhi and then another in Bombay. It was in a hotel in,Taj Mahal Hotel. There was a gallery called Taj Art Gallery where I had my show.
But there, in that period there would be very few galleries in either Bombay or...
Very few galleries, hardly any galleries. There were about three or four galleries in Delhi and four or five galleries in Bombay. That’s all. And these were all artists, you know, who, all these artists, you know, were very, very, you know, they were... I mean, there was no market, if that is the question. There was no such thing as market. Very limited clientele, I think mostly foreign clientele, even diplomats, and some architects and others who bought their work. Or... house, corporate houses or business houses like... I think Air India bought a lot. My first painting was bought by Air India when I had a show and there was a man who, Jal Cowasji, I think. He was a public relations man and he used to go to every exhibition and they would buy. So, Air India had the biggest collection in those days. I don’t know what happened to that collection.
And what was your sort of subject matter, area then?
I think besides the horse thing my sort of imagery was related to either sort of some kind of tormented figures or landscapes, very, highly expressionist and I did a lot of also images which were, you know, I mean, they were relating to trees but they were not specifically focussed on that but there were, and then also there was a figurative, a lot of figurative imagery. But I worked kind of in that period of time in a frenzy. You know, I’d work throughout the day or the night and I would destroy a lot and repaint, partly because in those days, when I got to... I had a lot of material. It was the medium that allowed us to use it very liberally. We sort of used a medium with wax, double-boiled linseed oil and wax. It was all boiled. And then we would have, you know, what we call powder colours, the hardware colours, because as young artists we couldn’t afford to buy Winsor and Newton or even Camlin colours. So, we would buy only those which were not available in the hardware shops and mixed them. And sort of thick, it was impasto, you know. And I think that whole period was full of that kind of an excitement for the expressionist painters. We all started with that. And the three exhibitions that I had during that period of time, they were all full of that.
Expressionist means what in this...?
Well, at one level they were kind of very, highly charged, you know, in some ways emotionally charged and painted with a great deal of anguish and I think perhaps somewhere the backdrop of the progressive artists was responsible in that. That gave us, many artists like me, young artists, at that point of time did that. But my work didn’t move into abstraction. It still remained figurative, even when I was, you know, leaving and went to England after that.

At this period of time... while I was fending for myself, you know, there was a job available for me and Bendre called me, who was the dean, and said, ‘Would you teach art history?’ Teaching was not an option because I was still a student. I was in my second year MA. So, ‘I said, but how do I teach because I have to finish my MA’. He said, ‘No, you teach junior classes and continue your studies in MA’. I said, ‘But is that...?’  So, he said, ‘Yeah, that’s fine, fine with me, if it is okay with you’. I said, ‘Wow, fantastic!’ Because I would get a salary. It was a handsome salary of 250 rupees a month. Can you believe it?  It was like a windfall. And this was a job of a tutor in place of a lecturer that, Ratan Parimoo, my senior, who was going to Courtauld to do further studies. And I just, you know, I was thrilled with the opportunity to teach. But I didn’t know what I will be teaching and it was a bit comic thing because, you see, my own classmates were often sitting there because they even told me that I should be taking some of the MA classes. I said, ‘But then where?’ They said, ‘No, in junior MA you teach and in senior MA you sit as a student’. That’s very funny. I think all my friends, Nagji and Chhatpur, used to make fun of me. Actually, in the first class I went and junior students, I was, I must have been, what... 24 or something like that, and I think they refused to recognise me as a teacher. But it was fun, great fun. I enjoyed all three years. Vivan Sundaram was one of the students in that period of time and many others, you know, who came.
So, those 3 years I taught and painted. I painted a great deal. I sort of produced, you know, in a, literally dozens of paintings. My exhibition had something like 60 paintings, something like that. Then I did watercolours, no, I did woodcuts. I did lino cuts, large lino cuts, 6 foot. I also did woodcuts and lino cuts both. I didn’t learn, etching was not known. Etching was considered to be a kind of a secret. People would not part with that secret. One of those strange things, you know, with artists, sort of do not allow others to know or learn. But we know that later Jyoti Bhatt learnt it and made it available and then there were workshops and... Baroda, in fact, became a ground for making graphic popular. Although there were a few other places also but this was one of the thing. So, it was mainly painting and lino cuts that I did, mostly oil, occasionally with water-bound pigments but... 
Was it partly through the teaching of art history that you sorted out where your real passions lay?
Well, I think it came my way. I do not know what it was but that was the subject which we taught all first-year students. It’s called story of art. And in a way I think it was an eye-opener because I had to learn so much in order to teach. So, I had to, you know, literally rummage library to see, you know, I had to teach history of all art. Story of art meant that you start from primitive times and bring it up to present day and then take eastern and western and everything together. And I think perhaps it did sort of, you know, open some areas in my preoccupations and I enjoyed it thoroughly. I greatly enjoyed doing that because every time there was something new to learn. You know, you sort of, you were teaching medieval and you had done the, the next year, before doing that, when you opened the book and you found there hundreds of other things. You know, that’s what, and then you think, oh, my God, you know, what to do. And you get so excited. You know, you impart it to your student. And I think in a way it also allowed me to learn about belief systems. This is one issue which is important. One is that what I had seen in Kathiawad during my childhood, both within the family and outside, is that people at one level, though there were divides or there were, they observed different religious practices, there was also a kind of a overlap, a kind of a understanding of the sacred, of the other or rather a sense of the sacred. So, they respected practices of others. I mean, I remember that there was this shrine called Geban Shah Pir, it’s a Sufi saint, I suppose, in Wadhwan, this town which was next door and there people of all communities came and, you know, literally paid their offerings. Similarly, I remember that in my time there was this singer called Abraham Bhagat who sang all what we call bhajans, bhajan means devotional songs, all of sort of Hindu gods and goddesses. It was very, very popular. In my own family there were practices which would be called mixed practices. So, there was that kind of a... you know, overlap of... and at a popular level, people respected each other’s beliefs. So, if there was a marriage procession and it passed by a mosque, they would stop the band and they would go ahead and then, you know, restart. So, this was a kind of a known thing and generally I think there was that kind of a... understanding. I think in a way the story of art opened for me a kind of a similar avenue. You learnt about Christianity, which you did not know enough about. You know, you had no exposure to that and I think art opened those doors. I learnt about Islam through art. I didn’t learn from my education. It came to me because I had to teach that. So, I had to pick up books and learn about this. So, I had to learn about different kind of a, you know, factions of Christianity. I was interested in Byzantine and then, you know, Russian icons. One had to know about that. It may not have been articulated in that manner at that point of time but, looking back, I think it all formed a kind of a basis for my understanding of art and I realised that art was the greatest humanising factor. And it was the art that sort of travelled and that sort of made people look at things, you know? For instance, in Islam there are a lot of paintings which are religious paintings, paintings of Prophet and all that, which in today’s world you are not even allowed to speak about. But when I looked at those things, I got very deeply sort of engaged in it. They were so inspiring and they opened so many areas within me that I thought that I must now explore this further. So, going to England was not to learn at Royal College of Art. Going to England for me was a stepping stone to look at the world art, that I would be able to see all that I have seen in books and I think that dream was largely fulfilled being in England.

Well, Baroda also became a place to test my kind of writing. I had leant to write, you know, in kind of a metrical verse. I had learnt so many other things from my friend and mentor Labhshankar. But it was my exposure to Suresh Joshi, a major literary figure who literally changed the course of Gujarati in the 60s by his short stories and his criticism. My association with him, you know, began almost as soon as I arrived. I sought him out, I think, in the first few days because I knew that he lived in Baroda. And we immediately started sort of kind of joint activities. In those days I lived in the house of another literary and political figure. Political, he was a political analyst, Bhogilal Gandhi. And we started a kind of a, what shall we call it, literary group, and we met every Saturday, or perhaps Saturday and Sunday but at least once a week, and it was mostly Suresh Joshi who read poetry or whatever that he knew. And we read Saint-John Perse at that time, before he got the Nobel prize. So, we were all very impressed when he got the prize. We said we knew a great poet. We had an income tax commissioner who knew French and he would read it in French, original French. And we were exposed to, I mean, among the great poets it was Lorca and Rilke, Kafka and there was, these were the great writers which Suresh Joshi introduced to us and we got into translating them. One journal started by Bhogilal Gandhi in the, in whose house we met, called Vishwamanav, ‘world man’, and Suresh Joshi then took over the journal. He had edited another journal but that journal which was originally a journal, Sarvodaya, that is Vinoba or Gandhian, it, Suresh Joshi turned into a literary magazine. It was called Kshitij, that is, that means ‘horizon’. And I became closely associated with that. I published all my free verse poems there and I also began to write on art, first for Bhogilal Gandhi journal and then for Kshitij, and Kshitij I edited a special number on visual art in ’63. So, these were the years, along with what was happening in the college, painting away. There were these literary activities which continued. And it was through literary activities that I knew Sunil Kothari, a dance critic who lived in Bombay and who wrote about dance, also a painter who is also a poet Pradumna Tana, also lived in Bombay, and through them Bhupen Khakhar, painter, who became more or less a lifelong friend. I met him in Bombay. Well, among the three, two of them, including Bhupen, were chartered accountants and Bhupen wanted to give up a kind of a lucrative job that he had. He had attended sort of evening classes in Bombay, in JJ School of Art, but was not happy. He wanted to come to Baroda and he confided in me. He wanted me to influence his family and somehow I managed. I think family first was very... I think they were not really happy with it. But eventually they realised, recognised, that was partly because I... Bhupen and I became very good friends in the very first year and I used to go to his place. I used to stay there in that Ketwadi Lane. Especially I hit it off with his mother and he was very, I think, he was kind of a mother’s boy in one sense because he had no father. And I remember having eaten the most delicious meals, you know, in Bhupen’s house. Interesting, Hindu family, but they do eat meat. Women cook but don’t eat often, and this lady would cook me fish. Fish is not called fish. Fish is called bazaar. They say today they have bazaar. Then everybody would understand, by that name, that today fish is cooked in the house. Anyway, this was one experience and Suresh Joshi was in a way very, I would say, was crucial in my mind, literary... whatever work that I did.

I wrote in a very strong Gujarati, or strong Kathiyawadi dialect. This is very kind of a robust sort of, you see, Kathiyawadi Gujarati is rather rough and raw. It also has certain musicality. I used that and I had written and I had already broken the metre while I was there but with Suresh Joshi and with my painting, well, in the Fine Art College, a ground seemed to have been prepared for me to break all rules and to throw them away. So, it is something which I wrote in the flush of, you know, kind of a, sometimes imagination, sometimes something which happened. But I wrote very feverishly. So, the language changed. It was not a language which I had chosen for poetry. It was a language which was spoken language, which was spoken. So, all words which would otherwise be barred from, you know, that kind of poetry or poetry with, you know, capital P, I sort of broke them sort of without...  So, I think that was a great release. It was also a catharsis in a way and in a way it went with all this new excitement in art, you know, that was happening at other level. So, in a way writing and poetry went hand in hand.
Except that wasn’t it much harder to find a vernacular in art than in poetry?
It was very difficult. That came at a very late stage. You know, it was not that. Art at that point of time was in that sense quote unquote modern with M capital. Modern with M capital at that point of time for us was great Henry Moore or Ben Nicholson or, then, as we moved away, it came to pop. You know, it was Rauschenberg and, you know, these are American artists. And in India it was the previous generation that is progressive artists, you know. You had Souza, you had Husain, you had Tyeb and all that. So, in a way it was within that circuit. So, the space for local was not created but even, for that matter, the poetry actually went from local to the other. Kathiyawadi was more localised, you know, that language in which I wrote, whereas when I began to break metres and wrote in free verse, it was sort of any Gujarati. It was not... there is no Baroda Gujarati or such thing. So, that was the next phase. So, I think literary in that sense was for me a great kind of a... it was not only a release but I think it was also a fulfilling experience, that, you know, it allowed me to do what I had wanted to do. I had never thought I would do, you know, it’s something which, actually, you sort of... you know, broke all kinds of, you know... and feel free. You know, it broke all the sort of, no, it didn’t, you were not bothered about what you were taught. Got out of that. And I think it was, I... you don’t do great paintings perhaps but it was in a great flush of, you know, emotion and anxiety and all that. It allowed me to sort of come out of some of my, whatever obsessions that I...  I think the poets in that sense were Baudelaire or Lorca, you know, and that these were immediate touch stones of that time.

In the early 60s some of us thought of coming together to form a group. I was in communication with artist Swaminathan who lived in Delhi and with a series of meetings some of them decided to meet in Bhavnagar where a couple, then Jayant and Jyoti Pandya, hosted us. And these 12 artists then decided to form a group which was called Group 1890, partly because there was a lot of discussion about the name and eventually it was agreed that the number of the house that Jyoti and Jayant Pandya owned would be adopted because that is where we met. Well, this was roughly to project a kind of a new generation of ideas, you know, which were, you know, in a sense very deeply sort of... born out of our concern for the modern, but at the same time there was a desire to sort of break away from the earlier Modernism, that is of the progressive artists group. It was also to, let us say, distance ourselves from the academic realism, at the same time sort of kind of a sentimentalism of a certain brand of Bengal school. So, in fact, we adopted a manifesto, largely drafted by Swaminathan, approved by all of us, and we then planned the show.  It was going to be a large show, very large, because each artist was represented by eight to ten works and we hired Lalit Kala Gallery, the big hall, where it eventually took place. Well, around that period of time we had come into contact with a poet, Octavio Paz, who happened to be a Mexican ambassador in India. In fact, we discovered him, actually. I had been told by my literary friends who had translated his work into Gujarati, had read an item that Octavio was appointed Mexican ambassador and it was Vivan, Vivan Sundaram, the artist, his sister Davina Sundaram who became a film-maker and I, all went to see him and we found him in Ashok Hotel because he had not yet found a proper residence. He was absolutely delighted to meet artists and then he became a friend of Group 1890 and became very closely associated with it, to the extent that he wrote a piece for the catalogue which is published in the catalogue. Eventually he also became very close to Swaminathan and wrote a poem on Swaminathan, which is included in his collection, called Eastern Slope. Well, I... sort of was leaving for England at that point of time, so I was not present when the exhibition took place. But it was opened by the Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru and I remember that we went to meet him to ask him whether he would open the show. Nehru appeared to be a broken man just after the China War, and sort of first he hesitated. He said, ‘Oh, why me?’  So, Swaminathan was quick to add that, ‘Sir, we have come to invite you as a writer’. So, he was very pleased that he was being considered by artists as a writer. So, he happily agreed and I believe he did the job. Swaminathan was in one sense very political. He had a political career. He was in, I think, Congress and then he was with the Communist Party and then he renounced it all, after, I think, the Hungarian operation, the Soviet and... but he remained engaged in politics. He had among his friends some of the well-known politicians of the country. So, that is how we were able to, you know, reach Nehru. And I believe the exhibition was received very well and in a way it became a kind of a landmark.

Swami was much older than me. There were many who were older than me. Jyoti Bhatt, Balkrishna Patel, Jeram Patel, majority of them, perhaps, we were 12, all from different parts of India – Reddeppa Naidu from south, Eric Bowen from Delhi, Rajesh Mehra from Delhi, then... so, I think I was among the youngest, one of the youngest. But I had a communication channel with Swaminathan because I had read his articles in, it was a left journal called Link and he used to write a column. He used to write on art, and I was quite sort of attracted to the way he articulated. And he was looking for a new avenue. It’s also interesting that what we spoke about in the catalogue, about, let us say, new art didn’t seem to be visible in the work that we showed at that time but it was something which we dreamt of or we, it was in the offing. As perhaps those who are familiar with art, you know, those years would know that Swaminathan’s work was in that sense, in those days very, I mean, it was something what you call quasi-primitive. You know, he painted bisons, in fact, you know, and that kind of stuff. Very dark colours. But eventually he began to, you know, he moved, he drifted, you know, from that to something, you know, which was very different, almost quasi-metaphysical paintings, you know, with a bird in the air, on a rock and things like that. But, anyway, it was a great moment for all of us, you know, for Indian artists of that generation, even though we were not of the same age, to come together and make a statement. And that eventually took us in kind of an area where we began to sort of open, we opened a kind of a debate on Indian art. Well, the group continued for a while and it, there were efforts made to revive it but it didn’t work. It was that moment and it lived for that moment and then, but what it lived in was another moment, that eventually Swaminathan became more and more engaged in art politics and among things that he seemed to be most attracted to was to sort of enter into the national debate on the role of the state in art. And I think that the debate began with him questioning the role of the Lalit Kala Academy, therefore the national art academy, and he began a journal called Contra, which is a small journal, a few numbers, and after that I got engaged in that debate and we began to publish a journal. We published for 4 years with Bhupen Khakhar called Vrishchik.
Wasn’t that only when you came back from...?
That comes... so, I’m just giving you the link, you know, from that, the politics of art. You know, that continued right up to ’73. So, from beginning, from the, from 1963, when the group exhibition of Group 1890 took place in Delhi to 10 years later.

But, as I said, I was leaving for England. I had Commonwealth Scholarship and I then went to Royal College of Art. But this was a... big experience. I was thrilled because, first, I wanted to see great works of art and that would be available in the museums. I wanted to travel and see what was not only in England but elsewhere in Europe. I also was drawn towards great cinema and I thought that I’d be able to see those films I had read about and I learnt that 8½ was running and it was my very first day in England that I went to see 8½. And so the first whole year I spent sort of watching all the great films. You know, all Kurosawa and Buñuel and Godard and whatnot. Well, Royal College was an experience in itself. There was a very kind and sort of fatherly figure called Carel Weight who happened to be the principal at that point of time, and he used to sort of ask very warmly about my wellbeing and usually come and ask, you know, when, whether I was settled or not. Anyway, I must say... very heart-warming. I eventually discovered his work and I found that there was something in it that was sort of, you know, a bit of a British Bonnard in him, which I loved, actually. I saw some of his paintings and I was very... I thought that kind of a gentleness with which he dealt with later was quite unusual. I don’t know whether he was considered a great artist or not. Well, I had, among my tutors, Merlin Evans, Sandra Blow and Peter Blake. Well, they were all very nice. They... I communicated with most of them. But I think it was a period when I think these teachers had not yet dealt with artists or students from the East. Or, if they were, there were very few. I think it was in those days that the process began. There was an artist from Sudan, I remember, Kemala, a girl, and, now I don’t remember but I think there were a few other artists from Europe and from America and perhaps from other countries as well. So, it was in a way slightly alien for me to be in that atmosphere, but gradually I got used to working in the studio. It was very strange because I was already teaching here in India and then I had to be a student again in a little sort of cubicle. You know, you had to produce your work. I didn’t do much in the first 2 years. In the last year I did some paintings and then, it was just to get my RCA. But I must say that I had some very, very fine sort of, you know, I met some very fine people and I heard some very find people there during that period of time at the RCA.  One was Peter de Francia. Peter de Francia was teaching in what you called general studies in those days but I didn’t know him and I didn’t know his work either. But I attended his lectures and I found that there was something that he was talking which I was not familiar with, particularly with regard to work of Léger, Fernand Léger, and I remember that he gave a series of talks on Léger. I must admit that I had a block about Léger and after hearing his lectures I think I got, I warmed up to Léger and I do remember, even in those days, I don’t know because I was sitting in the audience or whatever but he talked about Kalighat and he connected Kalighat with the genre of that, the French colony in Calcutta, possible that some works of Kalighat reached French capital and that Léger was aware of it. But that apart, there were other teachers like Iris Murdoch was there, but I did not know much about... I occasionally attended but, there were a number of visitors, including George Steiner, and all these things at one level, at academic level or at the level of, let us say, ideas, help.

Well, besides that, the Royal College was also, they called it part of swinging London. So it was the time of Beatles, Carnaby Street and whatnot. Well, to an extent I was also you know, part of that and I enjoyed looking at what was happening, including the dance parties at the RCA common room. But what I was most interested in being in England was to both learn about great works of art, to know about great works of art and I visited museums. First it was V&A, Victoria and Albert Museum, because it was next door to painting school, and in fact we had a pass to go directly into the V&A. We used to have our lunch there, and there I discovered a lot of Indian paintings. I thought about Indian art while I was in Baroda, but this was even more so because you saw at close quarters literally every day, and I think I saw Hamdra paintings, I saw the Kota works, and I was very moved by them and I thought there is something in them which I don’t know why don’t I have this. And I discussed this later when I came into contact with Robert Skelton and he became my mentor of sorts and that he showed me a lot, you know. In fact, he introduced me to this great scholar called Stuart Cary Welch who had written on Kota painting, and I became more and more engaged, and eventually I wrote a short dissertation on Kota painting. But beyond that I also visited the British Museum a lot, and more so, even more, the National Gallery, and I got quite glued to that place because it attracted me all the time, and especially the Italian section.  I would repeatedly go and look at the Piero della Francesca, Sassetta, Duccio, Giotto and also of course other great masters. But these are the ones whom I got more and more involved and interested in, and I thought that I should go and see more of it, and so I decided to travel. I think the very first year I travelled to Paris, I think it was December, if I remember it was quite cold, very, very dark and cold Paris. I lived in a, you know, stayed in a place which was not very far from the centre, just opposite the Notre Dame, and I even remember from my window I could see a view of the pipes and the little house, all dark and grimy, that Amrita Shergill had painted. So it struck a bell somewhere and I saw the Louvre, I saw Musée Guimet, I saw all these and I still remember that despite it was cold, I walked. I literally walked, and partly because I didn’t have that much money, but my interest was to see all, see the places and discover it, and that way Paris was the first, in fact, that kind of point of discovery. And then I thought that I should be now making trips to Italy and other places, and the 3 years I was, I literally went to Italy every year. But I went to Spain, I went to Germany, I saw part of France, but it’s mostly the north of Europe. And Italy I went repeatedly, and once I literally went up to Bari, from there to Brindisi, and I think twice I hitch-hiked in Italy, almost all through, from Milan to Naples. Wonderful experience of meeting people you know, who take you even to a short distance and take you home. It was in a way very, very sort of heartening because it was a bit like India, you know, because they responded sort of very, with open-hearted, I mean that warmth was almost contagious, and I remember meeting all kinds, even a motorcyclist would come and give you a lift, and I remember I wanted to see Madonna del Parto by Piero della Francesca which was in small village beyond Sansepolcro, and I reached Monterchi in the ramshackle car of a priest. I do remember seeing it and I was absolutely transported looking at that work. I mean also it was part of my journey, and that journey sort of in that sense was fulfilled like that. Similarly, going to see Duccio was a very, very moving experience, and seeing the great Master was, I think it still continues to haunt me, and then of course the great Sienese Masters, both Ambrogio Lorenzetti, Pietro Lorenzetti, and Simone Martini. Looking at those things was sort of, you know, being transported to a world one had dreamt of, and their world remained part of my world, you know, and it still remains, and I continued to go there. So I feel extremely grateful that I was able to travel to England and I went there and my teachers were very helpful, and most of them gave me tips when I went abroad, and I came back with renewed vigour. But somehow or other it didn’t feed into my art.

I was still groping because I had struggled with, you know, that kind of expressionist idiom for a long time, and had come to some kind of a cul-de-sac. You know, it was sort of coming to an end and you had to turn the leaf, you know, perhaps a new chapter but where? What to do? How to? I didn’t know. I kept on thinking that I should do something, take from Indian painting, take from something else and start, but it was difficult. It’s... perhaps it doesn’t come that way, you know. It had to be part of your being. Perhaps it had to get absorbed, perhaps, you know, then perhaps gradually it would evolve. What I did at the Royal College was some kind of work, you know, which was more or less a collage. I took photographs of my friends and I painted them. I also did some odd paintings, you know, in which I tried to incorporate some ideas which I thought were related to Indian painting, but actually they weren’t. They were more or less connected with that, the painting of the period that is both minimal and kind of a flat surface. I was not very excited about them but anyway, I produced these works because I had to get through my examination and I did that.
And you weren’t looking at Kitaj yet? 
I did not. I did not, but I came to know about Kitaj.
Already?
I came to know right in the first year I came to know, because I learnt that Hockney had just left. He was around, and I used to hear stories of him coming there and doing his Rake’s Progress. You know, he was re-invited. First it was rejected and then he was re-invited at the Royal College and then he produced Rake’s Progress, but he used to come in his gold lamé jacket and things like that, and Kitaj. Kitaj I was immediately drawn to. Hockney I enjoyed, particularly his drawings I greatly enjoyed, but Kitaj somewhere took me... and I think Kitaj and Godard somehow made a connection in my mind, that kind of a world, a kind of, it was urban but at the same time just looking beyond, and it was a very disturbed kind of, you know, vision, a vision you know, in which the collage sort of seemed to create a kind of a collision of forces. And in a way it was different from American pop, you know, either Larry Rivers or Robert Rauschenberg and all that, who were quite attractive, but this was something in which I was taken by and eventually I got more and more interested in Kitaj and his later work really, you know, came closely in many ways to my concerns.

Well, I was living alone, yes I had, but in that last year I stayed with two, three architects, in Addison Gardens with Shree Marathe, an Indian architect, David, I don’t know, the Scot, and there was an English architect called Martin Hewitt. One year I spent, and incidentally, Howard lived on the same street. That is how I came to know him. I came to know him a little later through...
Howard Hodgkin? 
Howard Hodgkin and Robert Skelton. Robert Skelton is a great friend, particularly with regard to his acquisition of Indian miniatures. The second year was a bit bleak. I couldn’t find accommodation and actually, first year I was in Hampstead with Praful Dave and eventually I stayed on my own, but I was very... in fact, I enjoyed it. Praful was around, but I liked that area, the place. Living in Hampstead was a wonderful experience, walk around the heath, go across and see the... you know, the great museum, small museum, what is it, near...?
Kenwood?
Kenwood, even go to the chamber music programmes that they had on the weekends, and also see the great Rembrandt there. You know, it was a wonderful Rembrandt that I greatly enjoyed. I used my time in looking at all that I wanted to see. I went to see Hampton Court, I, you know, go to all these places and spend my time, and the rest of the time I used to see good films, and Hampstead had a wonderful theatre called Everyman Cinema, and I saw, I remember, whole series of Pasolini right from the beginning, from Accattone to other... great, great experience, and a very educative experience.  Well, I had friends in the Royal College of Art, many, both men and women, and they were all... and some of them have remained my friends still now. Gabrielle Nesfield, who became Gabrielle Turner, you know, now lives in Kent, was a very, very close friend of mine. Then through her I met her French connections and they were there, you know, Sabine and Joel and these are still my good friends. It’s quite interesting, in fact we had a photograph taken in ’64 or something like that when I was in Paris, and then I went to Paris in ’85 with my exhibition at the Pompadour, and Joel saw that all the friends who were there in ’64, she collected them and we had a photograph with the same friends, you know, in ’85, quite a moving, very lovely experience.
’85 was when you had your show at the Pompidou? 
’85 I had a show at the Pompidou. So... well, England was I think a very learning experience in that sense. I collected lots of books, I collected lots of catalogues, I collected lots. In fact, the first year I bought a lot of poetry, all beat poetry. Unfortunately I lost it all because the second year there was, I had left it with a friend whose house was robbed and I lost everything. But I remember that I used to go to all the small bookshops and they had little magazines. That was the period of little magazines which continued right through the ’60s, and in a way Vrishchik is part of that same story because we continued with a small magazine in India. So that was, those 3 years were very... very important years of my life.

When you came back, was it a shock?
Yes, a bit of a shock, yes, true, because I had sort of lived away from all the things that I was associated with. And so going to Surendranagar was quite an experience. It was difficult to, it was very difficult to sort of bring the two worlds together, and I didn’t understand what it was, you know, to have these two worlds. You know, is it possible to live in those two worlds? That is what I had gained in England. In a way it was also Baroda which had paved the way for England. We had by the way an English artist called Gene Donovan, you know, perhaps the first British scholar in post-independent India. The second one was...
Derek Boshier?
Derek Boshier. Derek Boshier went to Calcutta, he didn’t come to Baroda, and Gene was a good friend. He stayed on when I was leaving, and he became also a very good friend of Bhupen, my friend. So I had known, you know, and we knew about British art or British institutions, particularly art institutions, Courtauld and all because Parimoo had been there, and even my teachers had been to England. Subramanyan had been to an art school there.
He’d been to The Slade. 
Yah. So, that way I was in a way familiar, so Baroda, or the passage towards that. So it became a kind of a consolidated kind of an art package, you know, of education, but I wanted to get away from that and return to my work. And in a way, going to Surendranagar, coming back to Baroda where I got the job again, again teaching art history, that was available to me, and so within a few months I was teaching again. And then it was a discovery. But I must speak about one more thing, and that is my hobbyhorse of travelling, that I had always enjoyed travelling and while I was a student in Baroda I joined every tour that was organised and knew literally, knew India through that. Ajanta, we went to Daipur, we went to Mahabalipuram, we went to Konarak, we went to Badami, literally, you know, almost four corners. And so that bug was still there, you know. As they say, there is a kind of a chakra in your heels because you don’t want to sit somewhere. If you sit too long, you know, you always want to go away and do something. So, England provided that opportunity to travel in Europe, and I did most of it, and on return, again, I travelled in India. I went to Majapradesh, I went to Rajasthan and parts of South, and I think it was during that period when I was painting that I began to experiment. And it was I think around late 60s, ’69 that I sort of stumbled upon using sort of Indian art, whatever... Persian imagery in my work. Well, it was a period when I was teaching and I also met my future wife there. She was a student and then we got married.

Well, Nilima was from Delhi. She had done history at the University of Delhi and then joined Baroda, because her teacher, an art teacher called Kanwal Krishna had sort of directed her to go and study under Bendre, so she came to Baroda and she was studying here. When I came, I think she was in second or third year, and then we got sort of, you know, involved, and later on I got married to her. So anyway, that was the period when we, Bhupen and I sort of were dreaming of something in our own work. When I came back, I saw Bhupen doing, he had already given up doing those collages in which he used to have these images of gods and goddesses and pictures, you know, pasted, and then he would make something like a shrine, and then with the graffiti and all that, and he was looking for something else.  Well, it was that period from September to January, September ’66 to January ’67 when I was jobless, and both of us applied for a job in Chandigarh, Bhupen and I, and we went for an interview. Dr BN Goswamy was, I think, head of the department, if I am not mistaken at that, yeah, he was there, and we knew that perhaps we will never get the job, but we went there anyway, and we never got it. But it was a very crucial experience for us both. We both talked a lot about what we wanted to do. I remember Bhupen talking about 19th century company painting, and he said that there is something in that, and I was talking about let us say a little earlier, both19th and 18th century, and I said that, you know, why can’t we use this idiom? Can we use it? It was a big struggle, and I remember when we came back we both embarked upon our own journeys, and Bhupen did his view from Dharamsala. It was very fine and very... I think it was a kind of a, what shall we call it? It was kind of a turning for him.
A breakthrough? 
A breakthrough in his work, and we were all taken by that, it was remarkable. But I did four or five small paintings during that period of time, but I was sort of in a territory slightly different from his. I was referring to, I was also doing collage, but I sort of dealt with imagery in a different way. Bhupen had already got his humour in that work itself, you know, when he put them, Nathdwara images, these four men seated at the bottom.
Did you feel you were breaking with the ethos of the 1890 position?
Yes.  Well, it was both. At one level, what we thought we would do, which we promised in 1890, was in a way being fruition [sic] there, at the same time breaking from the work that we were doing up till then. So it was not only a break from the progressive, it was a break from our previous work as well. So it was actually entering into something quite different and quite... at that time point of time, quite unusual, quite different, difficult.
Can you say a little about company painting and what would be implicit in that?
Well, it was I who was interested in the late miniature painting, and I sort of spoke to Bhupen. I said there is something in the way one would see that it could continue, that it shouldn't have died down. It would have, that language would have remained alive, and we could have extended that vision, that, and one thing, Bhupen did that. Bhupen picked up from that actually, you know. His paintings, if you remember the painting of man sort of you know, a gardener in Goa and also the painting with the cannon under the tree, they were all inspired by that kind of painting, you know, which was in a way referring to classical Indian painting but at the same time sort of moving towards a new era. The images of new era, you know, were appearing in his work, and also with a sense of, in a way it was a sense of involvement and detachment both, that also commenting upon it and also turning it upside down.  And I think that is something which he was able to do at that point of time, and it continued for about 3 or 4 years.

You had rejected academic realism, but wasn’t this another kind of realism?
Well, that was my hobbyhorse, not to actually articulate what, you know, all these terms naturalism, realism, illusionism, etc. So once we came to, let us say, sort of articulate that, we found that Indian art also had within it a great deal of naturalism, and somehow it was misunderstood. You know, even our art historians didn’t talk about it. Either they were feeling guilty about it or there was some other issue, partialy because it was connected with the Mughal. But then I would say it was not Mughal, it goes back to Ajanta. There is a kind of naturalism which is employed in the paintings of Ajanta, you know, which you could connect with a lot of later paintings.
Tell... tell the listeners about Ajanta, because they won’t know what Ajanta is. 
I would say that a lot of Ajanta painting is very physical.
Tell them what Ajanta is though. They won’t even know what Ajanta is.
Ajanta is... basically it’s sort of these are caves. They are monolithic caves carved in Northern Deccan, that is Maharashtra now, and from, let us say roughly from 5th century onwards, but the earliest caves go even back to 2nd century BC till about 7th to 8th century. Quite a few paintings have remained, despite, you know, the passage of time, and these were lost. But what remains is a treasure, it’s a great, great treasure. These are all about either previous lives of Buddha or about Buddha, but then it has a panorama of life because it deals with in fact people, and it’s something, you know, very physic, the body, the human body, you know, plays a central role. You see, it doesn’t deal with something which you call landscape, because in a way it all comes out of the wall, you know. Everything is predicted forth rather than receding in the background. So it is a vision, you know, of a kind, and if you were in Ajanta, if you walked through the caves, you would know that you are literally in a crowd. You know, you are walking through a crowd, and those bodies literally you brush your body with. They are remarkable paintings, great paintings in the sense that there is a continuity. There are multiple stories, and the stories are interwoven, and if you know the stories you would see that a character from here moves from here and then goes further and you can then, it unfolds another story. So Jataka tales or the tales of the previous lives of Buddha are similar to Katan, Katha Sarit Sagara, the ocean of stories, ocean and river of stories, where the story within a story within a story is told in multiple volumes, and I think it even goes back to Mahabharata, you know, the great epic. So, in a sense Ajanta is a culmination of that narrative tradition. Now, that fantastic narrative tradition of Ajanta was derived from, I think, perception, which was physical, and so they articulated the stories through physicality, and that physicality in essence, you know, can only be expressed in a language which is whatever, naturalistic of a kind.  So that kind of a naturalism which doesn’t deal with letters of foreshortening or doesn’t deal with Chiaroscuro but is using naturalism in every special sort of way. So I think that existed within the Indian craft tradition, or Indian art tradition, and it was transmitted differently, you know, in different regions. It was Mughal where this naturalism found a kind of a different form, partly because Mughal was formed of multiple traditions. One was it was the artists who had worked, I mean who were from India, from different parts of India, and then the artists who came from Persia, who interacted with them, then European art which was shown to them. So all three together formed a kind of a basis for a new language which is Mughal, and it incorporates elements of all in different ways, and most interestingly what it does is that it incorporates but it doesn’t swallow the origins of these traditions. The element of the... elements of the original language remains alive. I think this is something which is often not accepted. People would think that it is hybrid, you know, that doesn’t gel, doesn’t mix. I found it fascinating. Amongst these were the paintings of Hamzanama.

Do you think it could be argued that, however, that in company painting, and even in fact in Bhupen Khakhar the hybridity is there, the match is a little less, a little less homogenous?
Quite true.
And then something is altered?
Well, that kind of hybridity is what interests me, and I think in a way it also interested Bhupen very much, and this is something which I still argue about. You see, you don’t have to merge everything to make it into a homogenous entity. I think that kind of homogenous entity, in the end it is the death. What is, what is the dynamism of these living elements in interaction with each other, even conflicting, is something which is, I think, close to life in some ways. And I think that is what I like to keep alive, you know, that, and I saw that Hamzanama was an actual specimen of that, which was painting at the Court of Akbar. It is the story which is often considered to be the story of, I mean its name is associated with the Prophet’s uncle, but it was also a rebel in the time of Harun al-Rashid. But it’s a fictional story, a fictional tale. I think there are hundreds of stories, and they were all tales. And these were narrated to Akbar, Emperor Akbar, the Mughal emperor, and so he, it looks like he made his artists to paint it, and this was painted for 15 years in which Indian, Persian and... Indian and Persian artists were involved, who also incorporated elements from European art. We call that the Court of Akbar. The Portuguese missionaries had brought plantains, polygraph bible with illustrations. I think they were etchings from Antwerp, if I am not mistaken, and these served as a basis for them to, let us say, incorporate within their kind of naturalism that they had developed. So Persian, there is a particular kind of naturalism that is in 15th, 16th Century Persian painting. Indian painting had its own way of looking at both the world and also articulating in, basically in human form, a kind of naturalism, and this was the third. And I think what came together in the form of interaction was Hamzanama. When the same idiom is applied in a more homogenous form, in the life story of Akbar you find that it had lost the spark. It had lost that kind of energy, and also the kind of dynamism which Hamzanama displays.
Can I just say, isn’t the point for you partly that the artists from the different regions, and even from totally different traditions, were working together on the same sheet?
Often, yes. 
Which is astonishing.
But I would not be surprised to go back to Ajanta and say that there were multiple guilds and not one from India, and when you say guilds, you know, if they came from the South, that would be an entirely different tradition than the guild that was from the North, because the North would mean as far as let us say, you know, Kandahar, Afghanistan, because that tradition had travelled that far. What I am trying to articulate is the fact that even in the paintings like Ajanta there would be multiple hands because it’s a project which was a pet project. Such a large project, you would have to, and then they were painted at different periods. Sometimes not with great gaps between them, let’s say after 30 years another group came and painted that wall, or sometimes even finished that wall which was left unfinished by the other. But it is also quite likely that the guilds shared their craftsmen, guilds shared their artists. You know, if somebody was sick or ill and was not available, they would borrow somebody, you know, some others. Well, that is one thing, but at the Mughal court it was actually, it was an experiment. It was undertaken as a kind of a great experiment to, in one sense I think it is to define the great plurality of India. I think it was done through art. Well, Akbar as you know was interested in belief systems in the religion, so he used to collect all these representatives of different faiths. He had the Jain monks, he had the Hindu scholars, he had the Persian scholars, he also had the Portuguese missionaries, and he used to have these...
And the Jews, he had Jews. 
Huh?
He even had Jews. 
He even had Jews, yah, and he was interested, in fact, he even, how shall I say, composed a new religion, if I may use that word, Din-e-Ilahi, the religion of the law of God, which incorporated all these elements, and I think it is to his credit that he didn’t enforce it, and so it didn’t become a kind of a religion. But I learned that there are a few families who worked for Akbar, their successors continued to follow. I have even come to know of a family who was in Ahmedabad. Anyway, but the painting was the major experiment, and I think it was at a workshop either in Delhi or in Agra, but mostly in Delhi where these painters, the Great Masters, whom they call the Ustad, you know, who would make a drawing. There would be those who would be well versed in let us say landscape or in... or those who would be well versed in certain kind of figuration or portraiture, those who would be adept at doing certain kind of fine arts patterns or architecture, and their hands would be brought together on a single folio. Hamza was the... what shall we call it – this was the breeding ground, this is where it happened, they actually did that, and Hamza is a very different kind of experiment because it’s not small mini... miniatures, it’s not a small folio picture. It’s large, it’s on cloth, it’s painted on cloth, and there were 1,400 pictures painted. If you put them sideways, you know, it would be more than the space of a kilometre, and that was for 15 years all these people were engaged where they tried to hone their own skills into bringing alive the story of a hero who was perhaps fictional, but in a way they had in the example of the emperor a kind of a character. So they created Hamza in a way. It’s not so much the kind of a literary story as actually the story of the life of people, and what came in the process was a vast canvas of the Indian countryside, vast kind of hoard of characters, of demons. I think there were no demons of that kind painted ever. We only paint gods and goddesses, but these kinds of demons that they have painted, they are amazing, and they are all very, you know, charged figures. They are not sort of very finely finished figures, they are sort of half men at times, and I think that is where lies the great... greatness of that.

Well, it came to me accidentally. I had these ideas sort of brewing in my mind for a long time and I was responding to all kinds of art. You see, when I returned I had no opportunity to teach Indian art. It was much later that I got one subject, it was called Mughal to Modern. It was for junior students at third year level. But that provided me with an opportunity to study, and I began to read, I began to look at art, and I found among these the Hamza paintings, and I was quite stunned but at the same time taken aback, and then I discovered that except for one great German book there was very little material on Hamza, and that was done in the 20s. So I began to explore on my own, and I then thought that this was something which comes close to something which I thought of, you know, in my own way.

Well, it was the East India Company that was established by the British merchant groups at one point of time which then assumed a political role and ruled over parts of India. So, there began a kind of a, what you call... a patronising painting, British patrons, and there were also those who were, let’s say, you know, anglicised Indian patrons, and Indian artists responded to this in which they began to incorporate elements of let us say quote unquote western illusionism, and new ideas. So they were not just paintings of either gods and goddesses or the epics or of the Indian stories, but life of people at one level, and these were, some of these were curious. Like I think foreigners were always interested in what the castes were in India. Among the Brahmins there are multiple castes, they are all known by the caste mark or something or with their costumes etcetera. All the communities, for instance, you know, you would have the carpenter, you will have the, you know, cloth merchant, etc. There were all types of what you call typical, stereotypical paintings made, you know, which were called Firqa. Firqa is kind of a generic term of all types of curious, you know, tradesmen paintings, you know. These were done and company paintings then branched out into doing life of people, even British for that matter, how the British lived, and the changes that it brought about in Indian life. Mostly in East India, Patna was one place which was very popular, and among other things they painted on mica. So it was a transparent, like a glass painting. Also, there were a lot of illustrations made for the British for their scientific work like ornithology or botany, and all Indian artists were employed, because that was the time when patronage to Indian miniature painting was gradually going down, and these were the new patrons for whom they painted.
But in the 1960s such paintings would be all relatively valueless, yes? I mean, they would be regarded as rather a low category of Indian art?
Yes, yes. Well, it is interesting that most art historians, who were buying art, you know, for our museums, were not buying them. Or they were at the lowest. If they bought, it would be something like a little bonus. Even they were not buying drawings let me tell you, because people were not interested in that kind of thing. You know, this is something which we got gradually interested in, but company painting was not on top.

These kinds of genres which have something of street realism were becoming the core of your teaching in a way in Baroda, or the part of your teaching which was most personal. Do you think, do you think that this had already been partly facilitated by KG Subramanyan’s own emphasis on the craft, something more nearer to the vernacular?
I am not sure about that. I don’t think that became part of my educational or pedagogical programme. I think what, I think Bhupen benefitted most from that, and I think he used it in his own work. He actually painted petty tradesmen a little later. I think it sort of gave it a new lease of life and people began to look at company painting in a different sort of way. My interest in that was academic, only basic, only up to a point. I think Subramanyan’s interest must be very different. I do not know about that.

Well, I was sort of a wanderer, you know. I sort of lived a sort of a life, you know, where I could move from place to place, and even those 3 or 4 years that I was, you know, before we got married, I travelled a lot. Once or twice I did, you know, we travelled, Bhupen and Chhatpar and Nagji, I mean, but it was a kind of, I don’t know how to explain it, it’s very vague, kind of. It was a time where you were sort of floating. I think Nilima brought some kind of an anchor to that, you know, in a way made me sit down a little and made me think of my things. Also to have children was a great experience, and also I remember how she, for a period of time, even abandoned painting, her own painting to look after children, and then gradually she began to incorporate in her work images of her children and her own life, including domestic life, which not many people... actually, now if you want to make a reference to company painting, you could make it here in a different sort of way because Nilima in her own way painted life around, you know.  The lady who worked for us, you know, the homeopath we used to visit, you know, and so life of children in school, life of children in let’s say in Baroda or in Dalhousie, and I think in a way she also developed an idiom which I would associate to an extent with certain kind of Bengal school painting, especially Abanindranath Tagore. Abanindranath Tagore when he painted his Arabian Nights paintings was actually referring to streets down Jorasanko, the Tagore house where he lived. It was all those tradesmen, all those workers, all those sort of characters, you know, that were in the street, and in some way, though Nilima’s work is not dramatic, whereas Abanindranath’s work can be dramatic, she was referring to these things. I think to her credit, more than me, she got involved in actually using the technique of Indian miniature painting. She actually imbibed that, she learnt it. She made it a kind of a mission to know about it. She went to Nathdwara and learnt under Dwarkalal. She spent, you know, time on that. She went and saw Bannu in Jaipur, worked, you know, and learnt about how he painted, and in a way brought in her own work, which I think is rare, hardly any painter has ever done that, actually preparing the Vasli, that is the kind of mount that you make for painting, using the khadia, that is the whiting of which you make the first layer, then drawing and painting over and over, and then actually using the paper from Sanganer, that is from Rajasthan, handmade paper from Rajasthan, and also the idiom and the language, you know of... but obviously not using just one language, using multiple languages, and developing her own.  I think for me it was a great companionship to my own concerns, and while I was studying Hamza and Hamzanama I was doing this and that, and she was going on very quietly working, you know, in this manner, I think which was a very, in a way also complimentary and a very fulfilling experience because we shared. We began to share everything literally. I mean she came to share Sienese painting partly because of my hang-ups and also in many paintings, you know, we discovered on our own all kinds of things. And even when I, I think she also made me to write more, to say what I was teaching, and often, you know, in my writings, particularly the English language writings, you know, we had great discussions, and often, you know, she helped me articulate my ideas.

Vrishchik had begun in ’69. It continued until ’73.
And Vrishchik means scorpion?
Yah, it was a peculiar, you are asking why the name. We were in residence in Bangalore and we wanted to start a journal, and we all thought up a name and we said oh, what could it be? All kinds of names were suggested, and eventually, like 1890, you know, we fell upon, we said what is, what you call Rashi that is the astrological sign... that is Scorpio, and there were, we were about five or six persons there and four of them were Scorpio. Nilima is Scorpio by the way. So you know, that is how it was adopted. But anyway, it did some work of stinging, you know, at the Lalit Kala Academy.
And in a way was that... did that begin to form a core of fellow travellers?
Vrishchik? 
Yes. 
Well, that was the need of the day, that there was no communication channel, there was no art journal. There was one magazine which Lalit Kala published, which was very indefinite, and there were hardly any other, you know, channels through which the artists could talk. So our idea was to open that channel to actually make it possible for artists to communicate and then also raise issues. I think what Swaminathan had talked about Lalit Kala Academy, we took it up and we actually mounted a protest against Lalit Kala and the great, you know, exhibition called the Triennale that was to take place that year. So Vrishchik became the forum for sort of these views and comments and ideas and criticism.
Perhaps it’s worth just saying a little more about the art world in that way, what Lalit Kala represented, sort of like the Royal Academy. 
Well, Lalit Kala was set up, if I am not mistaken, in 1955 and it was supposed to be, it was meant to be a national art academy to deal with visual arts. And so it would have an exhibition, a national exhibition which would also award prizes which would be called national awards,  and then it was supposed to in general look after, let us say, or you know, make publications, etc. But you see, it was all composed of nominated members. A large number of them from the government hierarchy, and many came from all kinds of organisations, and so basically it was not representative. It was not representative of artists. It had members, you know, who had some kind of association or connection with art, but most of them were inactive. They were not doing anything, and the level of national exhibition had also fallen, and hence I think there was a great need, you know, to revamp that, you know, to do something. But should we or should we not, you know, because at that point of time we were not thinking politically, but we were only talking about reforming Lalit Kala Academy. But it became a political movement because we all got together and we had artists writing about them, and Vrishchik became a forum. So we published letters of artists in Vrishchik. They aired their views, both sides, and eventually the government appointed a committee. There is a whole story about that.
Bhupen Khakhar was the other editor, but something of a sleep... you were the real editor?
Well, Bhupen was not really interested in anything, but I wanted that kind of moral support at the same time, you know. He was a... I mean in my life at that point of time, he was a very important figure, and so we wanted to work together. He remained, he didn’t do much. Occasionally he would contribute, but he was around, but he was supportive, I must say, yah.

Geeta Kapoor I met soon after I arrived from England, and I got quite interested in her work. She was bubbling with ideas, and she had studied in New York and then she was trying to... and we thought that we need a new generation of art critics. We had older men like Richard Bartholomew and others, but times had changed, you know. And in a way I think a voice in art criticism was... I think it was we were at a point where a voice was to emerge, and one thought that Geeta would be that voice, and in a way she tried to sort of fill in that gap. Well, at that point of time she also was interested in art concerns. Some of us were involved in that, and when she went to Royal College to study, if I am not mistaken it was I who suggested that you go and work with Peter De Francia, and she did. And it was when she went to England and I visited England again that I met Peter for the first time, personally. But she did her dissertation which was called ‘Art and Indigenism’. It was on post-colonial art. So, in some way it comes close to some of the ideas, you know, which we were experimenting with in our own work, and some of the things, you know, which we thought could be written about. So she wrote this chapter in which she included three artists and in which, Husain, Swaminathan and Bhupen are the three artists she discussed in her... which we carried in Vrishchik, and even published as a little booklet. So, that is from ’69 to ’73. This was published in ’73. Well, then she became a much greater associate, and after that we all, you know, began to work together, which culminated in an exhibition called ‘Place for People’.
In a way that became what was then known as The Baroda School. 
Yes, possibly. Baroda School was known already because it had already aroused a kind of a curiosity, and even in a way slight envy right from the time the Baroda artists began to win awards in the National Academy.
I know, but frankly Jyoti Bhatt is not really part of that setting.
No, there was a Baroda group of artists.
I know, but that Baroda group, I mean the people who won the prizes from Baroda are not the same thing as The Baroda School. 
No, that, well, most people came to know and associate it with after ’70, 70s onwards.
And didn’t it have a street realist or something, I mean ‘Place for People’ was an exhibition that was slightly proposing, a new kind of reality?
But ‘Place for People’ took place 10 years later.
Yes, okay.
You see? This is something which was in the 70s, you know, and Vrishchik also attracted a lot of attention, and we had both our, you know, friends and critics, you know, some who did not approve of us and... So there was in that sense Baroda also was, you know, in that sense a centre of attraction. You know, people talked about it. I think it was much later in, after 10 years, that the idea of a ‘Place for People’, you know, because we, before that we had an exhibition in ’74, ten artists sort of got together and had an exhibition. It also had several of these.

That was a period when we were sort of collecting views of artists through Vrishchik, paved the way for people to come together, at a different level though, it was at a national level. But then it brought up sort of issues. You were either for or against, and it was also a time when, you see, there weren’t that many galleries around, and none of us were doing sort of commercially well. So, it was also more sort of practical to have joint shows, group shows. I remember Bhupen, Agji, Chadpur and I had a show in Jahangirabad Gallery we organised ourselves. Similarly in 1974 another show where 10 artists got together and we had it in Delhi, you know, with Vivan and Nilima, and even Balbir Singh Katt, sculptor, they were all involved in that. But this was a time when people began to think about some of the issues and some of the ideas. Well, Vivan and Sudhir to an extent, you know, were sort of focussed on the left ideas, and I must talk... I must mention this institution of camps, artist camps, which began in the ‘60s, and in fact for the first one perhaps took place in Kashmir. It was initiated by Sankho Chaudhuri, one of our teachers. Now, that brought artists together, and that sort of was either financed or supported by either an academy of the State or some other body. Eventually the Kasauli house that belonged to Vivan Sundaram became home for a number of camps. Now, the word camp in that sense is a loosely kind of used term. It was more of kind of an exchange of ideas, and there were people of different denominations, and in the case of Kasauli, there were artists, writers, film-makers, theatre persons, you know, women, particularly those feminists, and others. So... and it did not remain sort of limited to India. It became a kind of an international camp, and Vivan was in, Vivan managed to get either the Max Mueller Bhavan or Goethe-Institut to support, you know, a tour of German artists, and British Council to support British artists and all that. So that culminated into that, but yes, it is right that during that time there was some kind of a ferment, and the ferment was toward a kind of work, you know, that we, some of us were engaged in. It wasn’t really articulated in terms in which it really emerged at that point of time, but we were all doing figurative work. We were all interested in the environment, and in some ways there was a convergence in our work and we could share, share ideas, share work. And there was a kind of a debate in Baroda, you know, which was part of our pedagogy, with the visitors or visiting, you know, artists, you know, talked. Well, our houses, you know, both my house and Bhupen’s house, you know, were used, you know, for... because these were all mostly friends, and these friends stayed at our place and we would collect other artists and joined by students, and we would even have little seminars. You know, these were all kind of impromptu things at times, at times organised. I think in a way you became part of that sort of collective, you know, because already there was that kind of, you know, basis for meeting. So... ground was prepared for this exhibition called Place for People. It got limited to six artists. Maybe it was a convenient way of doing it because you know, we couldn’t afford to have more, and the six of us had sort of a kind of continuing dialogue, you know, sort of in our work or through correspondence or whenever we met, or in similar sort of sessions of collective dialogue we aired our views. So I think that was a time, and then Geeta Kapur, art critic, we felt very strongly. She had already organised an exhibition called Pictorial Space for the Lalit Kala Academy, and emerged as a major figure. But besides that, it was her interest in our ideas and in this kind of a collective and convergence that she wanted to contribute. So, in a way Place for People invited her as a seventh member, not as an art critic, not to write on our art or our work, but contribute a  piece like we had our work on display and she contributed a piece for that. So I think that seemed to have attracted attention and the exhibition which was held in Delhi and Bombay, you know, was well received.

Well, there were many issues involved. Well, to elaborate, it was not just architecture and people. It was actually an enquiry within. It was confessional in some sense, you know. It was something where we began to enquire into our own identity, and though we may not see politics in it, we did not see politics in it at that time, although Vivan and Geeta and myself, because they were more politically conscious. It was politics, and in that, I think, as Nilima discovered herself in a different sort of way, as you know, you know, that all her paintings are in a way enquiry into her growth, you know, as a young woman, you know. Her paintings in 'Place for People' actually vouch for that. I mean, if it is for Sudhir to discover the 'Railway Commuters', you know...
Sudhir Patwardhan?
Yah, it is not incidental, you know, it’s part of it, you know, it’s all part of that story. That it was living in Bombay, commuting and watching sort of almost the great humanity travelling from one end of the city to the other, converging in the city of Bombay, but focussed upon one single entity like the commuter train, discovery in a way. We had not discovered such things. Well so, in one sense for me also to make a statement, you know, about self, which I had begun to an extent by writing what I call Gher Jatan, which means going home or returning home, translated into English. They articulated a sort of, both conflict and convergence of worlds that we lived in, the world that was given to us, the world that came to us, the world that we created, and the world we yearn for. In some sense, in physical terms, our own life, life as artists, life as people, and in a sense it was also a coming together, a sort of a meeting of minds.
So, I did those four paintings which were around that period of time. That is, the first one was about ‘Waiting and Wandering’. The second one is called ‘Speaking Street’, the third one was ‘Revolving Routes’, a kind of a circular journey, and the fourth one was ‘City for Sale’, which is about the city of Baroda. I would say even for Bhupen it was a sort of a discovery, not only of his concerns as an artist, but also his sexuality, I would say. You know, it was a time, you know, when churning was in process, a kind of churning, you know, in our minds, in our work, and in a way we also thought of what to paint and what not to paint, how to paint. It was also about language to use, whether we, what is modern. I mean, we didn’t think of post-modern, but maybe perhaps we were thinking of something which was beyond modern. That came in some kind of a, you know, formation. I think the patterns became visible to us, that our minds were, and our works were converging, and hence, ‘Place for People’ is not incidental. It’s part of history, part of a history we all had lived together, and hence in a way, when you came on the scene, you know, you became part of it, you know. It was not something that we did not anticipate, you know. We thought that there were people, you know, in other parts of the world who perhaps went through similar churning and had their own views about both art and the world, and that it was time, you know, for us to make a statement, and hence, I think, there’s nothing grand about it, but that was something very urgent, something very personal, and also collective at the same time.

Well, it is, I mean Bruegel is an artist I am interested in, but I am interested in particular aspects of Bruegel. I think it is the linguistic terms. I am curious about the way he distorts his figures. You know, when you have a kind of a naturalistic language and you sort, kind of have a character, you know, or characters in whom you have kind of reposed certain elements, you know. You have something like a funny man or a slightly evil character or something peculiar, I think that is what interested me. I’m... of course I am a great admirer of his work, but at a personal level I can only say that, but I think at one level I also got involved in Grosz, George Grosz, and I think the city paintings took me. Initially it was Sienese, no, it was Ambrogio Lorenzetti, which I had greatly admired and which I had discovered while I was a student. In fact, my teacher, Amberkar had helped me in that because I used to respond to that, and he told me about those, and then when I saw them, you know, in reality, I was very deeply, greatly moved, and I realised that there was something very common in my view of looking and painting in movement. Not from a still, one single point of view, but multiple views. You know, you paint as if you are walking in a street. And so Ambrogio’s painting actually deals with that. Actually, you go through the street with him, and the street opens up as you walk and there is a physical walk also. So this brought me back to Ajanta, which is again about walking. This in a way brought me to Hamzanama in which you actually, you know, don’t physically walk, but your eye walks through, and I think Mughal painting, a lot of Mughal painting is about walking, about discovering, and the landscape rises up as you walk, as you go up. So, all these things were sort of in a way, you know, coalescing and coming together, and this is the time then I think with Kasauli, with friends, little groups meeting at home, it finally got sort of, you know, connected with that and that is how the whole thing came about. 

Was the Emergency an important event for you and for this circle of friends?
Yes. Emergency shook us all, I think. It was a terrible time. In a way, one sees sometimes it as a, you know, when you look back, as a kind of a portent of things to come. It is one of those things that I remember came after the communal strife, communal tensions and communal conflict, the first one that we encountered in 1969 in Ahmedabad, among the worst. That was also a kind of an awakening of sort, you know, because here you were sort of, we became marked, your name became marked, and so suddenly identity became an issue, and then it was Emergency where everyone got marked. Literally all who sort of stood for, in a way, very simply freedom or you know, not just freedom of expression, you know, became targets.
Will you just explain a little to the ignorant what the Emergency was?
Well, it was a time when the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi’s election was set aside by a court of law. And she... and there was a great kind of a protest against the way in which the ruling party handled affairs. It culminated into a nationwide protest, with leaders like Jaya Prakash Narayan, you know, a sort of a liberal Gandhian, sort of very non-violent protests, but sort of, you know... that was viewed by the government as being a kind of a secession, secession, and so Emergency was invoked by the government in ’75, and it continued for 2 years. Well, it sort of eventually lifted and it augured new politics in India of coalition instead of two parties. Now, politicians of different hues came together and they formed a government which was called the Janata government. But those 2 years of Emergency were sort of, you know, sort of, it was a dark chapter in our history, and many innocent, you know, activists and writers and theatre persons and also of course politicians, were not only put behind bars, some of them were tortured and many lost their lives. So that is the time. I think... I was doing a painting with sort of houses on two sides. It was mostly architecture, in fact something which would relate to company painting. The houses are in perspective, and it is sort of literally triangular streets, and I had figures in them and then eventually I had a figure with multiple hands who was a kind of a figure on the run. It was sort of being... it was right in the centre of it. Well, as I painted for, I think, a few months, eventually I removed the figure totally, leaving just the architecture and animals around. It was called A Speechless City. Vivan did a series of drawings, and eventually even paintings, and I think he was marked at that point of time, but luckily, you know, he escaped being arrested. But anything could have happened.

Kabir is taught in school, so our textbooks, Hindi textbooks, would have Kabir in it, all in Gujarati textbooks will have the saint poetry, like Mirabai, and we would have our own Gujarati Kabir called Akhor, and one would know about Kabir. I think most children in India, even today, would have heard of Kabir, because Kabir is also, you know, quoted. His poetry, particularly the couplets, you know, are like aphorisms. They are like proverbs at times, you know, people would recite it, and it is across – what shall I say – classes, across castes, across communities, people would remember it. Kabir himself was sort of a crossover. Now, he was not, nobody knew because they said that it was a child which was born of a Brahmin couple and which was reared by a Muslim family, and that when he died there was a quarrel whether to... bury him or cremate him, and that under his shroud there were only flowers. There are all kinds of legends about him, but the greatness of Kabir lies in two things to my mind. One is... the way he dealt with the sacred and the spiritual, he spoke in a very, you know, almost a language of the common people, ordinary people, and he was, you know, he could formulate an idea which would appear to be very simple, but it could be read in multiple ways. So it is almost kind of layered poetry, as you would say. I'll give you an example, that if he were to – let us say – write about hiraņa, which means a deer, which is an animal of prey, let’s say, you know, people hunt hiraņa. If you have the audience in front of whom suppose somebody like a musician... somebody like Kumar Ghandar, a great musician, who sang Kabir, were to sing that, there would be people who would take it as if it is an act of violence against animals. There would be people who would take it as if that hiraņa has something to do with some myth. It can be Ram, sort of chasing a demon. There would be another level at which it would be read as if it is the self, you know, which is being attacked. So, you know, there are beyond that, you know, they would have their own interpretation which I think Kabir allows, and that kind of layered poetry which has element of the, you know, I mean he in a way did not speak about any particular deity, although he used word Ram, and Ram was a generic character rather than Ram in the epic. But it would be something that he would say, ‘Tera saain tujh mein, jag sakey to jaag’. He said, 'Your, whatever... you know, what you are seeking yourself is within you. Awake if you can’. In that sense he actually allowed people to discover their own selves. So it hit very deeply and it went across both generations and times, and even today Kabir could be quoted. That is one.
Is that 15th century?
15th, 16th century, between that. But the other dimension of Kabir is very hard-hitting social poetry, and there he could really tear you down. You know, he wrote in a language which can be considered very hard and strong, but beautifully said. And so he sort of pounced upon hypocrisy, you know, especially religious hypocrisy. He also attacked pretence of different kinds and he even talked about the great gurus and those who are the big preachers, and he attacked both the priests of different – let us say – religious denominations. He would attack a Muslim priest and he would attack a Hindu priest. You know, he... so in way he was carving a new kind of belief system which was multiple. You know, we could bring together all the... and also innate wisdom of the land. I think there is something which people have in them, and since he was a weaver, he wrote his poetry using the metaphor of weaving, warp and weft, and in fact, quite a number of things he talks about is about warp and weft and I think these images and these metaphors hit, you know, the, you know, particularly the oppressed, you know. So I am not surprised that Kabir continues to appeal to audiences, not only in North India, those who speak Hindi, but also in many other regions where there are sort of different Kabirs who have emerged in different languages.

Well, I came to know of Benode Bihari through my teachers, both Sankho Chaudhary and from Subramanyan. I remember when I was a student I, no, when I started teaching, I think in ’61, around that time, I had an occasion to visit Calcutta. I went to a conference and I made a point to go to Santiniketan especially to see his mediaeval saint’s mural, you know, in the Hindi Bhavan, and I was very, you know, immediately taken by it. At a later stage I met his daughter who in a way was my student, and then I met him when he had lost his sight. He was living in Delhi with his daughter. In the last years of his life I came to know him a little better, and I also wrote a small essay on him in 1970. Very strange, you know, besides Subramanyan and a few others, nobody had written about him.
And the Satyajit Ray film. 
Satyajit Ray film was made later. You know, even at that time that film was not made. So, not, people did not talk about him, you know. They talked about him when it came to Bengal School, they talked about Nandalal, they talked about even Abanindranath, who is a father figure, also Ramkinkar. Benode Babu I would not say was not, it’s not that he was not known, but he was not spoken about, he was not part of a debate or part, and he never became part of our engagement. You know, all artists, all the six of us who gathered together, we all seemed to admire his work. So in a way Benode Bihari was also a part of that. That's why I am not at all surprised when you look at Benode Bihari’s concerns they somehow, you know, corresponded with ours.
Do you think that brought you closer to Subramanyan? Do you think you came closer to Subramanyan?
I had known Subramanyan right from the beginning, although I did not study, you know, with him. I was around and I watched him and I attended his lectures and all that. I translated, I even interviewed him in Gujarati a long time ago, and you would be surprised, and he would perhaps vouch for it, he told me the other day, he said, ‘It is because of you I write, I started writing’. I said, ‘Why, how?’ He said well, during the Abanindranath centenary, Tagore centenary, I was part of, you know, this Bhogilal Gandhi, one of my senior literary mentors and in whose house I lived, he published a volume on Tagore’s centenary and I was to write on something, but I said it is better that somebody like KG Subramanyan wrote that. I was too young to comment on Tagore’s paintings. So I went and asked him, and he wrote this piece which I translated into Gujarati. It got published in Gujarati first and then in English. So I knew him quite well, and I think generally we had that kind of a rapport, but I didn’t meet him that much as I began to after the 70s when we lived in the same house. I got accommodation in what is called residence in Bangalore, and that had five, let us say, you know, teachers, four on the ground floor and I had one, I was one of them, and he lived upstairs in, you know, what was originally the dance hall. So that is when we met a number of times and we became quite close.

Well, ‘Place for People’ had four paintings of mine, and these are sort of designed as pairs of companion pieces. There are two pairs. So, about ‘Waiting and Wandering’, the first, and ‘Revolving Routes’, the third, are companion pieces, whereas ‘Speaking Street’ and ‘City for Sale’ are another pair. Well, in a way it was a sort of search of the self, and as I said, that it was confessional in some measure, but also referring to both past and present. In a way, they were all about certain kind of journeys and also they were open-ended, they would connect, not only with each other, but they would connect with even other works of mine, or even make reference to other works that I admired.  It’s also a continuation of the kind of quotation that I had begun with returning home after a long absence in which I had brought in, you know, a tree from a Mughal painting, an image of the Prophet from a Persian miniature and photograph of my mother, plus all other things which I had sort of cooked up or concocted. So, these two were, these were an extension of that idea. One idea was to bring in as many, let us say, situations as possible. Could one deal with more than one? Simply to, let us say, think in terms of painting both the inside and the outside at the same time. That is how in fact the idea of about ‘Waiting and Wandering’ emerged when I was painting. I had used a part of the house that I was living in, and then I went out in the middle of it and was making some drawings of the same house from outside, just sometimes as simple as that, you know, and I said oh, why not? And then it was a journey to something like places, both lived and imagined, or even known and desired, or perhaps physically experienced and dreamt. This was the kind of a companionship that I was seeking, and that, I mean that’s an old hobbyhorse. It’s a kind of a situation that I have tried to articulate in most of my work. So, ‘Waiting and Wandering’ sort of emerged from that, and there the quotations are – let’s say – the nude woman on the right is from ‘The Bathers’ of Ingres. The Japanese character is perhaps from Utamaro if I am not mistaken, but then there are all other things. You know, my memories of my childhood, like the train that runs through the, you know, countryside, or the big champa tree with white flowers, you know, which was in my compound. So in a way, all that, and there is a self-portrait of sorts, sort of with a backpack waiting for something, you know, and it was a landscape or houses or architecture of the kind that I knew in my childhood, and also while I was in Baroda. So it’s kind of a, you know, all, I mean this is making too factual, too simple, and in fact I once tried to write down in this painting what I was painting, or the few months that I was working on. I thought let me see whether it works or not, the changes that I made, as I go back and forth. Would it work? I mean would it make sense? And I, after a few months, I finished the painting and then I’d forgotten, and then after a few months I picked up my... it was in some diary and I read it. It sounded like a load of rubbish, you know. Such a nonsense, you know, that I had written. It meant nothing. It just meant some kind of a, you know, record, which had nothing to do with what the painting, what I was doing, and I realised that it was a wrong move. And I even thought that at one level it was spying on the soul. I thought this is something which one has to guard against. The process of work, you know, is so, it’s so complex, so, it’s so unpredictable at times. You know, you desire... you design something and you do exactly the opposite, and you come to a point where you realise that oh, you began with that and where are you now? I don’t know. And the next day looking at the same painting, you know, you think, oh God, what have I done? And you go back. You start, you restart, you rub off. So it’s not like a kind of a linear journey at all. In fact, that is what interests me, that life is not a linear journey, and artists, never. It goes into all kinds of nooks and corners, even when you think of a journey, I mean there are streets which you have never thought you would traverse and you do, and there are things that will emerge which you never anticipated. And then altogether when it forms some kind of a, you know, what shall I say, you know, they come together and at some stage, you know, they begin to work with each other. It’s very difficult to even describe, you know, how it happens, what happens, and I don’t want to make it mysterious. It’s a sense that it’s not just a simple mystery; it’s the whole process of working. It’s like that, and if it were not so, there would be no fun in working, you know. That’s all that makes you do things which you want. So you plan out something and let’s say well, I am describing a painting or I can even, after having done the painting, I describe it again. Both of them really sometimes fall flat until you really encounter it. You have to actually experience it, and at some level you must make your own journey. I have to make a journey in my own painting, as I do in other people's work.

So the second painting, I mean the companion piece was in a way a kind of a journey, and I literally divide it in four parts, but also make a kind of a circular journey. On the left top it is invocation of my childhood imagery, like the dervishes or the fakirs dancing, but you also have the reference to Rabindranath playing here a Baul. I mean something, you know, you...
Explain that to... a little more. 
Rabindranath actually...
Rabindranath Tagore?
Acted, acted, acted as a Baul saint, and there is a painting that Abanindranath made of Rabindranath of that. So, there is that kind of, but then there is, you know, a bridge that, a kind of a riverside area which would go back to my hometown. And if you come down, there is a little slaughter house and there are animals and there is meat and all that, but if you move on the right, then it was the house that I lived in. It was residency bungalow, and we had a big, large champa tree, a beautiful tree, and the monkeys used to frequent it because it was full of vegetation. I think the tall figure is that of Nilima, my wife, and then there is a little girl, I think it was Samira at that point of time, and it was the back of that house. Right down as you come on the bottom, you have the ambience of the university, the college where I taught, and you have Timothy Hyman, Mr Hyman, you, giving a talk showing Balthus. But then there are all kinds of characters, a man on a motorbike. All the young folks used motorbikes in those days. Then there is Rodin’s ‘Thinker’, and there are a few odd things, and then the streetscape that opens is roughly on the, I think houses in Baroda, and there is also a gateway, which is similar to the gateway near Nyayamandir. And then you come round the circle and at the end bottom left you have a speaking tree in which there are five or six faces, one of Bhupen, one of Subramanyan.
Talk about ‘The Speaking Tree’. 
'Speaking Tree' is an image which I learnt about you know, while I was teaching, and later on I also saw that Richard Lannoy had done a book on using that metaphor for India. So I think the story is that in Sikandar Nama, the story of Alexander in the Persian texts, he had encountered on his way to India a speaking tree which spoke in many tongues. So mostly when it is painted, it has heads of animals and birds and human beings all sort of growing out of the tree. It was a fascinating image. So I sort of used it in my own way. So these are the five or six of my friends and mentors, you know, whom I put them in the tree, and there is a flying figure around. So altogether it becomes a kind of a circular journey, you know, and then centres into the middle where I am sitting, and then there are images of Bruegel and well, perhaps some other references. But that is how that painting was construed. So in a way, these two are autobiographical, specifically related to both situations and on my, you know, whatever my concerns are, you know, with regard to quoting, bringing together past and present. The other two are more or less about towns or cities I lived in. ‘The Speaking Tree’ is like the street that I lived in, in my childhood, in Surendranagar. It has a mosque in the middle, that green building with, there are a few praying there. And then surrounding that are, you know, stories, all sort of little tales, you know, of people in their little houses or homes or places where there is a sort of a man beating a woman. There is also a couple there, there is a woman combing hair, things like that, and there is a little boy watching the whole thing. But also the stories are of slightly different kinds in the sense that there is on the tree a man sitting and reading something. It’s like a kind of a genial ghost, you know, we call a sort of a genie. ‘Jinnat’ is the word that is commonly used, or that up there in the ground just before the streetscape opens, there are two angels who are picking up a figure. That is almost a self-portrait, and in which you don’t see anything, there are no shadows. So it relates to, I mean the stories I had heard in my childhood that the angels do not cast shadows, and only dogs can perceive that. So there are two dogs barking there. Anyway, these are all personal things. I don’t know whether it makes any sense, you know, whether, the mystery of the painting or the, you know, the magic of the painting or the way it works or the way it doesn’t, you know, it is all beyond this. This is just a simple description, you know, it melds. So similarly if I were to describe ‘City for Sale’ it also would mean that, you know, there is the cinema hall right in the middle, the Bollywood pot boiler, you know, about that triangular lover about sort of a mega star with his wife and his paramour. So they made a film of it. You know, the real life was made into what they call kind of a film, and that was playing while the, what we call riots, you know, communal conflict was raging in the town. So I did the two simultaneous things, you know, which is something which was referred to.

I was invited to make panels for an office in The Times of India. I am rather wary of doing work for, you know, commissioned work, but then I thought why not, let me see. So they showed me the place and I saw there were six offices, all with glass fronts and backs, glass fronts and sides, and the wall at the end sort of had about, it was 7 feet wide and there were six such cabins. So altogether it made 42 feet. So I decided I will use about, you know, a scale of 3.6, that is half the size of the width, and make six panels. The idea was that if you are sitting in a glass cabin you should be able to see through, and the one who sits in cabin three should be able to see the painting in two as well as in four, and if you walk out, then you would be able to see one by one all six. But I sort of made it sort of more complicated by dividing into vertical zones of sort. So there are multiple kind of divisions, some are wide, some are narrow, there are some who have images, some have landscapes, some have mythical things, some have something very realistic. So it is altogether there are six panels, so I thought that these zones of wonder would be useful. You know, even people sitting and doing their work, they may also peep into the other and they may connect with each other. So the painting makes up as a kind of point of contact, and then they could put it together and see it as a mural if they wish to. Otherwise, there are even zones within that in which they could perhaps find their own imagery that they are interested in. So that is how it was worked out, and each one had a title and some referred to some or other odd story, some referred to local instances, some referred to music, you know, they are an idea that if people listen to music while working, I think painting can also be part of that experience. Unfortunately I must admit here that The Times of India’s administration was rather insensitive. At a later stage one of the paintings was auctioned off. So something which I designed as one single unit, there are six panels which unfortunately was, you know, I was not very happy about it, but then what can you do, you know, when people own it, they do what they like.

Do you think that you speak with many tongues, like The Speaking Tree?
I think every Indian speaks in many tongues, not me alone. Literally we speak at least three languages. Almost all of us, if not three, at least two, and many speak four. So, it is not that, but it is that we live in multiple times. For instance, if you walk out in India in a street you find, you know, these tribals, you know, sometimes labourers working, and if you go a few miles you will find their habitat and you are reminded of a time which is perhaps 500 years ago. There might be those, you know, whose time might go 1000 years back. You might go to South India and you will see that, you know, those temples and all that, and you will see that you are in the Sangam times, you know, it’s mediaeval. Rajasthan will also give you another impression, but if you are in Lucknow you might find yourself in the 18th century still, and in Girgaum, in the new modern city, you will see a future city, or something which is either in New York and in Chicago or wherever. And I think this is a daily experience, you know. We move in different times, as we move from space to space, and I think this is partly an inbuilt psyche. It’s something, you know, which every child carries, you know. So that is nothing unusual, I am not talking about anything which is very special. I think it is an experience which people might have even in many other countries, too. Only, you know, one realises that there is nothing wrong in belonging to different times, you know.
What is unusual?
I mean, you know your feet are there in today.
What is unusual? You seem consistently to be trying to find forms of pictorial equivalents to that multiplicity. 
That’s true. Well, that was my endeavour, so I tried to sort of put that thing inside of it.
I mean, I understand why you feel it was banal to just enumerate, but of course that is fuelling you. Something of that quest is constantly giving... pushing you forward. 
Yah, no, that’s true, yah. I still get excited about discovering another sense of time somewhere wherever I go. But in a sense, you know, I am extending it further, not only to India but wherever I... whichever place I go to. For instance last year, or no, the year before when we went to China, it was, you know, this was something which I had been dreaming of visiting the caves of Dunhuang, and Dunhuang is at a point, you know, in the Gobi Desert, you know, where 300 caves have survived. But it is a whole journey of what is called Silk Route, and you could literally begin from Ajanta, you know, from North Deccan, that is in Maharashtra. You go up to the north and touch Afghanistan and you come to, you know... some places where you will find some of the strains. I mean the Deccan experience goes up to Malwa, that is in Central India, and then right up to beyond Afghanistan it is Uzbekistan and it is in Tashkent and Samarkand that you see strains of Ajanta are still, you know, visible. And I suppose if you go further to Penjikent and then from there you go further to Bezeklik and you go to Talwan and you draw a whole line actually. You know, it’s a journey, you know, and you see the image of Buddha heads, the image of the great caravans, you know, the people who travelled. People were not static, they were mobile, and they moved all the time. Even in Dunhuang they said there is one particular face, early face, you know, he’s sort of Indian, and there are images which are not sort of, you know, Chinese. So, you have that kind of a communication. You have that kind of a journey, and similarly there is also music. You know, in music you see similar things happening, and it’s not one way, it’s sort of also in reverse the same story.  So, I would like Dunhuang to be part of mine, and I did some paintings in which actually when I was doing some paintings on China on this experience, I saw in Dunhuang a particular painting which I was quite captivated by, which I had seen a small reproduction of it, but standing in front of it was amazing. It was a large landscape with a lot of architecture. It is the old monastery, and this is the site of what they call Wuta’i Mountains. Now, Wuta’i Mountains is a bowl of Bodhisattva, but obviously these monasteries which they have painted are based upon the monasteries they knew, or they created, you know. And it’s a vast kind of a sprawling landscape and with a lot of sort of intricate architectural settings with mountains and with banners and with people moving about, and it was all over on the entire wall which I never imagined. It’s really, I mean it, so it is a kind of a compliment to Ajanta, because Ajanta is all physicality and human bodies, whereas here was a landscape and a kind of a vision which is sort of complimentary vision, and I began to quote it. In the paintings I did I used that... landscape, and I am still haunted by that. I mean I still use it again.

Well, mapping is kind of an extension of journeys, in a sense you know, because that’s been my old hobby horse. So eventually I ended up using maps, that also is the story perhaps we can consider. So in mapping you have, it’s simultaneous, you know, they’re placed next to each other. They overlap at times and then you go through them, you make your journeys then and the idea is that it would allow the viewer to make as many journeys as possible. So there are multiple points of entry and exit, you can go and come out and go again, but make your journey, not necessary circular journeys, all kinds, you know, we can indicate it in different ways. It’s nothing unusual, it’s something that I have learnt or seen in many paintings, you know, especially you know, both in Indian painting or in Chinese or...
In Bruegel?
So many paintings, you know, Bruegel, there are...
Lorenzetti.
Lorenzetti, Duccio, you know, they are all, in all of them you make these journeys. Literally, you know, it is like assuming, sort of, a kind of a role, you know, in the painting that you find yourself in the same shape and form as some of the characters and then actually walk with them. So the painting in that sense opens, you know, and it’s a kind of magic world in which you enter and it is possible to do it over and over again, that kind of a journey, multiple journeys. So journey in that sense, if one had to think in terms of space then it is that kind of a laying out and then all the regions, you know, that gradually open. Well, I’m equally interested in palimpsest in the sense that I like things one upon each other, if they’re kind of layered. So there are things, you know, which perhaps are, you know, invisibly visible or what would you call it, you know, they are there in some way then and you begin to look at things. So in some paintings I’ve actually tried that, like I’ve used the image of Kabir, the poet you know, that’s from a late 18th century Mughal painting – it’s a very beautiful painting, it’s in the British Museum collection – using the head of Kabir and then planting a variety of images either from his poetry or cooked up by myself, I have placed them on top of his face – that can be that way several other layers. And further to that each image might also suggest another layer so within that, you know, you could have multiple kind of layers. Yes true, you know, these are the things, you know, which are part of my sort of very, every time I draw something either I remove it, I redraw it, I’ll paint over it, I scribble on it and I paint again, then I bring an image from somewhere else and plant on top of it. So this is the process, you know, which interests me greatly. You know, this is something which I think is also a bit like journeys because then you discover things because it’s something, at times, unpredictable. You begin somewhere, then you wash up the whole thing and remove everything, you scribble or you’re not even sure what you are doing. And I think it’s a kind of a daily exercise, you know, you keep on working. And I like this both in, I used to do it in oil where it was easier in some ways, but I also found it possible in water colour. I used a thicker, Arches board which allows me to wash it fully and it’s an excellent paper because it doesn’t warp or it doesn’t rub off and you can redraw, repaint. Ideally, it would be like what Indian painting is, which my wife, Nilima, is doing, but if I were to explain it it’s like you draw, there’s a layer, and then you put a wash of white on top of it and then you redraw. Then you have another wash perhaps of slightly different colour and then you keep on adding. Then you add colour and then you have gold on it, then you, so that way there are layers after layers after layers, so most, I mean, when I look at Muchal painting I find that it’s not flat, you know. Even physically it is not flat, there are so many layers. All you have to do is just to look at it carefully and you will discover that there’s something which was on the very first layer still visible and then there are multiple layers that emerge. And then also, as we talked about, so many hands but that makes if fascinating and it’s very, very in way, also delicious. It’s like peeling a fruit in different ways. Somewhere it is in the middle, somewhere it is at the top, somewhere it is right inside, so a mango is different than a coconut, you know. In that sense the experience is of actually physicality and of savouring – actually something you know, which you can savour with your senses, different senses. Sometimes it allows you to, you know, taste the taste of it, then at times it is the smell of it, at times it is the texture of it. And I think, in a way, the business of painting is also in some ways relating to all these sensory experiences – very strong sensory experiences. And I think most paintings allow you to do that. So palimpsest at one level if it is like digging or archaeology, it is also like, you know, kind of experiencing it physically, you know, something which you can actually taste.

Well, there are many who have done similar things in the past, you know, so sort of inter-community or inter-religious marriages are not something uncommon. So it was as simple as that, that two human beings sort of, you know, come together and want to live together then they get married, so we had a civil marriage. It’s also interesting that her family had no objection, even my family – it’s very interesting. I mean, I took her home, they were very, very hospitable and they immediately accepted her. And Nilima, I told her that one thing you could do is that if you know a little Gujarati, please speak. Because one of the things that they asked was whether she speaks Gujarati or not – she was not sure why, even I was not sure why – but we realised later that it was because they wanted her to speak to children. So when she put on a Gujarati sari, when she spoke to women and she spoke to children, never ever a question was asked whether she, whether there is any question of her being what she was, until today. My son has married a new girl and we went there only a few months ago, and the same family, now the younger people, my brother’s son, Omor, but his children, my nephews are there, my nieces are there, they mixed with the whole family, so there is that kind of an acceptance. So there is no, neither hard feelings nor there is something which they cannot accept, so there is space. What I would say is that despite the fact that they might find it difficult if I were to live there, you know, in that region, because you see their parents will have to, sort of, work it out. But as far as I’m concerned and my family is concerned, my family and Surendranagar has had no problem.
Do you feel you have ever suffered as a Muslim?
I would not say that I have personally suffered in that sense, except that, you know, it is quite well known now that it is very difficult with a Muslim name, you know to, because you are marked. And hence, like for instance if you want to, let us say, want to rent a place, if you want accommodation, if you want to buy property, if you want to do certain things, you are being discriminated, it’s very clear. Even when I was there in the university I, at one point of time, had to go out of university because there was no accommodation and then outside it was next to impossible to find a place in a decent locality. So that issue is very, very... and it got further aggravated after 2002.
Will you... 2002 being?
2002 was, developed there, you know, most horrifying instance in which, you know, it was after this terrible, kind of, event of burning of a coach, a train at a place called Godhra. So this was... there were these what they call karsevaks, those who had gone to Ayodhya, you know, Ram Temple, and they were returning and this coach was, caught fire and a number of people burnt there. Well, there was soon after, a kind of a conflagration, you know, all over the state and it lasted several days where Muslims were targeted wherever they were, either in the city or in the villages and it was sort of a carnage. The main issue here is that the state seem to take no notice of this kind of carnage that was taking place in front of the eyes of the leaders, so there was a kind of complicity so Muslims became, sort of, very unsafe, and since then there has been a greater discrimination. So it is an issue, you know, which I think all secular and, perhaps, those who are liberal-minded have talked about and it has been sort of even written about here at great length.

City for Sale was ’81 to ’84.
And eventually that was bought by the Victoria and Albert Museum?
Yes.
In London. But that, in a way, was something, it was probably the most politicised painting you’ve made to that point?
Yes, that’s true, but that was a time when there were a spate of riots, you know. And that over the years, you know, I’ve seen... beginning with... I mean, the first and the largest, the most horrific riots were in ’69. But after that it has been a kind of relentless sort of spate of riots. And you would have several in the year, I read somewhere in, one year there was something like 100 times these conflagrations took place in a city like Baroda and Ahmedabad. It was that period in which such things were happening and that painting, you know, emerged out of that experience. In fact, I almost felt very superstitious about that painting because it continued for 3 years, 3 or 4 years, and every time I would start there would be yet another riot. But it was a statement that I thought had to be made and in a way it was part of that kind of a confessional that I’ve spoken of earlier and it’s about the city that I live in and it has something to do with the cities that I admire and also the city paintings that I have admired. So it has that backdrop. In the middle is a figure, if you look at it carefully, there is a man who paints a cinema signboard, you know. He is painting the face of a cinema actress and actually he is painting the pupil of the figure. So this is a kind of a reference to, what do we call patas, that is a scroll painting in Bengal where there is a tradition that the traditional scroll painters carry with them an image without, I mean, the face without the pupil. And they go to the house where that has taken place and they ritually paint the eyeball, which is meant to be a release of sorts, you know, of the spirit. Well, here it’s sort of painted on the face of a very beautiful, well known actress, Rekha. So in a way it cuts both ways because there is an irony about the film being shown and the riots raging right at the top. So there is no eyeball in the painting.

During all the years when you were essentially teaching art history within quite a demanding university regime, did you feel conflicted? I mean, did you feel your painting was being held up almost? Or did you feel it was a...
I didn’t think of it at all, you know. It was partly because it was something that came to me in that way. I mean, very simply when I was offered to teach, I mean, I got a job as, a job teaching art history – I just took it, you know, because I had no job, very simply. And I was, you know, I had something like 23 classes a week, you can’t believe it, and I was teaching from Chinese art to Indian to western to Indian aesthetics and all that. I did that, you know, for many years, but I also continued to paint. I painted in the evening or afternoon or evening, also on Sundays and all this. Somehow you know, I didn’t see that there was a conflict between the two so my wife felt that it was our life... it has come that way to me. And it worked, it seemed to work. I had a studio in the college so I would go to my studio in the afternoon and work there or I’d come home later in the afternoon and work there. I know demands were much greater, you know, and people like Bhupen my friend, you know, who didn’t have that kind of a demanding job. He worked as a chartered accountant but part time so he had plenty of time, you know, to work and he occasionally taught – he taught part time in a school of architecture. But that was not half as demanding as, but then many like my teachers were like that, you know, Subramanyan for that matter, you know – he taught full time for many years and he continued to paint. So we had that kind of an example and we were not really, in that sense... what shall we call it? I mean, we were as professional as professional artists are because we showed everyone. But then those who don’t do such things, you know, sometimes feel that, well, we should be paying more attention, but that didn’t matter to me, at all.
Sudhir Patwardhan who is part of ‘Place for People’, was doing a full time job as a radiologist. 
Gieve Patel was you know, was a full time [doctor], he had a clinic, you know, he attended it twice a day in the morning and evening, for many years. And there are many others, you know, who work like that so it was not something, you know, which could cause that kind of a conflict.
And even perhaps looking back, I mean, you did it till you were 45 – it was perhaps a very useful apprenticeship, giving you all the languages for your ‘Speaking Tree’ or your ‘Palipsest’ or...
It’s true. And I think in our teaching fed into my work because every year, when you teach the same subjects you want to re... sort of, at least re-look at all what you have been talking about. And sort of in that sense, you know, if you don’t have any kind of a hard art history or a hard core art history, which luckily in this college we had full freedom to teach the way we liked. So mine was a kind of an art history which was, in a way, from the eyes of a painter. And I, I mean, I did deal with obviously with dates and provenance and various other issues, to an extent, but that was not my main concern. My main concern was to go to the work of art so for me it was a discovery every time, you know. So I look at Duccio again and I say, my God, you know this man has done so much in his life. Now, a new aspect would emerge from that and, I think, eventually that discovery would feed into your work, your imagination and it would become part of it. So I greatly benefited from that, I would say.
And in 1982 you became Professor of Painting.
Yes. Well, I was teaching art history for a number of years although I was not trained as an art historian, but I wanted to go to paintings and wanted to have a kind of rapport with practising artists. Subramanian left that year and I applied and I got the job so I taught for about 10 years. But I continued to teach history of painting to students of MA, so I continued my association with art history.

Well, I have greatly enjoyed Midnight’s Children and I even have enjoyed a number of his, several of his books. And I do feel a sense of, kind of a, well, I think there are... I mean, what I’m trying to say is that there are areas which, in some ways, can be described as similar and somebody has already written about our work and they have used the word ‘magic realism’, which is used for Salman’s work, I know that. But we didn’t have that kind of a direct, kind of, either in the form of communication, in the form of dialogue, in the form of any formal, you know. We have not articulated it in that way.
You did appear on the same platform at the Festival of India?
Oh yes, that we did, yes, once we did. There were a lot of people there but they were all around... in ’82, that’s right, in London at the Riverside Studios, that’s right, yeah.
And Tariq Ali bought a painting by Bupan and...
Yeah, Tariq Ali bought a painting and Salman bought a painting of Bupan, yes, I know that so there is... But you see the world that way, you know, came to us through Marquez, through Calvino, through Kundera, you know, there are these writers and Salman became part of it and today it is Pamuk, you know. So all these writers have been so much part of our, you know, make up, you know. In a way we shared so many things, you know, with them. And I think Calvino is something which I greatly admire so when I, and also it goes back to the larger tales, you know, like the Arabian Nights, which I greatly enjoyed and it’s something which you can keep reading all your life. And of course, the great stories called the Kathasaritsagar that is an ocean of oceans and river of stories – it’s a great book, you know, one of the... most, it’s kind of an amazing kind of text and it has 100 sub-stories, stories within stories. Some myth, some real, some historical, some others, all put together. So it is, in a way, if I were to articulate it would be in that it’s like one life lived many times, many lives – so it’s like Jataka, you know, the previous lives of Buddha, so each life, you know, is lived as an animal, as a bird, as a human being, as... and all these come together and form a kind of a world which is very magical. And I think this is something which one feels like and, it’s kind of a lifetime engagement, it’s not something which... and you can keep on with them and you can never finish them. Many of these stories are endless stories, they don’t end anywhere, there is no frame, there is no kind of an outline in which you can place. They extend into something and you can pick them up at whichever point that you wish to and start again.

Yes, Pompidou, it was the Festival of India and they had two artists, one was Vishwanathan who lived in Paris and my work, so this was shown in ’85. And a selection was made from the works from the late ‘60s until that time – so I think it was about 25 paintings, but all these paintings were there, ‘City for Sale’, ‘Revolving Roots’ and all others, plus earlier works and some new work that I had done during that time.
And did you find yourself seeing it differently? Wasn’t that the first retrospective you’d ever had?
I was quite... I didn’t know what to say because I’d never seen my work put together in that form, and it brought back all kinds of memories and, well, it was interesting to, sort of, you know, connect them in time and in space. But what I was interested in most was the latest painting that I was doing at that time. I had done a triptych, which was again relating to the place that is in a way Baroda and there I had multiple zones, as you say. But unlike The Times of India these were vertical paintings and there were horizontal zones and then, you know, zones overlapped. And so there were three that could be seen as individual paintings but altogether it was kind of a mix and there must have been dozens of zones in there – so this is what I was occupied with at that time. And I showed these three and then I know this great collector of Indian art called Chester Herwitz, who wanted to buy it. I was not too sure whether I wanted to give it to him because I was not sure whether I had finished the painting. And in fact, I brought it back from Pompidou and worked on it again and after about 2 years I finished that triptych and gave it to him. So there is always that thing that you do not know when a painting ends, you know, well start you can, you know, from whichever point you like to. But often there is either a new painting sitting waiting, or that the painting itself, you know, in a way remains or becomes more and more open ended and so you do not want to draw the line. But at some point of time you have to say, okay, I have done this much and the next would be in the next. So actually, soon after triptych I made a little painting on Kathasaritsagar stories. So the stories in that sense, I thought is it possible for one to draw from such a text and then also weave into it personal or, let’s say, contemporary stories, so something which would interest you because it whilst travelling in a bus from Baroda to Ahmedabad I was thinking of the structure of it. So I had three or four stories from Kathasaritsagar simultaneously in walking, sort of a journey, which was contemporary, you know, going along that way. So it was actually a kind of a bus, you know, into which this takes place, so there is actually it’s a reference to, in one corner, the window. And that led to exploration of ‘Arabian Nights’. And that story is perhaps familiar to those who have seen Pasolini’s ‘Arabian Nights’ – a story about love. It’s called ‘Story of Aziz and Aziza’. It’s a very tragic tale, it is also magical but it is something, you know, where it brings in all kinds of elements where a man who was to marry a woman goes to, if I’m not mistaken, to a tailor. And there he sees a woman who comes out of a balcony and he’s totally entranced and he forgets that he’s... you know, going to get married and he doesn’t move from there and that woman just disappears. And he doesn’t move until, you know, she comes again. And then the story unfolds that it is his would-be wife to whom he returns, whom he had not married, would solve the mystery of the woman who he had seen – and she in fact helps him and so it’s a long story. But that is one story I was quite entranced by and I remembered Pasolini’s portrayal of it and I thought let me try my hand. But there I have put both and Shahryar and Scheherazade at the bottom, the king and the storyteller. The storyteller is on the left, I think, left or right and so I incorporated the narrator and the listener and the story unfolds behind that. But these are only two paintings in which I’ve actually used some known stories, all of the stories are from different stories.

Is it ever an issue for you that  figures... in the majority of your work the figures are relatively small within the totality of the picture. Would you ever like to paint... I mean, they’re not as figure-centred, you might say, as many of the paintings we’ve also admired.
No. I think ‘City for Sale’ has life-size figures.
It does, it does.
There are also other paintings where I have done, like in the exhibition I had in 2000, I had two or three paintings with life-size figures in. So I do that.
But still, what we remember your painting for perhaps most, is the zones and the totality rather than the individual figures.
Well, I don’t know, I’m not sure. But I’m interested in the scale, the large and the small. I’m interested in placing large and small together, you know, in some kind of a dialogue. So if you remember the painting called ‘The Characters Questioning the Narrator’, which is a large figure, it was full-size. The painting is about – what is it about – 4-and-half feet high, the figure is about 4 feet in that, and then there is a small figure right at the bottom. So yes, I would be interested in making large figures, maybe I think, the paintings which I’m known [by], in which I have smaller figures, you know.

After The Times of India paintings that I had done I thought that, well, I have done my job, I have done a commissioned work. But suddenly this kind of an offer came from the government of Madhya Pradesh, that is central India, that they had a new legislative assembly building designed by Charles Correa and would I go and look at the place and think of a, you know, painting. I was happy, actually, Charles... I have known and I have admired his work and Charles came there and we saw the place together. And then the deal worked out, you know, the government was very pleasantly surprised, they had no restriction, nothing. We just want you to do this work so I said, wonderful, what do I do? So they said, you know, you plan it the way you like and we’ll help you in whichever way you need. So I was quite excited and I said this is something which is worth doing. I spent about six months or more, you know, on that and had assistants, you know, work with me. But I had not done such a large project, it was about 31 feet high and about 21 feet wide with a door in the middle, through it the legislators enter. So I had an architect, I had an engineer and my friend Nagji also helped me because he’s very good technically, with structure and all that. But then it had to be worked out and in what medium. Well, I was more familiar with oil than working on the wall because working on the wall would be really different and it might take much longer, and there was a time frame into which one had to work. So I decided and finally we came to making about 13 panels and these panels were then fitted onto the wall. And I also designed the door to an extent and put some, sort of, little images in between, you know, the wooden frames. Anyway, the idea was interesting because, you see, we had the legislators, you know... legislated? They all... sort of... this was the upper house. In some of the states we have both houses where the, you know, in some we don’t. So I thought, what would be the image, you know, for these legislators for a place which is a place for people, you know. It is something, you know, which was not a private space and it was not a commercial space – it was where not only legislators, but even people walked in. So there I planned at one level, the imagery which would be related to the place, that meant legislators themselves. So on left and right at the bottom I had the legislators on two sides, probably discussing. On top of the door I used the story of, there is a story of King Vikram, Vikramaditya, who when he... or is it, it’s the story in which the king really tries to, no, it was the throne of Vikram on which a king who had inherited it was about to, let us say, sit, occupy. And the throne had multiple dolls and the story goes that the dolls come out the moment they said, wait until I tell you this story, you must qualify yourself, you know, before you ascend this throne. So there are these sort of dolls which tell the story every time he begins to sit on the throne. I thought it was a useful thing for the legislators too, so to invoke that I actually painted, sort of some flying figures and a kind of a big chair. And then there is a panorama of Madhya Pradesh and India. I had done some research, I even sent one of my assistants to go to various towns of Madhya Pradesh, we got photographs. I read on Madhya Pradesh, I read stories, I read some legends and all that and out of it then eventually, cooked up a kind of a, what you call it, tree of life? Because that was another idea it was simmering in my mind for a long time that, to paint a life-sized tree – well, here it was about 30 feet, not that I painted a tree but something structurally was like a tree. So it all sort of went around and there are images floating all about. It worked out well. I had no opportunity to see it actually installed until it was installed there. Such an experience, you know, was impossible because in Baroda we couldn’t find a place where it could be actually, you know, installed, even briefly. And strangely, funnily, I saw it putting it on the ground and I climbed a big ladder and so it was a kind of a reverse view of the mural. Then later, when it was installed, I kept my fingers crossed because I had not seen it. Well, luckily it worked out okay and, but the most interesting part was that I had made three paintings, three maquettes for it. And I had sort of discounted the first two and the third, used. And since it had to be enlarged from that maquette we had the small image and the larger ones for the actual size mural. It was very funny, very strange, I don’t know many painters who would know and I realised at that point of time that you can’t just enlarge it, enlarge a small work to that scale. There were many things which looked okay, but there were several others, you know, which when enlarged changed meaning. The moment you enlarge that thing it went up the eye level. All those that were at the eye level seemed to be okay but the moment it went, let’s say, to 7 feet or 10 feet or 15 feet and then 30 and 31 feet, quite high. The same image which was that size which became like this, and when you looked at it from a distance it didn’t seem okay – so there was a change from the small to the big, so it’s not identical. But that was a very instructive experience, I must say that I learnt a lot from that that I could, you know, if one had to do a mural one had actually to design it on that scale – one will have to actually work it out. And perhaps, see it physically when you stand in front of it – it’s quite different then if you see it in a smaller scale.
Would you like to have drawn on the wall?
I would have, yes, if it were possible and if you had been given two years to do it I would have done so.
In some ways you do seem to have been very fortunate in having these big containers for this vast project... is your...
Well, I think this is something which has been part of my make-up and I thought that one should not be fussy about things. And if this comes your way one should take up the challenge and do whatever one can. And I was happy that it’s a public place. I’ve always wanted to do something on a public place so this came my way and I’m glad that, you know, those who commissioned it, you know, were also very... I must say they were really enlightened.

It was in 2000, 2001 when... in fact, the son of my, one of my literary mentors, Bhogilal Gandhi, at whose place I used to stay when I was a student, started... who is a graphic designer and who started a digital art gallery called Art Underground, and he invited artists to come and learn if they wished to use computers to make art. I was quite, sort of, attracted to that and I went and did something which seemed to, in a way, open another avenue. Let me explain it. It was difficult first of all to, you know, how to use the mouse or use photoshop or draw.  They said, well, there are hundreds of colours and you can use pencil, you can do it like crayon, you can do it like charcoal, you can... I wasn’t interested in that. I said, well, if I can do it manually why do I have to do it on computer? But then it was, the idea struck me that I had done a painting, it was an oil, it’s called ‘Talisman’, and I had made it into, it was like a checker board and in the sections, you know, circular, are in the square and rectangular, I think square sections, I had placed images which were all quotations. I had an image of an angel from Fra Angelico, I had an image of Prophet, I had an image of Mother Goddess from Bengal, I had a Mexican image, etc. And when I showed it to them they said that you have these images, originals so I said they are all from books. So eventually we got all these illustrations from books and we scanned them, and we placed them exactly as they were in the painting. And then we tried to put the same colour at the back and tried to make that painting on computer. But I saw that it looked quite bad; it looked awful. So it is a similar thing, you know, here is a painting that you see through light, it’s not physical and also it is something light comes through and through which you see that work. So I said, well, this is not what I want to do and I’m not interested in that. So I said, okay, let’s try so then I began to work on the images and I changed colours. And then I said, well, this image can be made bigger, it can be made smaller, it can be shifted around, you can play with them. But originally the idea was, when I was doing a checker board with these images, was of play, placing them in different places. But that one did by talking an image from the book then making a Xerox copy, then making a tracing and then making a drawing and then transferring it on the canvas and then filling up with colour, etc. The process worked, no matter how you tried to keep to the original it changed when you did it by hand. Because you know, your hand, your mind, the way you work, the day you work, you know, you effected some change or you thought that this is not right and you did that. So it was not a replica; it was not. Yes, it was scanned the same maybe, it wouldn’t change. So that was the main issue, you know, I was dealing with a different kind of process and the image that I was working with was literally, now, it was identical to the image that I had picked up – it had not gone through that transformation, that change. So the colours that you do when you paint, you know, in an image which you have drawn by your own hand, would be the colours, that imagine the process of, and it takes time, it takes sometimes days, even months. And you feel like changing it, you give it a wash or whatever, you redraw it or you paint, etc. Well, here it’s a matter of, not minutes, it’s a matter seconds – you can change the colour, you can make it bigger, you can make it smaller, you can place it on the left or on the right, etc. I said, why not? So I started making them smaller and bigger and eventually I made four ‘Talisman’, four paintings, four digital works out of them. Well, this is how it began but I was not interested in just making prints. I thought that unless there is an intervention of hand I would not feel satisfied. And at that point of time I chanced upon this map called Ebstorf mappa mundi, it was a picture postcard I picked up from the British Library bookshop. I learnt later that Ebstorf map was made on parchment and it was sewn together, it was about 13 feet wide and that it was on display in a church in Hamburg, if I’m not... Hamburg or Hanover, and it was destroyed during bombing, allied bombing in World War II. I said, that is all the more reason to do it, to do the map again, a kind of a world map, which was a 13th century vision and it was a painted map. And it had a sort of image of Christ, His head on top, hands on the right and the feet below. The entire world, in a sense, was Body of Christ. And there was Jerusalem in the centre, there were hell and heaven on one side, there were the great rivers, and the ocean, etc. Well, computer was very handy in this because then I wanted to change places. I wanted to remove hell and heaven, I wanted to replace the image of Christ with something else, but I wanted to retain hands and feet – and I ended up making some 30 odd mappa mundi’s out of that. I may still make more because that structure was fascinating, and all I did was to use the structure of the ocean and the land and remove all other images and placing into them Ambrogio Lorenzetti, placing into them an image of Ram chasing a deer, placing into them Majanun of the Persian lore, you know, the archetypal lover who is in search of his beloved Layla. And I was fascinated by the image of Magdalene, Mary Magdalene and especially the one in which she tries to touch Christ when He emerges after Resurrection, and Christ, sort of, says noli me tangere, do not touch me. Somehow I managed to, I thought that perhaps, so I got another map and with that circular map I put a kind of rectangular portion from another map and placed these four, Majanun and old woman, Mary Magelene, there was a dancing man and then I chose an image of Kabir weaving from the painting I have referred to earlier, as four cardinal points, as it is in navigational maps. And then in between I began to change, add to them. And then I printed these maps on simple water colour, often Arches or Waterford, in order to paint over. So in these maps I emptied out a number of areas and these areas I filled up with water colour or gouache and the first time I made a series of 10 and I made a suite of mappa mundi, each one titled differently, then I made many more. And eventually, I also sort of made large images.

Just around the time I finished a mural I was in the process of... sort of, looking for another way, another medium, another format to sort of bring in the stories of journeys. So I got a book bound in an accordion format, this was I think, ’96, I think the same year that I finished the mural. And I used to ask people which I was familiar with because I had already done some water colours and that, and I began to draw in this book. And I thought that I would draw all pages, big, small book, you know, roughly about a foot and... 10 inches, I could carry it with me wherever I go. So it has become a book of journeys of sort. I carried it wherever I went for almost 10 years. I carried it to Italy where I had a residency in Civitella Ranieri. I carried it lastly to Montalvo in California and in India when if I went to Delhi and stayed there for a few days, I would paint something. So in a way it is a story of, in some ways, my own ideas and my concerns, but at the same time the times in which I lived. Like the new house that I had come to live in here, but soon after that we also encountered that there was this, what shall we call it, it is called India sort of tried its nuclear device. It was, I think... something you know which is, which I’m unable to come to terms with, you know, an atomic state. So there are paintings, there are drawings in which I have packed my bags and there is Pokhran, you know, where this kind of, you know, test took place in Rajasthan. To moving along and then Kabir became a kind of an image, you know, which I wanted to paint. I had not painted Kabir but I thought that if somebody can sing Kabir why I can’t paint it, you know. It is in that way that I started and there is an image of Kabir in that. Then there are images which come from Pietro Lorenzetti, from his Deposition and images which relate to Italian landscape – something which I saw there while I was in Churta and I painted about 16 paintings there while I stayed there for about 6 weeks – and it went on like that.
 
At the time when I... in the 4 years time when I was exposed to digital I thought why not try it digitally, too, and I did two books, one on Kashmir, it’s called ‘Whose Kashmir’ and I brought in images from different sets of paintings, mostly quotations. And another I did on churning, we call it Samudramanthan, ‘Churning of the Ocean’ and I used the image from Angkor Wat, you know, where there is a great relief about the churning of the ocean myth. I used it in a modern context because here from the churning comes out Hiroshima, both Hitler and Gandhi come out from that, etc. Then my friend Bupan died in 2003 so I did a book in memory of Bupan. And here I would connect it with my present preoccupation – that I had wanted to do something on the belief systems, but I had not found either a format or a way by which one could deal with it. Kabir was, in a way, you know, it had paved the way, not as a process, in which you could use Kabir or Kabir’s ideas or Kabir’s poetry. And I did a series of paintings on Kabir. But I was still looking for something, you know, which I thought would perhaps serve the basis of a kind of a - what would you call it? It would be secular yet it would still be spiritual. And I had seen this, what is called, Kaavad made in Rajasthan. These are boxes, wooden boxes and they have multiple doors, they open in four directions and these are all... then could be folded up. It had images of gods and goddesses and sometimes from the epics, but usually gods and goddesses. And the box would have an inner sanctum of sorts where they would put little wooden images also. The narrator carries on his body and he moves from place to place and he performs. I was quite fascinated by this idea and when I saw a big or this Kaavad, which means a kind of travelling shrine or a moveable, mobile shrine, I thought, well, could one do that? So I embarked upon that. Having done the book it became a kind of a passage, you know. Books served to be a passage towards this, the actual physical thing. The book was something you could open and you would have multiple combinations of images. Here the shrine also is kind of a book, you know, which can be opened and closed but it is a shrine which is a personal shrine. So you can open it in whichever direction you want to, whichever combination you wish to make, and you can then close it and it becomes a small box.

Well, I mean you are asking this question which takes me back to childhood, and the tradition continues. One would still find them in the fairs or the Melas, even in big cities sometimes, but you would find them in small towns. Well, this is a kind of a little box in which, if I if I'm right, I think they have a scroll of images, you know, and there is a little peeping kind of a, you know, a little hole with a glass. So it is a bit like looking into a camera, and then they would have, you know, they would roll it so the images come one after the other. So if children... I think sometimes there were two, and two children could see together, and the story is... something like ‘Dilli ka darbaar dekho’ they are called, you know, ‘Look at the court of Delhi, look at Taj Mahal, look at the Qutub Minar’. You know, they show you sights, and I think that memory still lingers somewhere. You know, it’s there. It is a kind of a precursor to this kind of, you know, magic lantern or magic tales, or in a way a magic box, in a way camera, and perhaps extended to computer, if one wants to do that, and you have the film, cinema, you know, all these things get connected. I remember, you know, I would even connect it with, you know, when I once put various images together, I sort of brought this ‘Speaking Tree’  together. In a strange sort of way, this kind of work sounds or appears like fantastic and disparate images. When they are put together, you know, when you even see the sights on the little magic box, and the tree which has various animals and mythical characters and others, this all seemed to sort of make sense, you know.
Didn’t you once say that the peepshow man had a cry in the street?
Well, peepshow man carried that thing on him, and he moved from street to street. You know, he would go and then, you know, children would gather with a few paisa, one paisa or so, you know, children would sort of go and look at these things.  So that was a very early memory, yes, true.
Didn’t you say he said, ‘I will show you the world’?
I don’t know. I think generally what we know, it can be, you know, it would be. ‘Duniya dekho’ they call that means, you know, I show you the world, you know. So he would cook up, and he would in fact sing and show you, you know, this thing while he was rotating these images. It was a kind of a real magic, magic lantern, you know, where the world came to you.

In fact, it is not that sort of much like a magic lantern as it is a combination of book and home... this one which I have done recently, which is also incidentally called Travelling Shrine – Home. It’s like opening your house every time. So there is a combination of shrine and home, opening and closing of doors, you know, entering into it, and in a way, discovering the world within. But at the same time, it is also, you know, in another way, a book, the book that you open and close, and with multiple combinations because the accordion format allows you that, you know. You can close page two and three and then connect it with page seven or page ten or... and you can keep on making it. So it’s like play. It’s a magic book, you know. It’s not book which is linear, you know, which you are reading, and it’s not texture. It’s pictures, and connected pictures would perhaps have a different import than pictures which have words in them, or with them. So the idea of the shrine is also like a play, in a way. You play with it because there are doors which you can fold in different ways, and it’s in four directions. So you can turn around or you can go from one side to, go from one side to the other. You can keep some doors closed and you can open others, and this is something which would allow you to, in a way, be physically handling images. I think this is the idea. This is what I was interested in. Often we are not sort of handling images by our hands. You know, we look at them. So in a way it is a kind of a journey through eyes, but here it is also through hands, the whole body. When I was making the small one, the idea was that it’s something, you know, each individual can handle, hence it is a personalised, you know, you would keep certain doors open, you know, to read those images in a particular way at a particular time, etc. This would allow you to do that. But when I thought of doing a room-sized shrine, it reverses the process, hence you are not, let us say you have an object which is in the span of your hands. Here is an object which is larger than you. It’s like a house. So you have your walls with images, you have your ceiling with images, and you have multiple doors to open and close, again in various combinations. So true, in essence it goes back to the magic box at one level, but at that level, you know, it is a box which is a kind of shrine. Shrine in the sense that you, at one level you respect the image, the very idea of the image, you know, the image is there. Now, in the traditional shrine is the image of a god or a goddess. So that is something which is given to you. Well, here it is the opposite, you know. It is not image of, sometimes there are images of demons here, because here you will discover demons, not only there, but within you. And also you even realise what humanity, or humankind has done to its own... others, you know, the terrible times that we are living in, the kind of wars that we are witnessing, the type of conflict that has become part of our life, almost day in and day out. There are these terrible stories that come to us right from Biafra to Palestine to, you know, just in Gujarat itself, you know. So in a way this is a shrine for in some way, atonement, or realising that there is a need to look at them again, to know in a way a history, to know your own history, but at the same time to encounter the terrible images, and you know, in a way own the kind of, you know, that you also, you know, in one sense are part of that terrible thing that has happened to humanity. So this is a kind of a reminder in the hope that, you know, that kind of an image, you know, would allow you to perhaps meditate upon the self, that would allow you to perhaps think about what else there is in the world, and I think these images I tried to focus on. One was journeys. So in the journeys, the first shrine I did, it was about not just plain journeys, but even forced journeys, like migration, forced migration, and it referred to images, you know, of the kind that I have just mentioned.

The second one was on the city of Ayodhya, which has become a site of mourning of sort. A mosque has been demolished, and it’s sort of city is a kind of a... you know, witness to that kind of an event that took place. So that is sort of a dirge on a city. The third one was on alphabets, alphabet stories. I did a series of paintings as well, and this was in response to what happened in the early 80s when the rightist groups began to change children’s textbooks by sort of planting sort of ideas of divides. So in a way, it was poison from, you know, childhood, and I thought it was all done through alphabets. Learning of alphabets was learning of the divide.
The divide between Hindu and Muslims chiefly?
Between Hindus and Muslims and Muslims and Christians, you know, between communities, you know, all in that sense. And so the idea of a book of learning alphabets, I used that, I had done a painting also, and something, you know, in which what one tried was to resurrect the alphabet again through the palimpset you know, of how many types of images have been used and how many ways the alphabet has been articulated in a... like ‘a’ stands for something, ‘ba’ stands for, ‘ka’ stands for something. All these were like ‘A’ for apple in English. You know, you would have A standing for, you know, aggression, let us say, you know, and it has a different meaning, you know.  So, I chose in that shrine words from dictionary beginning with ‘a’ in the Indian languages, you know, vowel sounds I have separately put, but they are all, each one is written as a full letter. So, I started with ‘a’, and then I ended with ‘gna’, this is the last. Now, ‘a’ the first word is asaliyat. Asaliyat is difficult to translate, but what is genuine, what is real, what is true, could be within the meaning frame of asaliyat, and ‘gna’ relates to knowledge or wisdom or whatever else that is associated with learning. But if you put ‘a’ and ‘gna’ together, it would be a strange combination. ‘A’ and ‘gna’ means opposite of knowledge. Anyway, this was just a game, you know, one would play. So, I wrote words which I had picked up, from asaliyat to gnana from the dictionary, sometimes arbitrarily, sometimes specifically chosen, and I sort of worked on it like Rabindranath Tagore was while writing poetry, he used to scribble over them, and so the words would become images.
Erasions? 
Erasion. And I did all, I erased them all, all the words. I wrote them and erased them, and that became some kind of a pictorial science, but unreadable. But I got on the door, that is the wooden door of the shrine, all letters carved out, which cannot be erased, you know. They remain. They are actually carved into wood. And then all the words which had been erased are printed inside the centre on two sides, on the front and the back. Another one that I did was about, anyway, it was also about demonic images and about Kabir and about the dancing dervishes and that had in the sanctum poems of Kabir on two sides. So, the one that I was planning to do on a large scale, I thought that here I should again make an autobiographical statement. In some ways, returning to some of the ideas that I had played with earlier, and so I named it Home. It has images which relate to even physical home. For instance, one door has a view of the city of Baroda taken from Google Earth so you have an actual sort of satellite image, which we painted. And in the middle, I have the image of the area I live in, that is called Pratapgunj, with all its lanes and by-lanes showing. And I freely painted over that using images from my old paintings, from Returning Home, from, you know, from... no, it is from About Waiting and Wandering, Speaking Street and all that, and incorporated them into something which, let us say, worked as a kind of a, so it is worked as an image, which was called Niharika, which is the name of this house, from Google Earth. But then in the centre within, you know, the chamber, you know, where you enter, inside, on one side I had a speaking tree, which I constructed out of a Persian painting, and there in the tree are images of various kinds. There are these Sufi dancers, there are these bhakta, that is of Hindu origin. There are the musicians. At the same time there are displaced people from Iraq. There is an image of the Abu Ghraib Prison, there is a car burning which is from 2002, Gujarat, there is an image of the Bamiyan Buddha which was destroyed. So, that speaking tree, you know, is full of these images, and it is an 8 foot image. So, just opposite that I have an image of a big boat which is anchored on the one side by Gandhi and on the other side by Kabir, and behind is sort of a kind of an oceanic backdrop. On top of it floats houses, images of my own home in Surendranagar, including the door of the place where I was born. And on the ceiling I made a sky, photographed sky, and on two sides as you enter, it is an 8 foot image, 8 by 6, as you enter you see houses at the bottom which are from Surendranagar. And when you return on the other side at the opposite end, there are houses from Baroda, and around which in the sky are demons and angels and birds are flying over it, which was a backlit. It was actually lit from above.

The later history of my family is that my brothers and sister have died, and well, now, except for my sister-in-law, wife of my late brother, I am the eldest in the family.
And your parents, what happened to them?
My parents died long ago.
Did they die well?
Yes, they died at home, yeah.
I thought they separated? 
No, there was no, father died in the 60s, mother died later. Mother lived to see my children also, my daughter, and she lived with my second elder brother. I used to go and meet them occasionally, from time to time when I could manage, but every, I think Samira when she was young, I had taken her there, and Samira has been there many times. But you see, the family, Surendranagar is now a bigger family because there are grandchildren, and not only nephews, but their children’s children. So it has rolled out. They live in that region, they all, and over the years, I mean they have, as I told you, they have accepted us the way we are. They do not, sort of, you know, impinge upon our... you know, we have no problem, you know, with the others. They come here sometimes, you know... but, but the town has become a remote town now, you know. I don't recognise that. It has changed. Most of my friends are gone from there, except two. So it is something in a way, it’s part of childhood. You know, it is that town which I still remember, and occasionally I, sort of you know... visit it.

My father died, I think, around the time, before I went to England, but he was not an unhappy man at that point of time. He was happy that I went to study in Baroda. So, it is not associated with unhappiness of any kind, and at that time the other brothers had already secured jobs. That is something which he had wished, and they also had children. So, in a way they were – as we say in Gujarati – thale padi gaya, they are all settled. So there was a settled family and well, there were conflicts, you know, that brothers would not agree with each other and all that, but that is part of a long story. But it was not so pronounced that one would consider it to be a main issue, because it was generally that they lived their own life. One brother became a postmaster. The other brother was in what we call administrative service, that is, in the office of the collector, and he also rose in position. The third brother began with a postman, but then he also rose in position and he just died, recently. And my sister who lived in another town, she was the only one left among those. The story goes that she couldn’t bear the loss of her brother, that brother, and she passed away within a month after brother died.
So they are all buried there in that, you know, in different towns, in Kathiawad near Surendranagar, and the family, the children, now it is almost a family of a hundred or more. Luckily they are educating their children, and even girls are educated. The problem is that because of communalism, which is particularly faced by young Muslim boys who often find it difficult to get jobs because of discrimination, either give up studies or opt for something, you know, which is like, you know, starting a small business or running even sometimes rickshaw or trucks, or become mechanics, things like that, which has introduced a kind of a regressive... process of de-education that after being educated they are going into a profession where this education is not required, and its effects are felt upon women, children, particularly girl children.  So girls... to educate girls would mean they would have to go to the house of a groom who is not educated. So it’s a big issue, it’s a problem, you know, that often girls are not educated, or educated up to a point, and I think this is the case with quite a lot of Muslim families. This, many people don’t realise, it is an issue, but it is a very important issue because with absence of education, the community would not go out, and as I mentioned earlier that, you know, on its own, community doesn’t come out because it has no economic means. And there is no leadership within the community, there is no enlightened leadership, and hence they still remain at the same social political level where I think except for vote bank, you know, when different parties woo them, there is no hope, you know. At times one feels quite disheartened.
But I have seen of late that earlier even the boys were not being educated, but now they have found that IT, that is information technology, seems to be very open. And so that kind of a discrimination we had noticed in jobs and in education has been sort of now replaced by this kind of an open-armed...
Technological. 
Yah, so some of the boys have got into that. One of them is, you know in, I think he went to Saudi  Arabia, he had been to Germany and he had studied in Bangalore. So these are the grandchildren now, and I hope that that will also initiate the process of girl child being educated, because they are now educated. In my family two girls had education, one because she couldn’t marry because she had leukoderma, and another one who was divorced, and hence she had nothing to do so she got educated. Ironic, very strange, peculiar situation, and luckily now she has found a groom who is educated. So there are a few. The family remains there and they are sort of in a way, their life is there, you know.

It was a different world that I entered into, but it was a world that I desired and I feel comfortable in. It would have been literally impossible for me to have lived in Surendranagar after being exposed to the world that I belong to now, the kind of liberal, you know, world that I live in, order... the kind of situation that we belong to is still not available in small towns in India. You would be, sort of, in a way branded as a Muslim and you might even, you know, it would be sort of a pressure from both sides that you will have to behave as a Muslim with a Muslim name, which is something which would be a very difficult thing for people who are educated, you know, to... they will not understand it, you know, and it’s sort of almost mediaeval that you would not understand that.
But at the same time you never angrily rejected your parents?
No, what I am saying is that it’s my family, or in a way a set of roots, you know. Something, you know, which is part of my make-up. I can’t wipe off the 18 years that I spent there. I do not think there is any, even there is, I don’t think my subsequent make-up is devoid of that earlier make-up, you know. It is part of it. So I, and since that world also doesn’t reject me fully, it allows me a space to enter. I also feel that there is space for them in my world, and I make that space for me, and I think that space in which we traverse where we have a communication, and it’s very beautiful at a human level. You know, I am like, if I go with my children to that place, they are so delighted, you know, you know, and even if I attend a marriage in the family, they will be forever grateful that, you know, this highly educated, you know...  and these boys and girls, my children both Kabir and Samira know it, and they reciprocate. So in their own way they open a channel of communication with them, although beyond that there is not much that you could do because we have to understand the constraints. Life, you know, is very different at two different places. What is interesting is that they understand that, and they do not demand from us, you know, the kind of life or the kind of whatever, you know, the life that they lived in, they might, you know, people perhaps would expect you to do certain things, and which they don’t expect. You live your life, we live our life, and you know, if we can communicate at that level and be sort of happy, and I think that is something which is very, very, very genuine and very honest. So, I like to keep that contact alive. I do not want to sever it from my life, even though it may, you know, in my present life, may not figure very prominently. And in a way, it is also something where when you think of your life, you know, in retrospect, you think that that experience of those 18 years is not something which was in vain. You know, it is something, you know, there are beautiful moments; there are beautiful things that happened. I gained so much from that experience. But at the same time, let me explain that my family in that sense doesn’t mean my immediate family. It’s also my friends. You know, all the people, my teachers, you know, and some of them I am still in touch with, both in Surendranagar and elsewhere. And in a sense, coming here also was to make another family, and that was a family which art created for us, and in our fine arts college, you know, the small institution, was like an extended family, and we have that relationship even now. I know that I taught for... since I taught for so many years, I literally knew names of all my students, hundreds of them, and the extended family is worldwide now. I can find them in Mexico, I can find them in the United States, in England, there are so many in England, and a number of them in India. Every place I go to I find somebody. It’s like meeting a family member. It’s a very beautiful kind of a bond of sorts because in fine arts we lived like a family, not only that we worked together in the studios, but we had our... like our functions together, our, like we had a fine arts fair in which the whole college participated. We made objects, we made books for children, we did all kinds, we made toys, and you know, this continues. We travelled together to different places as a kind of a... it is called a study tour, but we went to different places, sometimes faraway places, and we lived together for sometimes a fortnight, and these are some of my most cherished memories. You know, all the friends that I travelled with, they have, many of them have remained friends. Like some of them are lifelong friends, and all students with whom I dealt with, many of them are personal family friends, those who are teaching now in the college. So in that sense, that family and this family, though they are different, in some way make for me a larger family.

Strangely enough don’t think there was such a crisis that should have a, created a great impact on my mind. In other words, it’s not that there was no crisis or there was no conflict. There were points at which, you know, one felt that, you know, you entered in a different kind of life experience. You know, it was world changed, you know. For me, simply to come to Baroda was a change. I made that change in my life. I have never anticipated that. I didn’t know what I was entering. But that did not again sever my links with Surendranagar. The second was going to England, you know, to London for 3 years, and it was again quite a tremendous experience, you know. An entirely different world and one also came in contact with something which one had read about in either literature or learnt from, you know, people you had met. But to be there, you know, was quite an experience at times, but even from a, but it didn’t really, didn’t really change my world view.
I mean, living in the western world is an experience which many people who have grown up in the east, you know, would find it traumatic at times because the way relationships are formed in India, you know, like living in a joint family, you know, are very different than the way the families and others function there. You know, there is, in a way there is a separation between, you know, there is... relationship is seen in terms of individuals and each individual has his freedom, and I think children after they have finished their school, they become independent. So there is a relationship, and in India we have perhaps in some ways much greater emotional bonds, and if it is a joint family, that bond is even greater, and perhaps, you know, that kind of a bond is something which may create problems for those who wish to live an independent life, you know. I noticed that. I mean I was observing all this thing, you know. I do remember that, you know, when you are abroad and living on your own... once, I think it was during Christmas when everybody goes home, despite the fact that it’s a liberal and very secular world, Christmas is a major kind of a festival and it was a family bond. Everybody would go there, and then you suddenly realise that, oh, it’s different, it’s not like what you thought that people do not have that kind.... But that is the point where you even find that you are isolated, you know, and I think it’s quite possible that even now people... but it all depends upon what kind of friends you have, you know, and the friends can even take you home. But I did realise that that was something very personal, people would like to go home themselves rather than carry their friends with them. But anyway, that can be different. I had some wonderful friends there. I made friends with my classmates... and I used to, I think they must have found me very nosey because I used to barge into studios of other students, which was not known because they would not do so. I was very curious as to how they lived, what they did, why, where did they come from. Like this was a British lawyer who came from a very, I think... how shall you put it... a sophisticated, perhaps well-to-do family. He would be impeccably dressed and he would have his apron on him and he would put it away and then he would not even come for lunches with us in the common room or come to view there, but go to some place where he would have his whatever, the kind of lunch that he would have, his pie and perhaps he would have his wine and all that. I was very curious. I became very friendly with him. I forced him to... and in fact I went to his place also. We went brass-rubbing in the country and things like that because I wanted to know what it was, you know, to be, you know, in a family like that. I think his parents found me rather strange, but they couldn’t do anything because I had already converted this boy into a good friend and we both went into [the] country and did that. Anthony Mannering was his name. I don’t know, he was not much of a painter, but I don’t know what he did later.

So, in a way I wanted to make friends, you know. So, Oliver and Lois Bevan were my very, very good friends for 2 years. I also discovered, you know... I mean the painters whose work I’d like, I would go out of my way and sort of try to befriend them, which I did. Even Victor Burgin I knew very well because I liked, the man had a very, I mean it was a different kind of a mind, but I was curious as to... you know, because he was very theoretical, and I was very curious to know about this man, and eventually I think he became a kind of a conceptual artist. You know, what is the other man, now he is...?
Professor Victor Burgin is one of the best known artists of his kind in the world. 
Well, he was right in front of us. You know, he was, but I also, you know, in some way, my teachers, when they came to me, we talked a lot about, you know, what it was. I mean, I questioned them as much as they did, you know. Like for instance Merlin Evans would come and look at my painting and I was using very bright colours, he said, ‘Oh, there must be very bright sunsets in India, no?’ Which is sort of a stereotype. You know this is how he dreamt, he had never been... he never thought that. So, I would ask him, you know, questions about what he was doing and things like that. Like Anthony Mannering was, once I said look, ‘Anthony, would you ever consider coming to India?’ ‘Oh, good Lord, no! No!’  You know, all the tigers and all that. So, he thought that Indian streets had tigers roaming about. But anyway, even then it was possible to make contact, and there was a certain degree of bonding as well there. Like Gabrielle, Gabrielle Nesfield, whose father was in India, so she had a kind of an Indian connection. He had been to India, he had worked in India, and in a way, you know, it opened doors, you know, for both of us, and she sort of remained a good friend, you know. I go there every time I go to England and meet her. So, Royal College was not all that which was, you know, in that sense ‘hard edge’ and minimal and academic, it was also personal relationships. For me it mattered a lot. Like, I made friends with this girl, Kemala, whom I was very curious because I had never known anybody from Africa. She was from Sudan, and I was very curious, so we used to have long talks and chat, and I am sorry that I have lost contact with her and I wish I had continued that contact. But through Gabrielle, I met people, you know, who were of different origins. There was a Mexican girl, Alicia, whom I was very curious because again, Mexico is a place which I was very, very curious about when I... which I eventually visited a number of times and discovered it for myself. But the French, particularly Joelle Moreau, who is a kind of a garden architect, you know, she is sort of a designer of gardens, or whatever you call it, and Sabine. So, they all have remained with me. You know, it’s not a one-off relationship, it’s relationships which became very personal, and so even after they got married or, you know, and my children have been there, you know. Like Kabir has met Sabine, you know. So there is that kind of a family connection which is, in a way it’s an extended family, like I came to know you, you know. And so in a way it’s that kind of a relationship which grew out of... at one level from art, but at another level because of the kind of bonding that is discovered in the process. So, it is not something which you can put in boxes or categories, but that they all remain in their own place, you know. And on the whole, I think it does seem to fulfil, you know, in some manner. So, the conflicts if you were talking about that... but I was and was not impressed by Royal College. At one level, I found that living there, in there, was in isolation of sort, and another level I felt that well, it provided us all opportunity to interact with each other and that there was the V&A next door and I could go there and learn from the collection in the museum. So it had, you know, there are different kinds of responses, but there was no kind of a great conflict of that kind that I would think that, which created a problem for me. But it’s true, if I were to live anywhere in the world, I would live in India. I could go elsewhere for a few months at the most, but I would miss India. If I were to choose any time, I would say this also because of the weather because I like warm weather, I prefer that, and I like the diversity of India. That is something which one finds limited in many countries because India in a sense is many countries rolled into one. So going to Karnataka would be going to another land. So in a way, this kind of a culture of the subcontinent, you know, to be in a continent and also moving easily from place to place and discovering every time something new, something so totally different, you know, is a matter of great delight, you know, because you are constantly exploring. You are always moving and you have something wondrous waiting for you wherever you go.

Well, curating is not something which I have chosen myself. But at some point of time, you know, it came to me to, let us, say either organise or curate exhibitions. Way back in, I think, ’69 or so, we were asked to do something on art of Gujarat, a small exhibition, but Bhupen, Jyoti Baht and I went round and collected a few objects and put up a show at Jehangir Art Gallery in Bombay. But, it was at a later stage that one felt that perhaps one could put together exhibitions. Well, I had done small things here and there, like when I was teaching in the faculty. I would put up sort of all exhibitions sometimes of reproductions and originals. I think we did something in popular art at one stage. But it was later when offers came from other sources. Among these, an important one was, I forget the title of the exhibition, but an exhibition in exchange of one that had gone to France, perhaps for the Festival of India again, and we were, that is Geeta Kapur, Anis Farooqi, who was the director of the National Gallery of Modern Art, and I. We visited Paris to select works from French museums. So, we had done some work before going, and put together what we thought to be relevant for India. But most of the works were to come from museums in Paris, but we certainly had on our list the artists that, I was very keen on Bonnard, and there were these sort  of little tips that we should be having both van Gogh and Gauguin, without which an exhibition like that would perhaps be adversely commented. So, we put that into their mind, the French who were working with us, and we managed to put together a reasonable exhibition in India. I don't know what it was called, it’s something like ‘Birth and Life of Modernity’ or something like that, and it was in the National Gallery, but we did not write the catalogue, it was already written by the French. But I think that was an experience because we actually dealt with some very well known works of art and also important museums, and it was great fun looking at those works in the collection of the Pompidou and in... the, what is it, the other big impressionist museum collection?
Orsay. 
L’Orsay, and... we didn’t visit other museums besides Paris, but we had a list and we got a Bonnard from a museum somewhere in the south. Not a very large show, but a reasonably big show, a good show.
When did it end, about 1950?
This must have ended around that time, yah. I don’t really remember.
So it’s classic?
Yes, it’s more or less a classical show. Well, the French did send a show. It was curated by somebody else, you know. It was of a later period, you know, at the National Gallery of Modern Art. As I mentioned it to you, it was a friend of Deepak Ananth who curated that show, and that came at a later stage.

Well, another show which I got involved in, because it was the project that interested me, it was for the Manchester Art Gallery, and the project was to have three shows. One show of art of India, that is contemporary art. Well, it was all contemporary art. The other was art of Sri Lanka. The third was art of Bangladesh, sorry, four exhibitions, and the fourth was art of Pakistan. I undertook this responsibility because I thought that such an enterprise wouldn't take place in any of these countries. You know, it would never happen, and here it was a venue which was outside all four, and it was going to be in England in four different places nearby, Manchester and three other places.
That was useful because I had been toying with this idea and I had written a paper that was with regard to art practice in India. One of the papers was about sites of art, and what would consider, what would one consider art in that sense? But even if one did not go into every... every kind of art that was produced, one at least felt that at least we could address these three principle areas. One was obviously the urban modern, that one. In some sense art school artists or something, you know, which was art of the galleries, art of the museums.
The other one which also you know, roughly what is called folk art, or something which is rural, tribal, and we felt that sort of this is an area because this is the vast subcontinent has an amazing sort of array of works produced by ordinary people, and this is generally understood, and when one considers India, these are the two aspects which are generally put together. But a third is usually not considered, you know, that was urban popular. And I had thought that if we did not put that together, then our - perhaps – view will be limited, and urban popular has sort of, you know, it overlaps urban modern at one level, and it overlaps rural tribal at the other level, both in terms of artists coming from small towns and villages, and become sort of a workforce, whatever you call them, and those who then graduate into the cities and produce stuff. You know, like even the cinema hoardings. It also, let us say, in the work of Bhupen and many other younger artists, you know, relates to the kind of popular culture that we have. So, I found the title which was rather colourful, you know, ‘Home, Shrine, Bazaar, Museum’. I thought that there are a few sites which one could indicate, and we worked together. We worked on that for a period of time, and I needed somebody to help me with the tribal rural objects. I had already chosen some of the areas which I wanted to represent in the rural tribal thing. I wanted sculpture from central India, that is from Bastar. I wanted the kind of work which would be related to cane and bamboo, and I had seen work of these women artists of Bihar. Then I also wanted something in terracotta. Jyotindra became a close associate and he helped me in this, Jyotindra Jain. Dr Jyotindra Jain, director of the crafts museum at that point of time, had put up a number of exhibitions and also held a number of collections, and in fact actually he has mounted works in a number of museums, and then he has reorganised the crafts museum in Delhi. So I selected artists from urban-modern and then we together selected artists from the tribal-rural, and then I also selected some from urban-popular. In fact, I wanted to put up a show of urban-popular. It had to be limited because there wasn’t that much space, but we did actually finally find the hoardings, works of a hoarding painter in Delhi, and Ram Rahman, a photographer, you know, set up a kind of a photo studio there and you could even have your photograph taken with cut-outs of Gandhi and cut-outs of Queen Elizabeth. So, it was fun that way.
Among the artists I had chosen several, you know, from older artists. There were, well, Nilima was one of them because I wanted somebody to represent that aspect of the miniature tradition, and she did a series of paintings, they are sort of specially made for that. The youngest artist, Shilpa Gupta, had done a video which was on a kind of, you know, it’s something which I am interested in, is the belief systems, and she had actually gone to various shrines, temples and gurudwaras in Bombay, and interviewed people, you know, about their view of the sacred, their view of actually, the word that she used, which is anyway, two-sided, dual meaning, which is a word called ‘blessed’. So, the whole thing was on blessed things, and it was a kind of a room in which the video was shown, but at the same time she had created objects with some kind of a crocheted cover, and she had taken it to all of them to bless it. So these were sort of blessed objects, which people, the viewers were supposed to collect, and they were given away. So, it was a kind of an interesting experiment. I wanted two or three other artists, but that didn’t materialise. One was the work of, three women artists actually. One was Sheba Chhachhi, who had worked on women in Kashmir, a large installation. I also wanted Mrinalini Mukherjee, who works in hemp fibre, to go with the work of the women artists of Bihar, because they also work in that kind of cane fibre, and I also wanted Navjot from Bombay who had been interacting for now a few years with the tribal artists of Bastar. I wanted the work of both her and the people, the artists with whom she had interacted. Unfortunately it didn’t work out because there wasn’t that much space. So, it remained only a wish list, but an exhibition did take place and there were these four exhibitions open 4 days, an interesting kind of an interaction between artists from Bangladesh, from Pakistan, from India, and moving from one to the other. I think it in a way broke some ice, and we were able to sort of, you know, talk to each other, to communicate. We had known some of that, but I think in a way it was the basis for all of us to come together and see what we are doing in our respective regions. Well, I thought that was a kind of a statement, and in some way it was a political statement and that is how, but I wish that we had produced a larger and bigger catalogue. That was not possible.

Well, at a later stage it came to me to curate the exhibition of the work of Benode Bihari Mukherjee. Benode Bihari Mukherjee was a very unique kind of artist. Well, in terms of let’s say his life, I mean, if you think of his life. He had lost an eye in his childhood, so all he painted was with one eye, and that was also a poor eye, which eventually he lost in his 50s. But that is not the point. The point is that he had something very unusual in him. He studied at Santiniketan, and then became a librarian. I think of his own choice he sort of learnt to put together all the volumes that Tagore and others had collected, something about history, and he also became a writer of sorts later. You know, he published both in Bengali and later on I came to know that he had in fact, his work, his writing was greatly admired, and Subramanyan eventually translated his work into English.
Well, Subramanyan had worked on his major sort of magnum opus, the great work that he did for the Department of Hindi in Santiniketan where there was this scholar called Hazari Prasad Dwivedi, the great Hindi scholar who had written on saint poetry, and even his work on Kabir is of, I would say it is one of the most important books ever written on Kabir. And Benode Bihari and Hazari Prasad seem to have got along very well, so Hazari Prasad invited Benode Bihari to make murals in the new hall that they had built. There were three walls that Benode Bihari painted. He also wanted to paint the fourth, but that was not available to him.
Around 1940?
It is 1947. But he had already painted murals before that. You know, he had painted the student’s hostel, the ceiling of the student’s hostel, and that mural... I don’t know how he made it, you know, because it’s a very narrow passage. It’s about 8 foot high, and it’s a kind of a veranda and it looks that he must have been sort of lying and painting, or just putting his head up and painting it. And it’s an interesting painting because it’s a kind of a... circular, the surroundings of Santiniketan, all the trees and vegetation and animals all kinds of whatever, people, you know, who come to sell, come to sort of they are wandering around, and right in the middle is a pond with buffalos bathing. I think there is something in that painting which Satyajit Ray seems to have responded to. I think even Pather Panchali is the first film that Satyajit Ray made, has characters very similar to the ones that appear in that painting. In that painting there are various characters that are very similar to the one that Benode Bihari painted in that. But he also painted for instance another mural in Cheena Bhavan and that is the Department of Chinese, and that was different, but it was the grand mural, the big mural that he did in the Hindi Bhavan, and I think that is, to my mind is a kind of a great landmark in the history of contemporary Indian art. It’s also done at the point of time when India was on the verge of getting its independence, and it also portrays something which in a way covers the culture or the belief systems of the subcontinent. So it is actually the story of the mediaeval saints of India, and you have one like the west wall begins with all the sadhus, all the monks, all the aesthetics coming down from the Himalayas, wandering around, and then eventually there is this image of Ramanuja, the great saint of the south, you know, literally kind of a gothic height, and his disciples standing around him, and moving further you have the image of Kabir, you know, seated and in a kind of a musical sangat or sit together. Moving further there is the great work, Hindi poet, perhaps the first poet who wrote in Hindi instead of Sanskrit, the Ramayana, the story of Rama, and that even is still popular and people sing that Rama, it’s called Tulsi Ramayan.

And then further to that it is the blind poet called Surdas, and with a little young boy leading him, ending finally in the image of guru Govan Singh, the  Sikh guru, and a landscape of Bengal with a little pond in front. Well, in a way it invokes the memories or something of what we call Ajanta, what we have talked about Ajanta. It is all physical. They are all human characters, you know, which emerge out of the wall, and it is that physicality it takes on, but it is entirely, it’s a language. In a way it combines ideas from both Indian tradition as well as Far Eastern tradition, but also it includes elements, you know, which come from, as I said, Gothic, or from perhaps pre-Renaissance and it puts together everything in a kind of a single unit, and it’s a kind of an epic. I was greatly moved by that, so when an invitation came to curate an exhibition, we thought that I think we should focus on something, and in fact we made a copy of the mural digitally. Digital technology was helpful now because we could join all the photos together, which was not possible earlier because with black and white or colour photographs, to photograph it in, you know, and then join it together was very, very difficult. And we actually enlarged it, not to exact scale, but quite close to the scale, and we put it up on three walls of the National Gallery of Modern Art. Well, the artist’s daughter, Mrinalini or Dillu as we call her, she is a good friend of ours and she had the maximum collection of the work, and we selected quite a few. We means my co-curator, Siva Kumar, Professor R Siva Kumar. He is kind of a... now, not only a scholar but almost an authority on Bengal and the art of Bengal. He has worked on Abanindranath, on Nandalal and others, plus he has published on Ramkinkar and others. So, together we worked, we travelled to all the places where Benode Bihari had worked, like Banasthali in Rajasthan, we went to meet those who had known him personally. We recorded that. We got Satyajit Ray’s film and we put it up there. We even enacted the whole mural in black and white, but all the photographs taken earlier when that mural was in good condition. That was the ceiling mural, and we put it up at the same level. So, all of it came together and we managed to publish about five monographs on that, including, and one CD. I think that this is where I felt that if one were to have an exhibition of an artist of that, of his stature, any for that matter, if one were to do that, this is the minimum that one should be doing. And luckily, with some external help, some galleries came forward and we were able to publish a large monograph, and also a special monograph on his mural.
With wonderful folding plates. 
Yah.
It’s about 10 foot long, isn’t it?
Yah, it is 10 foot long. Yes, we have been able to do that. So one feels with sort of, you know, a sense of, you know, it is a, you know, it’s not just doing an exhibition, but it is something like a kind of a lifetime project you know, that you are interested in, and it is the work of an artist one felt was not sufficiently recognised alone. So, I think it was a good experience.
You gave quite a lot of your life to it. You gave probably almost a year in all. 
More than a year. Two, more than two years.
But no, because you did paint as well. 
I did continue to do my work, but it was something which required that much time. It was not entirely of our own making. We could have done it within a year, but it was a bureaucratic delay on the part of the government that sort of, you know, made it difficult for us. But we managed to steer clear of that, and then eventually we made it. Unfortunately, the exhibition didn’t travel, despite the fact that it was all there. It could have travelled to Bombay where the gallery was available. The National Gallery had its own wing in Bombay, and Victoria Memorial Hall in Calcutta was willing to even, not support but finance it. But that again, the bureaucracy did not approve of its travelling, so that sure did not travel and it was dismantled eventually. But I am glad that we have these publications.

Well, obviously there are problems when you have multiple projects on hand. I do feel the strain of it at times, so one needs to have space between two projects. It is better that way. I feel that, you know, if I have done an exhibition of that kind, I won’t put aside other things unless, you know, there is a chunk of time I can attend, I can use.
Now, in the case of Benode Bihari it was difficult to continue working, but I did something. I didn’t altogether sort of abandon other activities, because there were large gaps, you know, because there was no sanction. I mean, we were waiting for permission of the government, so during that period of time I would either do some writing or I would do some water colours or things like that, but I would not be able to undertake a big project. I did realise that. Similarly, if I have a project like the one that I recently finished, it was next to impossible to do anything else, you know, one had to put one’s, you know, all one’s time into that. Literally we worked for 5 months without break, you know, no Sundays, no Saturdays, and even my young friends... all the assistants who  were working with me, they also had their fixed 6 hours, minimum 6 hours a day, sometimes 8 hours, but those 6 or 8 hours they were there every day. And when you work like that, you have to have that single-minded involvement to achieve that kind of a result. Writing, sometimes I do manage, but I have of late found that even writing, if I... you see, my writing is also partly connected with what I do... otherwise.
Well, it all is.  I mean, Benode Bihari is ...
Yah. It’s not something I write on something else. You know, it’s all about things that I am involved in. Even my Gujarati writing for that matter is related to that. So, that also... unless you have a chunk of time, you can’t. So I wait for that period of time and I will do that, but I must say that now I can switch off, you know, after the project is over. So it doesn’t take that long to recover, otherwise I used to get too involved in that, too emotionally... and sometimes disturbed, and to get it out of your system took sometimes much longer. It’s better now, I think. I don't know why, but it is. So, I did see this time the project was very, very strenuous, very trying. But anyway, I went to England, my daughter invited me, and so I just went and did nothing. Just spent a few days with friends, and I think it helped. You know, I got out of this, so before I undertake a project I will now... I think there is time for considering perhaps a larger project. Let’s see how it comes out.

I would say to his credit that he handled his sexuality in an enormously, I would say intelligent way. I think it didn’t cause any kind of a problem. We were worried. I as a friend had known it, and then I always thought that somebody... because you know, there are... you know, and 30 years ago it was not the same story, you know, because there were people who used to speak very derogatorily about gay people. Even some of those who became his good friends, you know, they also used that language. I remember that, and as you know that Bhupen sort of lived it fully. You know, he had his friends all the time. But the way he conducted himself, you know, even living in that place called Chikuwadi, which is a middle class Gujarati sort of area, and you would think that all those, you know, if they would perhaps be incited about that could have created problems for him. But in a strange sort of way... you know, he... made his, one thing was that his house was open so people could see what he was painting, even the very gay painting like Two Men in Bananas, I remember, or even Yayati. I mean you could literally walk into the house and see, you know, I think everybody must have noticed it. And his own servants, you know, like Pandu and others, and they all saw it day in, day out. Well, I am still a bit sort of, you know... not clear about how he managed it, but despite being right in the middle of such a kind of an area where people would have taken great objection to anybody doing that kind of painting, Bhupen somehow managed, and it happened slowly, gradually. So in a way, the eye of, you know, those who saw these paintings also got trained, as if there was a kind of an anticipation and they were prepared for it... and I think also his image, his... two kinds of image, one image of being a very gentle and amiable man, sort of man older than he was. You know, he projected that, and the second attention he got, because a lot of sort of important people visited his house, especially foreigners. And I think that kept people, you know, impressed, you know, by that - there was something very special about this man, and I think he conducted himself so well that I had no reason to feel anxious about. Earlier I was, I must admit, that in the '60s I was not too sure, but '70s I used to worry about him, and then '80s I think it almost became clear. I know that people were asking questions to me about his sexuality, and I had to hide it, even among the artists. You know, there were those who didn’t... or they wanted kind of that I would corroborate.
Were you, were you not hurt that he hadn't... hadn't confided in you earlier on? 
I think it must have been very hard on him, hard for him to confide. It must have been very difficult. He did confide to me, we had a correspondence. At one point at an earlier stage, you know, he even wrote to me, but he wouldn’t openly tell me. At one point of time he even felt as if sort of I would not approve of it, and I would say that he had every reason to, because we could not talk about it openly. He must have gone through a very difficult kind of a journey, at what stage, when, to whom, where, it’s not easy, and in a society like, you know, a middle class Gujarati society, to speak of that was not so, not possible, and I can quite understand that.

Well, I think in a situation like that, when you work together for a number of years then events unfold, you know, in which work is, work of one artist is projected and the others is not, there is a likelihood of some kind of a... what would I say – discord. Well, the first ideological difference initially was about political ideology, and in fact about sort of looking at everything in political terms, and especially in terms of left politics, left politics, and since Vivan was an ardent follower of that, you know. So, there was a time when we disagreed on some of the things. As regards personal kind of... what shall we say – sense of competitiveness, I don’t think so.
Can you just, I mean it slightly begs what was your position if it wasn’t left?
No, basically in the late 60s and early 70s, the period in which Vivan and Geeta, who were sort of very highly political, were sort of very keen that all of us adopted a kind of a view or a stand, you know, which was in some ways, was rooted in the left ideas. Well, none of us, you know, many of us were not actually groomed into any of these political ideologies. So, at that point of time, even the idea of including politics was something which we were uncomfortable with, very simply.
But in the course of time, as our ideas became clearer, and I think their attitude also in some ways came to understand or accept some of the positions which others had, but none of us had the rightist position. So in a way, ours was a kind of a Gandhian socialist position. I mean if I were to think of mine, mine would be sort of in a way centre of left, you know, that sort of a thing, but centre in that sense was not central in any other sense but Gandhian or, you know, that kind of ideology which I would connect with Jayaprakash Narayan. But basically Gandhian, and which is something which appeals to me a great deal. You know that the left is not very happy with Gandhi, you know. They have come to accept him now. But earlier I think his idea, you know, of, you know, including non-violence was not really, it didn’t go well with them. So, in a way there was that kind of a difference, and we were not overtly political. I mean our work perhaps had some, what shall we say, elements, you know, which could be read politically, like Bhupen’s work also could be read politically. But Bhupen felt even much more, you know, reluctant to talk about politics. You know, it remained a way. You know, he wanted to be on his own and do his thing, although he was doing something, you know, which was highly political, you know, in some way, like talking about, you know, petty traders, you know, was itself a political statement. But that is something which we were uncomfortable about in those days. But later on, I think when Geeta wrote and Vivan also, you know, in a way realised that there was a point at which we could actually share ideas, and, I think, in a way Kasauli paved the way for that. The dialogues at Kasauli were very crucial because at one level we met people who in some ways responded to what we said, and I think they also realised, you know, that the hardcore left would not perhaps be a kind of an issue. In some ways I think the left in India had changed, you know, in view of the kind of reality of India, you know, that unfolded in the course of time.
I think there was a kind of a... there was a kind of an understanding. But I must say that while I got far more interested in those things, and eventually realised that some of these issues, you know, could be tackled by a combination of Ghandian and left ideology, Bhupen I think remains almost apolitical. He did not wish to go into that. Well, if you are asking about... I mean, there was not genuine rivalry of that kind, but obviously there would be at some stage if one artist got prominence over certain things, the other artists would get slight... so there’s nothing... that’s human, but it was, it didn’t, it didn’t sort of become a big issue. We continued to be good friends and we saw each other’s work, we could criticise each other’s work. I miss Bhupen a great deal in the sense that Bhupen and I used to look at each other’s work and Bhupen, though was not very vocal, he showed his... you know, I mean he, by various ways, he would communicate to me what he liked of my work, what I was doing, and I invariably talked to him about his work, almost every work that he did which I happened to see, and it was a kind of a great bond which lasted almost until the end. In the last few years I think he was a bit... I think he drifted away. Either he wanted to drift away, live in a different kind of a... and he had his friends, you know, those who were looking after him. So I remember that the retrospective that was planned, we went and actually made a proposal that Geeta, Vivan and I, three of us would work on his retrospective and we will curate it. We would start that, he didn’t accept our proposition.  It was left to a gallery to curate.
You mean especially his Indian retrospective?
The retrospective, it happened after his death. It is a retrospective which was planned in his own lifetime. So, it was something, you know, which we thought that we could do. We all...
But his true retrospective had already happened in Europe.
He had already a retrospective...
Much more of a retrospective. 
And very fine retrospective, excellent retrospective, which I made an effort to go and see it personally. I went to Madrid to see that show,  nothing else. Nilima and I both made a trip from Manchester, you know, to go to Spain, and I told Bhupen that it was one of the finest. I mean the great artist that he was, you know, that was projected in a very, very special way. So, hats off to the man who, sort of curated that show.
Enrique Juncosa.
Yeah.

I do not know really how to, but friends have been discussing that, Geeta... I think you have also offered some ideas about what kind of book it should be. Nilima is very concerned about that. I am feeling a bit sort of, you know... that I don’t know... I don’t really know who I am, you know. I can’t really make out, but what friends feel is that various aspects should be brought together. Some feel that there should be, you know, there could be two volumes. Some also feel that its format should be different, you know, and not like a kind of an artist’s art, but my writings, my... even some of my literary writings, you know, could form part of it. So it is a bit complicated, and Chaitanya Sambrani has been asked to write the main essay. Geeta said that she would also do a piece, so we would have at least two items, and we have been documenting whatever we could. Well, let’s see how it goes.
But I would perhaps do these books that I have been planning. One is on my writings, both in English and Gujarati, writings on art. There could be two volumes. I am also planning to complete my Gujarati essays which I began writing in the late '60s on return from England, called Returning Home. Also there is now a very clear possibility of doing a larger volume of poetry that my collection could come out with all the unpublished poems, even the ones that we had not included in the first edition, and the ones that I have written since, each publication. So, there are many things to do. Many things are in the offing.
