hans.bethe

The late German-American physicist Hans Bethe once described himself as the H-bomb's midwife.  He left Nazi Germany in 1933, after which he helped develop the first atomic bomb, won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1967 for his contribution to the theory of nuclear reactions, advocated tighter controls over nuclear weapons and campaigned vigorously for the peaceful use of nuclear energy.

I was born on the 2nd of July, 1906. I was born in Strasbourg, but I grew up in Frankfurt. I came from an academic family. My father was Professor of Physiology at the University of Frankfurt. As a boy I was interested in numbers and mathematics but I wanted to study something which was closer to nature, and therefore I began studying physics. I began my studies in Frankfurt at the university in the physics department.
[Q] In what year?
That was in 1924. I came to the attention of Doctor Meissner who was a spectroscopist and was the equivalent of a Reader in the physics department. Meissner told me that it was useless for me to take my Doctors degree in Frankfurt and that instead I should go to Munich to study with Arnold Sommerfeld. Sommerfeld had been the teacher of Werner Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauli, Paul Ewald, and a number of other people of that quality, and he had the most extensive school of theoretical physics in Germany.

My father had an influence on me in that he stimulated my curiosity about things in nature. He stimulated the idea that research in science was an interesting thing to do, and therefore it was quite obvious that I should study science. My father and I went very often for walks on Sunday, long walks, many hours, and then we talked about... mostly about scientific matters; sometimes also about daily events but mostly about science. So I think this was very important, but I didn't go into the subject, into his subject of physiology. Animals didn't interest me specially, but instead of that I went into the inanimate subject of physical science.
[Q] But you did go into his laboratory?
Well, I collaborated with my father on one investigation that he did with a postdoctoral student about the permeability of membranes which even today is a very important part of biology. And I had the advantage that I knew calculus and so I could make a theory of that permeation of the membrane. The theory had been made a hundred years earlier, but I reinvented it.

I thought that I might become a mathematician, but it... mathematics was too dry for me, there was too... not enough connection with the real world. And on the other hand I also thought of becoming a chemist but that was no use because in the laboratory I was rather clumsy and put most of the chemical reactions on my lab coat, which was not very successful. So theoretical physics was the obvious thing for me to do, and there Doctor Meissner paid attention to me and encouraged me to go to Sommerfeld.

I came to Sommerfeld in the spring of 1926. This was an extremely fortunate time. The year before Heisenberg had invented quantum mechanics and just at the time I came, Schrödinger was finding wave mechanics which made things much more easily calculable and which also fitted well into Sommerfeld's previous work. The... Sommerfeld was very close to the editor of the Annalen der Physik, which was one of the important journals in physics at the time, and Sommerfeld got the galley proofs of all the papers of Schrödinger, so Sommerfeld asked all his graduate students to report on these papers one by one. We really learned Schrödinger's papers from beginning to end, every one of us got a part of it. I was to report on perturbation theory and I have used Schrödinger's perturbation theory all my life to good effect.

Perhaps the most important other student was Unsöld who then went into astrophysics, and he... during my studies discovered that the sun and other stars mostly consist of hydrogen and not of the same material as the Earth. Astrophysicists before him, especially Eddington who really put astrophysics on a firm basis, had assumed that the same elements prevail in the sun as on Earth, and that gave Eddington a terribly high temperature at the center of the sun, about 40 million degrees. Then came Unsöld, and at the same time Russell, Henry Norris Russell in America, who said well... the spectrum of the sun and of other stars is richest in the lines of hydrogen, therefore it is very likely that hydrogen is the dominant element in all stars. And this was then taken up by Eddington and Strömgren who independently made a star, mostly made out of hydrogen. So this was probably the most important student at my time.

The reader in Sommerfeld's institute was Kirchner who had an experimental lab in the basement of Sommerfeld's institute. The institute wasn't very big, it was about, oh, four rooms on the first floor and the same area in the basement, so Kirchner studying the experiments of Millikan and others came to the conclusion that the... the value of the charge of the electron was not 4.77 as... Millikan had always maintained, but 4.80, and this turned out to be the right number. Sommerfeld's institute was full of postdocs coming from all countries. There was, for instance, Linus Pauling coming from America; there were II Rabi and Ed Condon coming from Russia... from America and Pauling being more on the chemistry side, Rabi and Condon on the physics side. They were all sitting along one long table about 20 people, all the visitors who were full grown physicists and all the graduate students at the same time.

So this same room also had the physics journals and so it was a very... very much a family of people.
[Q] And the physics journals at that stage would be primarily...?
The physics journals were Annalen der Physik and Zeitschrift für Physik in Germany, and then The Proceedings of the Royal Society and The Physical Review.
[Q] You actually did receive The Physical Review already then?
Yes.
[Q] And the other person in Munich at that time is Willy Wien. I mean, just to...
Yes, Willy Wien was the Professor of Experimental Physics, a very famous person who had discovered that the maximum of the spectrum of a hot body shifted according to temperature. When it got hotter the spectrum got bluer, and that was one of the bases of Planck's discovery of quantum theory in 1900. So Willy Wien was a famous man, then mostly interested in so-called canal rays, that is rays of positive particles, protons, and investigating their properties, and he was known as a rather severe examiner in PhD examinations. For instance he almost flunked Werner Heisenberg because Heisenberg had not paid enough attention to experimental physics.
[Q] And microscopes in particular.
Microscopes. Yes, well the examiner had to ask three questions, so he asked Heisenberg about an astronomical telescope, a terrestrial telescope and a microscope, and Heisenberg couldn't answer any of them. After which he was justified in failing him, and it made a great impression on Heisenberg so that later he invented the gamma ray microscope to illustrate the uncertainty principle.

I took the normal courses in advanced experimental physics with Kirchner, and especially theoretical physics with Sommerfeld. Sommerfeld had a six term course covering all parts of theoretical physics. I think I took Mechanics from him, and Fluid Mechanics and Electromagnetism and Optics and Differential Equations of Physics. The last was his favourite subject and that of course tied in exactly with Schrödinger's wave mechanics. It prepared me for using wave mechanics with facility. So... and Sommerfeld was a very good mathematician. He insisted on rigorous mathematics, so he was a very good teacher, and perhaps the best was his seminar which I mentioned where we discussed Schrödinger's papers. He insisted on everybody being very clear, and when necessary Sommerfeld would ask stupid questions to show... to find out from the lecturer what was unclear.
[Q] And your duties as a student in the seminar?
Well, at... in the beginning I didn't have any duties, but then in my second year I was asked to correct the exercises of the younger students, so I... marked them all and corrected the mistakes and one of my students then was Rudi Peierls who later on became a famous physicist and my good friend.

I was again very fortunate because the year before, Davisson and Germer at the Bell laboratories had discovered electron diffraction which directly demonstrated the wave nature of electrons so that... that gave a good basis for Schrödinger for his wave mechanics. And there was one important trouble with Davisson [and] Germer, he got interference patterns, just as you would from waves going through a crystal, but they were never at the right place - and so Sommerfeld gave me a problem already the first semester: Please explain why they are at the wrong angles.
And so I very soon had the idea that electrons, when they enter a metal - the experiments were done with nickel - experience an acceleration which you can't see very well because it is difficult to get electrons out of a metal. And so I... said 'Well, there must be a negative potential in the metal' and it helped that Sommerfeld at the same time was developing his theory of metals which used the Fermi distribution of electrons in the metal, so you had some kinetic energy, so therefore the potential energy must be bigger than the so-called work function, that is the energy which is needed to pull an electron out. And so I said, 'Well there's probably a negative potential, 20 electron volts perhaps, and... that way I could bring the experiments of Davisson and Germer into agreement with wave diffraction theory.
Now about five other people had the same idea at the same time, in fact they were mostly Americans, one was quite a famous man in crystal spectroscopy by the name of Patterson, and Americans never read German papers, so they never paid attention to my paper, but they just quoted each other's papers. Unfortunately I have now adopted the same custom on my own.

Sommerfeld assigned me then a thesis problem. He had liked my little paper, and so he told me 'Now you make a complete theory of electron diffraction in crystals.' And so I did and Sommerfeld still gave me advice, 'There is the theory of X-ray diffraction by Paul Ewald, you might use as a... as a basis.' And I did, and fortunately for me electron diffraction is much simpler because in X-rays you have to deal with a vector, the electromagnetic field; whereas in... in electrons you have a scalar which makes everything much easier. And without much difficulty I could produce a theory of... of electron diffraction. It wasn't a very great work, in fact Wolfgang Pauli who was always very critical told me when I first saw him, 'I have been very disappointed by your thesis. I had expected much better of you.' But von Laue who had done the first theory of X-ray diffraction back in 1913 liked my paper very well and used it in some of his later publications.

Of course there was a lot of... of controversy about the interpretation. There was Schrödinger who wanted to see his waves as something real, just like electric waves. And there was on the other side Niels Bohr, a much bigger authority, who strenuously objected to that; pointing out that after all electrons had been shown to be particles and one had the direct experiments seeing electrons in the tube. And that problem was then enlightened by Heisenberg's uncertainty principle which showed that you had to consider electrons both as waves and as particles, but when you use the particle picture then the position and velocity of the electron could not simultaneously be measured accurately. That fitted right into Niels Bohr's ideas and everybody including Sommerfeld accepted this picture. It took a lot of persuasion for Schrödinger to accept it.
[Q] And he never did.
He finally did.

Born produced a theory of collision phenomena in which electrons certainly are particles but then the... this had to be reconciled with wave mechanics, and he produced a complete theory of collisions and at the same time he introduced the important concept of the probability interpretation of the Schrödinger wave function; the absolute square of the wave function gives you the probability of finding the electron at a certain point or with a certain momentum.
[Q] And you studied that paper as...
I studied that paper very carefully as it came out.
[Q] And there is a second paper which appears in the Göttingen Nachrichten which you then also study.
In the second paper he applied the theory to the elastic and inelastic scattering of electrons by hydrogen atoms, and that became the basis of one of my papers, in fact one I consider to be quite an important paper, which I used for [my] Habilitation. In Germany, after taking a Doctor's degree, you are still not entitled to teach at the university; you had to take a second exam and especially you had to submit a more advanced paper for Habilitation. I did that in 1930 after having taken my Doctor's degree in 1928.

I used Born approximation like Moliére's Gentilhomme used prose; I didn't know about Born approximation.
[Q] No I... I'm merely coming back that when Pauli criticizes you, it is really when you try to be much more ambitious than that.
Exactly. Yes, well I went to a second approximation which got very clumsy and involved, but it has been used in recent years by crystallographers to go one step farther.

Ewald had been a student in 1910 to '12, and was... had great friendship with Sommerfeld. He invited me to give a talk about my thesis at Stuttgart where he now was professor, and later on in the spring of '29 he in... asked me to be his assistant. But before that I went back to Frankfurt for one semester.

The important thing in the early days of quantum mechanics was atomic spectra. From atomic spectra Bohr had derived the initial quantum theory and the people around Sommerfeld, and Sommerfeld himself, had deepened it greatly and got many details. So I thought the most important thing now was to apply the new quantum mechanics to atomic spectra including the ionization potential of atoms, and there were very important papers by Wigner and von Neumann about the application of group theory to... to the theory of atoms, and so I decided the most important thing for me was to study group theory, which I did.
[Q] From... in which... in which book at the time?
There was a book by Speiser about group theory which I worked through at least half way, and at that time I really knew quite a lot about group theory. And then it's no use studying a book unless you apply it, unless you do some work of your own using it. Now I had learned about crystals from the Davisson-Germer theory and so I thought, let me apply this group theory to crystals. In fact that had been done many decades earlier, crystal groups, symmetry groups had been found by the crystallographers and Ewald knew all about that, but then it occurred to me that if an atom were put into a crystal then it no longer had spherical symmetry, but it had the symmetry of the crystal which is lower. So you would have a splitting of the energy levels in the crystalline field, just as you have in the Stark effect, a splitting in the electric... constant electric field. But of course it's different in a crystal and I proceeded to get all the possible groups and the representations of groups which applied inside the symmetry of a crystal and I calculated the splitting of atomic energy levels in... in that medium. And for instance, in... in the most symmetrical position in a crystal, in a cubic crystal, you have the three directions of space, x, y and z. But when you then have a D-state electron, the five wave functions of that are no longer all at one energy level, but they split; one wave function becomes like: x2 - y2 and the other becomes like xy and...
[Q] Cubic Harmonics.
These are the cubic wave functions, and I figured out for all types of crystal symmetries how the splitting would go.

I tried to read all papers which were concerned with quantum mechanics. That is Heisenberg's papers, Dirac and applications, Heitler and London getting the wave function of the hydrogen molecule, then Born of course. And... and finally, but that was really later, the latest papers, how to treat the wave functions of an atom more conveniently by writing down a determinant and at that point you don't need group theory any longer, it just is automatic. So I... but that came [a] couple of years later.
[Q] And when you read, I mean this is now a question, when you read these papers, you keep notes?
I kept short notes, but I had a rather good memory so most of it I kept in my memory.
[Q] And, so you were fully aware of everything which goes on in atomic physics, molecular physics...
In those days I was fully aware. That changed later on, '38 or so, it was no longer possible. But the time... now, I should say a little more about that paper on the energy levels in a crystal. It has been very much used by physical chemists and immediately when I came to Ewald he immediately said that this is a very useful theory because there are some sharp line spectra of some atoms in a... in a crystal, namely rare earth atoms. Rare earth atoms in a solid give you a very clearly defined line spectrum, and with fairly complicated arrangements of the levels, and your theory is obviously applicable to that. I wrote a short paper on... on this fact but I never had the patience to actually look at the spectra of the rare earth atoms. The reason why rare earth [atoms] do this is that they... they have an incomplete D... f-shell and so they are mostly ionized so you directly see that f-shell in the atomic spectra. I had the ambition in those days not only to think of the spectra of atoms in a crystal lattice, but of calculating the binding energy of solid matter. I've never succeeded in doing that, it was done about 30 years later. Nowadays it can be done.
[Q] With computers and...
With computers.

The electron wave in a solid has the periodicity of the crystal, and... but it... you can have an electron propagating freely in the solid. That was very much in Sommerfeld's mind too, and it then became the basis of Bloch's theory of conduction in metals, where you had wave functions which had... were like free wave functions but modulated with the periodicity of the crystal. That was the basis of... of the theory of conductivity and it was also used by Brillouin and then by Peierls in talking about finer details of the behavior of electron wave functions in a crystal.
[Q] Then you master all of these... 
All of these were familiar to me. I wasn't clever enough to do Bloch's theory of... of conduction in... in metals, but later on in... in Handbuch article with Sommerfeld I discussed all these.

I was very much impressed by the work of Hylleras who managed to get the binding energy of helium much more accurately than Heisenberg had done before. And the trick was to use the variational principle which had been formulated by Schrödinger and put in trial wave functions and just find the minimum of energy. So I said to myself; Hylleras has done helium, there are other atoms which contain two electrons, so... and in particular hydrogen can have two electrons. Now the old quantum theory had concerned itself with that, old quantum theory before Heisenberg could not solve the helium problem, and even less could it solve the problem of a negative hydrogen atom where the nuclear charge was one rather than two. So I thought this would be an interesting problem and I applied Hylleras's method to the negative hydrogen atom - that is a proton with two electrons around it - and I found that indeed there was a bound state which had a binding energy of something like 0.7 electron volts. And this turned out later to be quite important for astrophysics - I didn't know that at the time - because near the surface of a star, the sun for instance, there is a region where the temperature is relatively low. And if you have a low temperature then the negative hydrogen ion can be stable and it is then susceptible of... of being ionized by the light quantum coming from the inside and the ionization of H-minors contributes a great deal to the opacity of a star near its surface.

I got into nuclear physics only after 1932, after Chadwick discovered the neutron, then you could think of particles in the nucleus.
[Q] I'm asking or... essentially to elicit the statement from you, namely that it was fuzzy and therefore you felt the time was not right to... to do that.
Absolutely, and that people had to talk about electrons in the nucleus and this was obviously impossible because the wave length of an electron was maybe a hundred times the radius of the nucleus, so that didn't make any sense whatever, so you just couldn't do it.

It was numbers that proved Bohr's theory. It was numbers that later on led to the classification of spectra, to... Zeeman effect, determination of the angular momentum from the Zeeman effect and all that; numbers obviously were the way to prove things right. And I... there is one unpublished paper of me which... in which I tried to get the ionization potential, the binding energy of atoms up to Neon. It was a very crude approximation and I showed it to Sommerfeld and Sommerfeld said... discouraged me and said that's really not sufficiently interesting to publish, so I didn't publish it, but somebody else did, I don't remember who.
[Q] So this is already just as you come to the Sommerfeld seminar at the very beginning?
Well this I did, yes, just as I came to the seminar. I was interested in numbers, but that particular attempt I did when I returned to Sommerfeld in the fall of '29.

I had spent one semester in Stuttgart with Ewald, which was a very happy time, but then Sommerfeld wrote Ewald a postcard, no more, in which he said 'Bethe is my student. I want him back.' So Ewald put me into a package and sent me back to Sommerfeld and I returned to Sommerfeld in the fall of '29. It should be mentioned that Sommerfeld had a sabbatic in the winter semester '28 to '29 in which he traveled all over the globe, among others to India, and had a very good time. When I returned to Sommerfeld and Sommerfeld suggested I should get my Habilitation and I had read the Born paper trying to... to get the inelastic scattering by hydrogen. I think I should mention that the actual calculation was done by Elsasser, which was another paper published. Well, the Born theory for first part approximation says you take the wave function of the system in the initial state and take its complex conjugate and then you take the wave function in the final state and you multiply them and you multiply by the interaction between the atom and the electron which comes in from the outside, e2/r1,2, and you integrate that. Well, Elsasser had done that, by first integrating over the atomic electron wave function, and that's a very hard thing to do and it took him a long time to... to do it. But I noticed that the wave function of the incident particle electron or proton or whatever it may be is much simpler, it's just an exponential, eik.r, and if you multiply two of them, you get eiq.r where q is the change of momentum in the scattering process and to integrate that with the interaction 1/r1,2. It's as easy as can be. Ewald had done it, and it is just taking the fourier transform of the wave function. And that's what people knew as the atomic form factor.

So you had the atomic form factor generalized to the case where the atom makes a transition from its ground state to an excited state, and you get that generalized form factor and then you multiply it by the initial and final wave function of the atom. And then you have a very much simpler theory. So this was the basis of my paper and having simplified it to that extent it was easy to do the integration, and it was easy then to do more than the... to sum the probability of various... excitations of the atom, to sum over all possible final states of the atom, and get the total cross section or total inelastic cross section of the atom, which comes out very easily.   And then I found - and that was very nice - that it became even easier if you took not just the cross section of going from state zero to state n, but multiplied it by the energy difference, energy of state n minus energy of state zero. And if you did that you got a still simpler result, in fact I later found out - much later - that this really was the way in which Kuhn and Reiche had discovered their sum rule for atomic oscillator strengths. And this had been the basis of Heisenberg's Matrix Mechanics, (p*q)-(q*p); that's essentially what I rediscovered, and so I could sum the cross section multiplied by the energy change, and that of course is the energy loss of the integral particle. And so thereby I could calculate in a very simple way the energy loss of any particle going... interacting by electric forces with an atom.

It turned out when I came to Cambridge, England in the fall of 1930, Patrick Blackett found this very interesting because the experimenters in nuclear physics had always determined the energy of a particle from the range of a particle in air. And so he said 'Now, we have an old formula for this energy loss,' which he showed me, in fact I may have already known it, but certainly he showed it to me, 'which differs just very slightly from your result. So, extend your result and give us the relation between energy of a charged particle and [its] range. That we can use.' And that's what I did and I got the range-energy relation in air and in hydrogen and other substances, and this turned out to be very useful for the Cambridge experimenters then, and for other experimenters later. And it is still useful because nowadays experimenters can measure very easily the change of energy of an electron as it goes through some foil - let's say, a thin aluminum foil - not electron but any particle, and it turned out as it had turned out in the pre-quantum theory that this energy loss depends primarily on the velocity of the particle. Now it's very easy for experimenters to measure the momentum of a particle by deflecting in a magnetic field, and if you have both momentum and velocity, you deduce the mass of the particle, and in this way nowadays experimenters can deduce the masses of all the remarkable particles, mesons of all kinds and excited states of... of the proton and so on. So this Habilitationschrift which was a very interesting thing to do at the time, turned out to be very useful for a long time.

[Q] The problem of energy loss had been a famous problem that Bohr had worked on and...
Yes, in fact the old theory of energy loss was initiated by Bohr about the same time as he found the old quantum theory and it's a beautiful paper, Bohr's paper, and his formula differs from mine in a just a very slight extent. But Bohr was very intrigued by that and he asked Felix Bloch to look into this: Why is it different? And Bloch then succeeded in making the connection between the classical formula of Bohr and my quantum formula and he found that for very slow electric particles, especially those of high charge, the old classical theory is right; and then for fast particles, my quantum theory is right, and Bloch succeeded in getting the... in bridging the two.

[Q] The period, as you have remarked, after 1926 when you come into physics is amazingly rich and it changes the entire character of physics. The other papers which come out at that stage is of course Dirac and the electron, [and] the generalization of quantum mechanics to relativistic systems. You again fully studied those developments.
I read those papers and tried to digest them. I used them only later, but I did use them later. For one thing I generalized my stopping power to the relativistic case where I really didn't need the whole apparatus of Dirac but could use simple apparatus which had been developed by Christian Muller at Copenhagen and so I could generalize my stopping power for two electrons of relativistic energy.
[Q] And,    Dirac is also the author of a famous paper on quantum electrodynamics, papers which you again study at that time, the generalization, the quantum theory of the electromagnetic field.
I did study it. One of the uses I made of it came when in 1931 I went to Fermi in Rome who had been very much interested in this. In fact he had written the only readable paper on quantum electrodynamics up to that time in the Reviews of Modern Physics, and Fermi was terribly interested in the various formulations of interaction of electric particles in Relativity Theory, so we wrote a joint paper on these various methods. I knew Muller's work quite well and Breit's work and Fermi knew everything else and this went very nicely. We discussed it couple of times and then Fermi said 'Well now let's write a paper about it.' So we did, and this was done in the most expeditious way possible; Fermi sat at the typewriter and typed the paper - he knew German very well and we conversed in German - and so he would say a sentence and I would nod my head and approve it and I would write down the formulae in the meantime - it was too difficult to type those - and in maybe a couple of hours this paper was done and sent in, then accepted and published in the Zeitschrift für Physik.

For one semester I was in Stuttgart with Ewald who had given me really the basis for my thesis, and I was very happy there, happier than I had been for years, and so I was very reluctant to go back to Sommerfeld when Sommerfeld claimed me. But Sommerfeld gave me several inducements; one was the Habilitation and the other was that he would get me a travel fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation, which he did. And he suggested that I go one semester to Cambridge, England, which was of course a big center, and the other semester to Rome, to Fermi who was a rising sun in theoretical physics. Fermi had published his Fermi's Statistics and then, as I already mentioned, he had done a very good presentation of quantum electrodynamics in momentum space which made it very much more readable than Heisenberg and Pauli who had done it in ordinary space. So I went to Cambridge and found it a very congenial place, in fact, I had been quite unhappy in Germany because most of the people around me in Germany were arch conservatives, they constantly talked about the terrible disgrace of the Versailles Treaty and were dissatisfied with life quite generally.   In Cambridge I found people relaxed, talking about much more general and more interesting things, and I found in Cambridge I could make friends far more easily than I could in Munich. I had made friends during my high school time, but really no additional ones during my student time. So Cambridge was a great revelation that people could be human and I had a very good time there. I didn't do terribly much additional work, I did do some work. I had a wonderful professor to report to, Ralph Fowler, who had worked mainly in statistical mechanics but who was very happy to listen to me when I talked to him about energy levels in crystals and... and stopping power and all sorts of things. I talked to the experimentalists, Blackett and Cockcroft and Chadwick, and got very interested in experiments which I had not been in Munich. So Cambridge was a very good experience, and then Rome was an even better experience in some ways.

Nevill Mott was a very important person. He was about my age. He was interested in similar things. As a matter of fact he had been interested mostly in collision phenomena and had written a very good book - I think it had already been written - about atomic collisions with Massey, and he and I got along famously. We went for walks together and occasionally for bicycle rides and we became very good friends. He was a theorist. I also became a good friend of Blackett but he was of... many years older than I, while Mott was my age and had very much... very congenial.
[Q] And your interest in Scattering of Relativistic Particles stems from this interaction with Mott, or intensifies?
Yes, I think that stems from this interaction, and on the other hand Mott then went into solid state theory, so we exchanged places more or less.
[Q] So socially Cambridge was a very important transition.
Socially it was very important. I was invited often to college dinners which were always very good. I stayed at a boarding house where the food was very bad, and so it was a happy time.
[Q] You already knew English?
I knew English... high school English. When I came to Cambridge people would understand me but I wouldn't understand anybody, and this continued for about a month. Then I went to a restaurant on one occasion where at the next table there were some Germans talking to each other and I couldn't understand them either, so I decided now I could understand English.

Then I go to Rome and in Rome the physics was very inspiring. Fermi was very young, he was about five years older than I, and he had made a name for himself and was a full professor and was in addition a member of a new academy in Italy which gave him the... the title of 'Excellency'. And it was of course in the midst of the Fascist times and Fermi's lab where he was really only an appendix to that lab, with the main professor was Calvino who was a very good experimental physicist and a very sensible person, he let Fermi do whatever he liked in one wing of the laboratory. But the whole lab was on a hill right next to the Department of the Interior and from time to time there was a meeting of important people in the Department of the Interior. When that happened the access to the entire region was blocked to any civilians. Fermi didn't like that and so when he came to the guard post he said 'I have to get in. I am the driver to Excellency Fermi, and his Excellency would be very annoyed if I didn't... didn't come.' And so on that basis he was let in. He looked like a driver and the guards never found out that he was himself 'His Excellency'.

There were very good people. There was Rasetti who was an old friend of Fermi's, about the same age, who had learned about nuclear physics in Germany from Bose. There was Segrè, who became my lifelong friend, who was working in spectroscopy and in particular was finding out about the statistics of nuclei, namely that nuclei with even atomic number had Bose's Statistics, and [those] with odd atomic number had Fermi's Statistics. And there was Amaldi, somewhat younger than I, who afterwards became the leading figure in postwar Italian physics. When all these... and there was also Racah who was working on group theory and later emigrated to Israel. Well, all these people brought their problems to Fermi, and so did I, and you would come to Fermi's office and say 'Well, I have this problem...' and explain in one sentence what you were interested in. And so Fermi would say 'Now let"s see. Let's sit down.' And for 15 minutes or so he would think about the problem in a general way, and at the end of the 15 minutes you had the rough outline of the answer and then you could go back either to your lab or to your paper and put in the mathematics and figure it out. And so Fermi gave me the wonderful method of doing things quickly and easily, any problem can be solved, any problem can be solved by sitting down for 20 minutes and thinking about it, starting from... from first principles. Sommerfeld never did that. Sommerfeld said 'Well here is the title of your problem, now you do it' and then you had to put in differential equations and if possible Bessel functions. For Fermi that didn't matter. You just did the mathematics the best way that came to your mind, and the physics was clear by the time you started.
So Fermi was a very important influence upon you?
Fermi was a most important influence, in fact I consider Sommerfeld and Fermi as equal in... as my teachers.

I was work... continuing to work on the level splitting in crystals and wanted to know now how rare earth atoms actually looked, and so I used the Fermi Atom. That is Fermi had applied his... his statistics to obtain the simple picture of an atom which gave the charge distribution of the electrons, and so I used that for the typical rare earth and calculated the wave functions of electrons in that potential. And I was very proud when Fermi then told me 'You should put that in to my Thesaurus piarum; the treasury of wave functions', and I don't know whether that was preserved, but anyway there it was. I never did anything. And then we did the... this joint paper about various approaches to relativistic collision theory and I wrote a paper on... on the stopping of electrons... of relativistic electrons, which Fermi then later on modified. Then taking into account that in a solid, or in any condensed material there is a dielectric constant, and you have to take that into account, and that reduces the stopping power somewhat.

I was asked to write an article for the big Handbuch der Physik by Geiger and Scheel, and to write an article about one and two electron problems. And in this I brought together everything that was known about the quantum treatment not only of hydrogen, but also of two electron problems. I had done the hydrogen negative ion, I had been very interested in the Hartree approach of... to heavier atoms where you use the charge distribution of all other electrons to make the potential for any one electron. In fact I was interested in that from the beginning and Ewald had made me even more interested in it. So I wrote a Handbuch article of some 300 pages on this subject. I brought together the theory of the hydrogen atom, including the continuum wave functions, the optical properties, or some rules... sum rule of oscillator strength, sum rule oscillator strength times energies difference, and so on. And then the collision problem... everything I knew about the collision problems from my work, and in addition polarization of the radiation which is emitted after an electron collision. So I put in absolutely everything that I knew.
[Q] Stark effect, Zeeman effect, fine structure, hyperfine structure.
Indeed. All of these, the Stark effect and Zeeman effect in particular, including Stark effect in very strong fields.

[Q] The life time of excited states of Hydrogen.
Yes, and life time also of the first excited state of Helium, which is metastable because it is a triplet state and the transition has to be to the singlet ground state. So all that is in this article. Then, when that was... when I did some of that in Rome, I think most of it in my second term in Rome in 1932, in fact at that time I spent most of the time writing that Handbuch article. Then while this was going on I was asked to write a second article, that is really Sommerfeld was to write an article on electron theory of metals, and Sommerfeld told me 'I will accept this only if you do - you meaning me - if you do 90% of the work and get 90% of the honorarium.' And the honorarium was very substantial in those days. It started me out when I had to emigrate. So when I had finished the first Handbuch article, I began writing the second which kept me busy until 1933, and I included again everything I knew and could find about solid state theory. I included the Wigner-Seitz Theory of how a metal electron actually looks in... in its crystal field, how that was connected to cohesion, binding energy of metals. I included all electromagnetic, ferroelectric effects and I think it was up to date at that time. It was in fact republished after the war by Springer who also published the first Handbuch and the first Handbuch article was then revised with Salpeter and brought up to date with much more relativistic theory put into it and that was then republished by Springer and also published in English by academic publication [Academic Press] in this country.

I came back to Sommerfeld and I had a fellowship which kept me alive and I served as the second assistant to Sommerfeld, and whenever... especially whenever an American came, he was assigned to me; 'You take care of him.' And one of them... there were two important Americans who came to Sommerfeld at the time. One was Kirkwood, who was a very substantial person in physical chemistry. And the other was Lloyd Smith who was younger and - he was just my age - and wanted to have a problem in quantum mechanics. So I asked him to do the theory of excited states in Helium, and he did that very well, to his satisfaction and my satisfaction, and he became important for me later on in life. I also had some... I think I had two doctorate students. One of them was Henneberg, who did for me a thesis on the scattering of electrons by heavy atoms, angular distribution and all that, which I think was a very good paper and Henneberg unfortunately was sent to the front in the Second World War and was killed in that.

I just looked at the problem in the Fermi way and solved it and then I wrote it down. The Handbuch article, people described in this way; that I had a stack of white paper on my left side and I filled it and then put it on my right side and at the end of the day the stack was on the right side.
[Q] And the stack was then sent on to the typist.
Yes.
[Q] And that essentially was more or less the final manuscript?
Yes, more or less. Yes, I think in those days I didn't change terribly much after it had been typed, I changed a little bit before it went to the typist. Nowadays, these papers go through three, four, five revisions and I correct the formulae and I correct the writing - but that's old age.
[Q] But it's also the world of word-processors and it's easier to make corrections than it was.
It's much easier, yes.  
[Q] And, so in... you come back and you're again an assistant at Sommerfeld's. You mentioned Henneberg. You said there was a second student that you...
Yes, a second student named Voss who met me again after the war, but I have much less to say about him. I don't even know what it was I gave him as a thesis. But he did finish his Doctors degree.
[Q] And at that stage you're already a Privatdozent, and therefore you can take...
Yes, I gave lectures, I guess about collision theory and I have the report of the university about the tuition payments that the students had made. It was the custom taken still from Middle Ages that the students had to pay, I don't know, 10 Marks apiece for attending a lecture, and so I got some hundred-odd Marks from the students from which then was deducted the income tax and several other things. And there is a very impressive statement from the university treasury paying me the 115.00 Marks which came out.

[Q] In 1928 you get your doctorate, and the honors.
Yes, in spring of 1930.
[Q] And in 1928 the doctorate is with what honors?
Summa cum laude.
[Q] With Wien being one of the examiners and he's very happy about your experimental knowledge.
Experimental knowledge, not about my experimental performance. But I knew about cosmic rays and he liked that.
[Q] And, for the Habilitationschrift, who decides that it's okay?
At that time you write your paper, the decision is actually just of your... by your professor, Sommerfeld, but formally you give a lecture to a whole group of faculty members and they... formally they decide that you're satisfactory.
[Q] And then you're officially made a Privatdozent, which gives you the right to teach at any German university.
Correct.

In the spring of '32 I went again to Rome, still on the Rockefeller Fellowship. This time I was almost completely occupied by writing the Handbuch articles, but I had a very good time. There were two other visitors, George Placzek and Edward Teller. George Placzek in... sat to my left in the same room in which I was writing. He had a very... he also was supposed to write a Handbuch article about the Raman Effect, but he found it far more difficult to deal with that. And so mostly he turned the pages, but there was not much on it. But I developed a very nice friendship with Placzek who was one of the nicest and most thoroughgoing people I have known. He was indeed studying the Raman Effect of molecules and later on he was... he studied the behavior of neutrons diffusing through matter. Every time he was extremely thorough and went to the sources. Usually he loved the library at the institute in Rome because he could follow the subject of Light Scattering back to 1800's, and he then used that in his article. We went out to dinner together every day and remained friends ever since. There was also Edward Teller who mostly worked outside the institute, but also worked about molecules and I got to know him also well and we also became friends.

After that I go back to Germany and this time I got an actual job, namely to be acting assistant professor, I think is the best translation, in Tübingen to teach theoretical physics. And this started out very nice. The professor, Geiger, was very nice to me and showed me all the experiments he was doing and I got immediately two graduate students and I gave my lectures which were attended not only by the graduate students, but also by some faculty. There was one very nice young man, assistant to Geiger, Hochse [Sexl] who later on became well-known in connection with the Mayer-Süss, the shell model of the nucleus, and who, as far as I believe, never became a real Nazi. Well, on the other hand this was the winter of '32 to '33 and Nazis were very strong and the student population of Tübingen was very Nazi. There were torch parades and all sorts of things, and there were a number of students who came with a swastika to... to my lectures. It certainly didn't look very good.

On 30th January, 1933, Hitler took over and formed the government and very soon he issued a law which said that any Jew and half Jew and any quarter Jew was forbidden from taking any government position, either federal or state in Germany. Well, I was half Jewish on my mother's side and so it was clear I could not hold any university position because all universities were state universities. I believe that is still the case in Germany. So in April one of my two graduate students wrote me a letter. 'I see in the newspaper, that you have been dismissed from your position. What shall I do?' So I answered him ,'I didn't know about that. Now please send me the newspaper, and I don't know what you will do. You'll have to find yourself a different professor. I anyway have to leave.' And about a week later I got a letter from Geiger who now was quite cold and acted as if he had never known me, that it had been decided to terminate my professorship forthwith. And still a week later I got a letter from the Department of Education of the State saying that I was dismissed. So I went back to Sommerfeld, who again had a fellowship for me and who gave me hospitality for the summer semester of '33. It was a tense situation of course. Sommerfeld was very friendly and always remained so. There was one Nazi graduate student there, and there was the... and there was also an American there and the American and I often talked about the awful things the Nazis did. And fortunately the machinist in Sommerfeld's institute was very alert and came to us and said 'Kids, don't do that. There is the Nazi student. He'll turn you in if... if you continue to have such discussions here in the institute.'

We received the papers by Chadwick about the discovery of the neutron, and I was extremely interested and offered to give a talk about it before the colloquium. But Sommerfeld and Gerlach - Gerlach had replaced Wien as the Professor of Experimental Physics - got wind that the students would demonstrate against it, so they advised me not to give that talk. I could talk in the Sommerfeld seminar, I could give my lectures on theoretical physics in Munich until late in the semester I got a letter that I had also been dismissed as Privatdozent. Now Sommerfeld was extremely well-known all over the world, and he was extremely concerned and he very soon procured for me a position for the fall in Manchester. He knew Sir Lawrence Bragg very well, and I got a job... teaching instead of Williams who was [the] theoretical lecturer there. And so I prepared to emigrate to... to England. Before that however, still in April, I got a letter from Heisenberg who asked me to become his assistant in place of Bloch, who of course had also been dismissed, and I had to write Heisenberg that I would love to do it but I was afraid that I had the same trouble in my ancestry.

In 1933 emigration from Germany was very easy, you just had your passport and I could even take along the little money I had saved and receive in England the honorarium for my second Handbuch article. So that got me well started, and in a way it was very fortunate for me to emigrate because the world opened much more widely, and especially fortunately, it turned out that in Manchester there was also Rudi Peierls who had become a friend of mine in Munich and who had a wife and a newborn baby and offered me a room in his house which made me feel completely at home. So not only did I have a good place to stay, but in addition to that, Peierls and I could discuss physics constantly. We lived together, we went to the lab and we discussed physics almost all the time. Peierls was much more open to the... news in physics than I was, so he was well-informed about everything that went on in nuclear physics.

Now, Heisenberg, as soon as the neutron had been discovered, wrote two very useful papers saying 'Well now we know how the nucleus is made up. It's made of neutrons and protons. They are substantial particles, they can very easily fit into the nucleus by wave mechanics. We can get their wave functions inside the nucleus. We can get their interaction.' And then after Heisenberg, Majorana improved that interaction, Wigner got into the act and suggested a third type of interaction. Heisenberg actually was wrong about the interaction he proposed. Majorana was the one most closely right, and so Peierls and I both began working on nuclear physics.

Peierls found out that a very interesting experiment was being done at Cambridge by Chadwick and Goldhaber. Goldhaber later became the Director of the Brookhaven National Laboratory. He was a very smart graduate student at that time, and they had discovered that the deuteron, that is the atom of hydrogen of atomic weight 2, could be disintegrated by gamma rays from a natural radioactive substance. You have to remember that at that time there was not yet available any accelerated proton which had high energy, so one had to rely on the high energy particles which nature provided, and fortunately the gamma ray from one of the thorium daughters has an energy just big enough to disintegrate a deuteron, in fact an energy of 2.6 million electron volts, and the binding energy of the deuteron is 2.2. So they managed to disintegrate the deuteron and get the track of the proton which comes out of it to measure the length of that track, and then using the range-energy relation they could determine that the proton which came out had an energy of about 0.2 million electron volts. Neutron obviously had the same energy, so they could calculate the deuteron binding energy.

Peierls and I went to Cambridge to discuss this with Chadwick and Goldhaber, which was very interesting. And Chadwick then said to the two of us 'Well, I bet you, you cannot make a theory of that.' So there was a five hour train trip back from Cambridge to Manchester and during that train trip Peierls and I solved the problem of the theory of this disintegration, and we then wrote a paper about that. Having... when we assumed I think we had thought of that before, and I believe also Heisenberg had thought of that, that the range of the forces between neutron and proton, the nuclear forces, must be very short, very short compared to the size of the deuteron, and that made it very easy to write down the wave function of the deuteron. In fact we could write it down on the train still, and it's beautifully simple and knowing that we could also solve the problem of the scattering of neutrons by protons that was being experimented on, and we calculated to start the cross section for that scattering was very closely related to the binding energy of the deuteron. And from that we calculated that the cross section should be about 3*10-24 cm2. 10-24 cm2 is called a Barn. For a nucleus it's the cross section as big as a barn, as one of my later colleagues at... at Cornell invented, and so we calculated 3 Barns. The unfortunate thing however was that people did [the scattering] experiments on it, many of them at Columbia University, and they found about 20 Barns instead of 3 Barns, and that 20 Barns was obtained even after Fermi had shown that there is a correction for the binding of the two deuterons in the molecule. The actual figure the experimenters had found was 50 Barns, but Fermi's correction brought it down to 20. So obviously our theory of this scattering was very beautiful but unfortunately wrong.

I talked to Wigner, and Wigner found the solution and told it to me on a subway train from Columbia University to... to Penn Station, which was very noisy, but at that time I had good ears so I could hear him. So Wigner said 'Now look here, you know the binding energy of the deuteron which had a spin of one, that is, the spins of proton and neutron are parallel. But you don't know anything about what happens if the spins are antiparallel and you have total spin zero. How do you know that such a deuteron has the same binding energy?'  And that indeed was the solution of the problem. The deuteron of spin zero has very small binding energy, and therefore a very large cross section for scattering of neutrons by proton. So Wigner gave us that solution which I later on put into a big, comprehensive article. Wigner himself never found it interesting enough to publish it, but Teller then followed it up and said 'Well, if the scattering depends so much on the relative spin of the... of proton and neutron, then there should be interesting effects when you use, at low temperature, a parahydrogen and orthohydrogen.' In parahydrogen you have a molecule in which the spins of these two protons are opposite; in orthohydrogen they are parallel. Now if you make parahydrogen therefore, you find out that your cross section will be quite different, and Teller got a very good postdoc to calculate that for him. His name was Julian Schwinger and they published an interesting paper and when the Columbia experimenters used parahydrogen, indeed they found all the effects that Teller and Schwinger had predicted.

Well my duties were very slight. I was to give two lectures a week for I think four weeks, may be it was six weeks, in which I explained the elements of quantum mechanics and occasionally after the war some people came to me and told me; 'I was a student in your quantum mechanics class in 1934 in Manchester and that was very good.' So that was nice. Then Bragg had made a theory together with Williams concerning the behavior of certain alloys, metal alloys. The prototype was an alloy of gold and aluminum, one aluminum and three gold, and this alloy, as you can find out by X-rays, has a very regular arrangement. It's a lattice, similar to the lattice of sodium chloride in which atoms of... of aluminum and atoms of gold alternate quite regularly, and one could follow the way this... this arranged itself as a function of temperature. At low temperature you had this regular arrangement, but if you heated that alloy to, let's say 500 degrees, then the atoms would become random.
And so Bragg and Williams have made a theory of that which was similar to the theory of Weiss of ferromagnetism; mainly they said there is an ordering field which takes hold at low temperature. So Bragg asked Peierls and me to do more about it, and I spent a lot of my time making this theory more theoretical, calculating the interaction of intervening atoms. And I found out that you could do this without invoking any general ordering field; just take the interaction of the atoms in pairs just like in ferromagnetism, and just like the Ising theory of ferromagnetism, and then it would turn out that at a certain temperature, the Curie Point, order would set in. And that's what the experiments actually showed.

And I found also that above the transition point, the Curie point, order was still persisting in a local way. There was no order... no long range order, that is, an atom of gold here doesn't know about an atom of aluminum there, but the neighbors know about it and so the neighbors still have good order. And so I introduced the concept of short range order versus long range order. Short range order doesn't change very much, well it changes some at the Curie point, and I could calculate that the transition would be a second order transition, that is the... there would not be a latent heat, but the specific heat would have a peak and then go down to a more normal level, but there would still be some specific heat which was connected with the destruction of local order when the temperature rises higher. So that fit the experiments very nicely and I think made Bragg very happy. And Peierls afterwards made my theory a lot better. Instead of counting configurations of atoms, he went back to good statistical mechanics and made the theory really respectable.

Ferromagnetism had interested me greatly. Heisenberg had made a theory of it in which his main point was that the exchange interaction between neighboring atoms must be attractive. But it was a rather phenomenological theory, and I wanted to do it better. There was the Ising theory which... of a linear chain of atoms which was purely classical. But I knew very well that electrons have spin, and in fact it was the spin of electrons which was important for making ferromagnetism, and so I decided already at Rome in the spring of '32 to make a quantum theory of... of ferromagnetism, I hoped. So I considered again a linear change, just like Ising had, but I treated the spin exchange properly by quantum mechanics, spin being a non-commuting variable. And I found the solution.   I made an Ansatz, which is now known as the Bethe Ansatz, that you get product of functions, each function being ei*delta where delta is the phase shift of the two electron wave function as you go from one atom to the next. So in terms of that phase shift I could write down the wave function of the entire chain, using a Slater Determinant and calculate the energy levels, and as expected at low energy I would get ferromagnetism. And you can just as easily do it for antiferromagnetism where you have repulsive interaction between neighboring spins; and then at higher temperature the order gets less and finally you get a Curie point and you get... you get only paramagnetism instead of ferromagnetism. And on the basis of this I was invited to a conference on ferromagnetism at Leipzig, I think it was April '33.
[Q] '34... oh '33.
'33 definitely.
[Q] And so you went...
Now this paper of mine, the so-called Bethe Ansatz, has been very much used in condensed matter physics and I haven't the slightest idea what people did with it. In fact from time to time I listened to a talk about it, as I did a year and a half ago, and what people have made of it seems to be totally unrelated to my original paper, but they claim that the Bethe Ansatz was important for their work.

Alpha radioactivity, that is the emission of helium nuclei by natural radioactive nuclei, had been well explained by Gamow, but beta radioactivity was a different matter entirely - in two ways. For one thing beta particles, that is an electron, can really not exist in a nucleus. As I said earlier, its wave length is about a hundred times the radius of the nucleus. And secondly the electrons come out with varying energy, because beta rays don't have a definite energy for a given radioactive nucleus, but they go all over the map up to some maximum energy. And that seemed queer enough, so that Niels Bohr had the idea that maybe conservation of energy doesn't hold in this case. Pauli, who always, was very strict and held to the laws of physics said 'That's nonsense. Even if you, Niels Bohr, said it, it still is nonsense. Energy must be conserved and so we have to assume that the... in beta radioactivity another particle must also be emitted, and that particle must be neutral, have no charge, must be invisible because it has no charge, and he... and part of the energy goes to the electron and part to the neutrino. And that way also we can conserve spin; namely we know that all nuclei with even atomic weight have... have integral spin and so if they then emit an electron when an electron has a spin of a half, how can that be? We need another particle of spin of a half so that the new nucleus which still has even atomic weight can again have integral spin.'

Well, Pauli's idea was taken up by Fermi, who produced a beautiful and very convincing theory which is... which still remains right to the present day, the first point of which was that electron and neutrino are... do not exist in the nucleus but are formed at the moment of disintegration, just like a quantum, like quantum is formed at the moment when the atom makes a transition, it isn't in the atom beforehand. And so you don't need to assume any electrons in the nucleus, electrons are newly formed, two particles come out simultaneously. He used the Dirac mechanism for creating particles and so you have the emission of an electron and a neutrino. Well, that seemed very convincing, and indeed is still right today, but there was the question - could you ever observe a neutrino? So Rudi Peierls and I thought about that and came to the conclusion there are two possible ways a neutrino could show itself. It might have a magnetic moment, but that seemed rather far-fetched since it had no charge. In that case you could observe ionization and one little paper I wrote was... discussed just what a magnetic neutrino would do when going through matter. But more likely it did not have a magnetic moment, and in that case the only way how you could observe a neutrino is if the neutrino caused in turn the inverse of a beta decay, that is, the neutrino would go into the nucleus; an electron would come out. And at that time it seemed just incredibly unlikely that one could ever observe that. Fortunately nature knows its way better than we did, and nuclear power was invented and in a nuclear power reactor you get just incredible numbers of neutrinos produced all at one time and at one point, so that later on, well after the war, it was possible to observe neutrinos causing electrons, ejecting electrons from... from a nucleus. But Peierls and I said 'Well, if this is the only way a neutrino can show itself, it is likely that it will never be observed.' So we were quite right saying that this is the only way how a neutrino can be observed, but we were fortunately quite wrong saying that it can never be observed.

[Q] You spent a year in Manchester and then...
And half a year in Bristol.
[Q] You receive an offer to be a fellow at Bristol for the entire year or just for the semester?
For the entire year, but I quit in the middle of that year because I got an offer from Cornell, and this offer was largely due to the fact that I had taken good care of Lloyd Smith when he was in Munich and Cornell was very ambitious. They wanted to go into nuclear physics, and... well, Lloyd Smith had taken care of introducing me to the department chairman when... when this person, Professor Gibbs happened to come to Europe, so I was known to Gibbs as well as to Smith. So they made me an offer as an acting assistant professor at Cornell with the possibility that I would then stay as a fully assistant professor.
[Q] This was actually for the fall of 1934.
It was for the fall of '34, but I had promised Nevill Mott to come to Bristol and went there and said I am coming here, but I will come to Cornell then for the second semester.
[Q] You indicated that you were well-known to Lloyd P Smith and to Gibbs, but it's probably also correct to say that you were well-known in the world of physics by that time.
I was sufficiently well-known.
[Q] And recognised in terms of...
It was quite acceptable to nominate me as an assistant professor.
[Q] Well, you were very young.
Not so terribly young.
[Q] And it also presumably helped that Mr Bragg could write for you at that stage.
That certainly helped. I was welcomed by everybody in the department, except Richtmyer who was in a continual feud with Gibbs. Richtmyer had wanted to be department head and he was Dean of the Graduate School, and was very much against everything that Gibbs would do.

I came by boat, of course, to New York, and then from there by train to Ithaca. Ithaca was a sleepy little town and it seemed to me when I went for short walks that it was surrounded by nothing. When you went to the edge of Ithaca outside there was nothing. But the university was very lively. The university had good students and I gave my regular lectures, I think two courses. One was... one probably was something like electron magnetism, and the other was a special course on theory of collisions. Students were attentive and came very regular to the lectures, which isn't always true in Germany and even less in England.
[Q] And a course like a... the collision course would have how many grads... how big were the grad...?
There were about 40 graduate students, and about, oh, maybe 15 faculties. And I felt very soon quite at home. In fact already by the summer of... of '35 I felt quite at home here and while I went back to Europe for the summer, it was clear to me that... that America would be a good place to stay and remain. The faculty were extremely nice to me and I had the impression that probably I would stay here for a long, long time. There was a very nice senior theoretical physicist, Kennard, who had written a book about modern physics together with Richtmyer. There was a very nice experimental physicist, Murdoch, who later became Dean of the Graduate School, and there were assistant professors like Smith, and... quite a number of others. And there were nice graduate students, one of them stayed here for ever, that was Paul Hartman, who is still at Cornell.

There was a small cyclotron which was being built by Stanley Livingston who had been the right-hand man of Ernest Lawrence in building the first cyclotron at Berkeley. And I understand that while Lawrence had the idea, the actual building was done mainly by Livingston.
[Q] And when you say 'A small cyclotron...?'
It was really a pocket cyclotron. It could give protons of about 1 million electron volts, and deuterons of 2 million electron volts, and it could give helium at higher energy but I don't think this was ever used. Deuterons were the favorite projectile to... to bombard nuclei with because they had such very strong reaction with any nucleus, and so it was deuteron reactions which were mainly investigated. So I very soon got very close to Livingston. Livingston had a card file of all papers on nuclear physics which had ever appeared, and Livingston was a very good experimenter, but didn't know much about the theory, so he was happy to have my explanation. And in this atmosphere I even did one... my only experimental paper. One of Livingston's students, I think his name was Weeks, was to follow Fermi in investigating the action of neutrons on nuclei. And so one evening, late evening, Weeks and I got together to count the reactions, I think the reaction makes alpha particles, which happen when you have argon and neutrons. My only experimental paper.

They wanted one more experimental physicist and we had a choice between, well, Gibbs... Gibbs asked me immediately to consult with him whom we should get, and there was a list of people finally narrowed to two, and among the two we thought the most lively would be Robert Bacher, who had started as a spectroscopist, who knew some theory, who was then instructor at Columbia and who was very happy to accept, I think again an instructorship here at... at Cornell. And this became a lasting friendship. Bacher came here and he was much more knowledgeable about physics than Livingston, and less good in doing... making apparatus. So the two formed a very good team and so we all three got together and worked together a great deal.

I got many invitations to speak at various universities and I found that in every place people were very receptive to my very simple nuclear theory based very largely on beta piles and a little bit more. And so I thought it would be useful to put it all down on paper. And sure enough one of my invitations was to Minnesota, which was the home of [John] Tate, the editor of the Physical Review, and Tate said 'Why, that's a wonderful idea. Why don't you write something for Reviews of Modern Physics?' So I began writing that. The first part was just about Static Problems, by myself... no, the first part was with... with Bacher. Bacher knew a lot about hyperfine structure, and its interpretation in terms of nuclear spin. And so he wrote the last chapter of this first part, and then the second part was about experiment, together with Livingston. And I expanded my calculations on stopping power for this purpose, and we put in together interpretation of a number of nuclear reactions. And while I was writing the first part Niels Bohr came out with his theory of the compound nucleus; and Fermi came out with his experiments together with four or five other Italian physicists on the action of neutrons on every nucleus in the periodic table, and he found radioactivities of many types.

The first artificial radioactivity however had been found by Curie and Joliot, when carbon was bombarded and made Nitrogen-13. But when Fermi found radioactivities all over and often several in the same target, and Fermi then found something... two very interesting things. One was that slow neutrons were much more effective than fast neutrons in getting into a nucleus. Of course slow protons never get into a nucleus because they are repelled by the... by the electric forces, but slow neutrons have an easy time, and slow neutrons having a very long wave length can get into the nucleus very easily. And Fermi himself brought the theory to that as well. But then he found also another interesting phenomenon; namely... he could pbut absorbers between the neutron source and the target, and there was one overall absorber which was boron, or one absorber for only slow neutrons which was cadmium, but then he also irradiated, let's say silver, and put a silver foil in between. And it turned out that the silver foil absorbed the neutrons which made radioactivity in silver much more strongly than it absorbed other neutrons. So this was explained by Bohr as a resonance phenomenon, and the resonance theory was immediately adopted by Fermi and by everybody else and I tried to explain these resonances by just taking the wave function of a neutron in the field of a nucleus, and then just as a one body problem there would be resonances with the spacings of maybe 1 million electron volt. But that wasn't at all what Fermi had observed, so I... then Bohr came and said 'No, that's not at all the way it works. The neutron gets caught in the nucleus and stays in the nucleus for a long time, maybe a thousand times the transit time of a neutron, and then finally it comes out again. And in between it forms a compound nucleus.' So the question that then arose was how many levels would such a compound nucleus have. The theory of scattering with the compound nucleus was made by Breit and Wigner and was obviously right and is still right, but now the question was how many resonances would there be.

As part of my first article in the Reviews of Modern Physics I tried to figure that and found that the number of resonance's would increase exponentially with the energy of the neutron and the energy of the neutron when... of a slow neutron when entering the nucleus is some 7 or 8 million electron volts, because that's what it would be bound by when it finally is captured. And at such an excitation energy you get a very high density of levels. Then very soon, Weisskopf introduced the concept of entropy, and said 'Well, the number of levels is es where s is the entropy', and in my first article I calculate the entropy as a function of excitation energy and atomic number. I also made a mistake in that but I think it's not important to dwell on that. In fact, one thing I should mention, I sent that paper to Peierls to look at, and Peierls was horrified by the sloppiness I had... I had used, and wrote me back a letter which went, taking off from the Dreigroschenoper in Germany; 'Erst komt das denken, dann das Integral.' First think and then carry out an integral.

[Q] You indicate you were very much taken up with the new science of nuclear physics which is now made possible by the cyclotrons and neutrons coming into being. But you still carry on your activities in solid state physics. And...
Well, I did... I gave theses in solid state physics and one of them to Van der Lage was actually quite a good thesis, in which he expanded my theory of levels in a solid state, level splitting, and actually obtained the wave functions which correspond to various levels, and that was useful.

I did go to many meetings of the American Physical Society; most... most of the meetings in New York and all the meetings in Washington which were held at the time of cherry blossoms, which was delightful. And in addition to the Physical Society meetings in Washington, there were small meetings which were organized by George Washington University and by the Carnegie Institution of Washington, jointly. Carnegie Institution had as its main physicist were Tuve who had built an accelerator to get protons up to about a million electron volts with very accurately controlled energy, and they were doing beautiful experiments on the scattering of protons by hydrogen, that is protons by protons, and we learned a great deal about nuclear forces from these experiments. They were carefully evaluated by Gregory Breit and his students. But what I was... wanted to talk about were these meetings. They were about one week long, a little earlier in spring than the Physical Society and there were maybe 20 physicists at each of these meetings, usually... were mostly theorists, but sometimes a couple of experimenters and then later on astrophysicists, but it was mainly theory. And we discussed very much nuclear theory. We discussed the problem of high energy electrons penetrating more matter than... than anybody thought believable. We discussed quantum electrodynamics, Breit was very interested in that.	    
[Q] And this was organized by Teller and...
By Teller, Gamow and Tuve.

The subject which interested me most was quantum electrodynamics, and one of the leading people in this was Robert Oppenheimer, but he didn't come to these conferences, but I knew that he was very good at it and very interested. I think Uhlenbeck did come to the conferences and knew something about quantum electrodynamics, and then beginning in '37, Weisskopf. So this was a great joy and I learned... I sort of explored the eastern part of the United States, as far west as Chicago and enjoyed all of it very much. One invitation was from the University of Illinois at Urbana, which led to an offer of a full professorship. I liked to be a full professor, but I'd rather be a full professor at Cornell, so I made that known to Professor Gibbs and then to the president of the university, and they matched my salary and... and made me also a full professor here. That happened in '37.

Rabi invited me very frequently to come to Columbia. On one of the occasions he showed me papers by an interesting graduate student who I think at that time may have been still at City College. His name was Julian Schwinger, and I looked at the papers and was much impressed and then Rabi got Julian to come and talk to me and he obviously knew at least as much as I did. So I wrote a letter to Rabi saying so and saying that indeed Julian Schwinger was... was ready to be a professor rather than a graduate student. And where we had... I had very good visits with Rabi who was deep in... in explaining... no, exploring magnetic resonance's, electron spin, nuclear spin, you name it, and he had very good students. One of them was Norman Ramsey who stayed in the field and was very productive.

There were two excellent ones: Emil Konopinski and Maurice Rose. And Rose died very young, but while he was here - well, he then went on to other places, but while he was here we wondered one time what would happen in a cyclotron as you increase the energy more and more. Lawrence at Berkeley was engaged in building bigger and bigger cyclotrons and we were wondering could that be done, would they always function? So we looked at the resonance between the orbit going around the cyclotron in the magnetic field, and we found that as long as the particle, proton or whatever, was nonrelativistic the periods of the orbit remained the same. But once the proton became relativistic the period would change, and it was important that the period of the orbit kept synchronous with the period of the electromagnetic field which was applied to accelerate the particle each time it came between the pole pieces. Well, we found that wasn't so, and we found that they would get out of step, or if they were in step, then the orbits would no longer remain circles but there would be defocusing. So we wrote a paper on that; that the orbits in a cyclotron are nicely focused and synchronous as long as you have no relativity, but once you get a relativity you get into trouble. Well, we got into trouble with Ernest Lawrence by writing this article and my name was mud in Berkeley and I got letters, furious letters. First a very down to earth scientific letter from a graduate student named Robert Wilson who was investigating this resonance in the cyclotron. Then a somewhat furious one by an associate professor called Ed McMillan, and then a really furious one from Ernest Lawrence; 'How can you dare doubt the omnipotence of cyclotrons?' Well, he wrote at the end of that letter: 'There are many ways to skin a cat.' Well it turned out that nobody knew a way to skin a cat, and indeed the cyclotrons as then designed did have a limit of maybe 20 million electron volts, maybe a little... maybe 50.

Almost 10 years later McMillan did skin the cat and found out that one could preserve synchronous orbits and focusing, by changing the frequency of the cyclotron and that hadn't been possible in 1936, but it was very possible in 1945 because in the meantime, radar had been developed at the MIT Radiation Lab, and so by the confluence of technical development and an ingenious inventor, this Synchrocyclotron was... was developed. It was invented at the same time in Russia by [Vladimir] Veksler and it was then built almost immediately after the war in Berkeley and was used very effectively by the Berkeley group including Panofsky. And at the same time another instrument was invented by Don Kerst at Illinois which was the Betatron in which electrons were accelerated, already having relativistic velocities, keeping the same orbit all the time. Then Macmillan and Veksler said 'Well one could combine these two and have a Synchrotron where... which was... betatron with changing frequency', which is nowadays the preferred method of accelerating particles to very high energy.

Dirac in 1928, I believe, in his relativistic theory of the electron, had found some very disturbing states, namely states of negative energy. And then clearly one couldn't have states with negative energy, so several people I think - Oppenheimer and Weyl - suggested that probably these states of negative energy were all filled and whenever you had a hole in such states that... that indicated...
[Q] Can I interrupt you for a second, because I think what happened was that it's Dirac who filled all the holes, but he believed that they would be protons.
Correct, he thought they would be protons, and Weyl and Oppenheimer said 'No they have the same mass as the electron and therefore they are positively charged electrons.' And then these positively charged electrons were found experimentally, I believe first by Anderson and Neddermeyer in Pasadena, who demonstrated quite clearly that in cosmic rays there were particles which curved the wrong way round in a magnetic field and had on the other hand the mass of an electron. So there we had positrons, and by the time I got to England in '33 they were well recognized, and... together with Heitler I produced a theory of the radiation emitted by high energy electrons and the production of positron and electron pairs. Well practically all the real work was done by Heitler together with an Austrian physicist, Sauter, but I was worried that the cross section predicted by the theory diverged at high energy. So I decided there must be some limit to that and so I discussed what would happen at high energy due to the fact that an electron after... an atom after all is neutral, so the nuclear charge would be screened by the electrons of the atom. And so instead of that, you would have a... there would an effect of the... of the screening of... of the charge of nucleus by the electrons, and that would lead to the cross section remaining finite.

[Q] That begins your interest in the limits of quantum electrodynamics?
It does indeed. In this paper, with Heitler, we tried to compare the theory with high energy electrons, and the only high energy electron which were... which were available were from cosmic rays and we predicted that cosmic ray electrons would lose a lot of their energy by going through rather small amounts of matters, maybe a... a centimeter of lead would do it, slow them down definitely. But experiments showed that wasn't the case.   Well, in this connection I was approached, still in England at a conference in London, I was approached by Arthur Compton, who was one of the two leading cosmic ray physicists, the other being Millikan, and the two had a constant feud.

I was approached by Arthur Compton, who was one of the two leading cosmic ray physicists, the other being Millikan, and the two had a constant feud.   So Compton said 'You have proved that electrons should lose lots of energy in matter, in the atmosphere for instance. How could electrons get down to earth so easily? It must be something else. Cosmic radiation cannot be electrons and it cannot be gamma rays, because gamma rays would immediately make electrons. So,' suggested Compton, 'probably they are protons.' And I said 'Yes, probably they are protons.' And Compton went on to say 'Well, there is a phenomenon observed on cosmic radiation, namely that they are deflected in the earth's magnetic field,' I think to the east, I'm not sure, it could be to the west, 'and that indicates that they are positively charged and are... and therefore they ought to be protons.' So I think that was an important step by Compton, and we have a joint paper on... on that subject. Later on it turned out that many of the particles we see in the cloud chamber at sea level are neither protons nor electrons, but are mesons - but that's a different story, but I got interested in mesons very much.

The Bethe-Heitler formula [theory] was completely verified by experiment here at Cornell, and one of the experiments, for instance, was done by McDaniel on pair production, the pair production cross section turned out exactly what was predicted.

Yukawa predicted a meson as the particle which holds the nucleus together. There is obviously a strong force in the nucleus, as there is a strong electric force, and an easy way to visualize the electric force is to say that a photon is emitted by one charged particle and absorbed by another, and so Yukawa said some other particle must be emitted to make the much stronger nuclear force. 'And I know', said Yukawa, 'that the nuclear force is short range, and I can easily do that by giving mass to that particle'. So he postulated a particle of intermediate mass which nowadays is called a meson, to transmit the nuclear force. The trouble was, and that trouble only became gradually evident, that the meson you saw in cosmic ray didn't have the properties that Yukawa had predicted - but I think that's anticipating. But I was terribly interested.
[Q] Then you actually work on trying to unravel or decipher all the meaning of a...
I worked on cosmic ray showers and I worked on neutrons and cosmic rays with Placzek.
[Q] And you worked on Yukawa Theory.
And I worked on Yukawa theory trying to apply it to the deuteron, and it worked very nicely for the deuteron and it was able to predict that the forces between neutron and proton are not purely central forces, and you needed that in order to explain that the deuteron has an electric quadrupole moment. That quadrupole moment had been observed at Columbia by Rabi's collaborators, and so the Yukawa theory gave possibility of explaining why there should be non-central forces between nucleons which would explain the quadrupole in the deuteron.

[Q] You mention Rose and Konopinski, and... you had mentioned earlier, Viki Weiskopff comes roughly at the same time to Rochester...
Yes, well let me mention about Konopinski. He came to me on the recommendation of Uhlenbeck, whom I asked when I had a postdoctoral position, should I take a certain man, and Uhlenbeck wrote back 'No, I don't recommend that man, but I recommend Konopinski.' Konopinski turned out not only a very good physicist, but also a very nice person with whom I remained in contact for many, many years. His specialty was beta disintegration and he continued beta disintegration all his life and wrote the basic book on this subject.
[Q] So by '37, '38, there's really a nucleus of people.
There is indeed, and with Weisskopf being at Rochester, there are many visits back and forth. Anyway the Rochester Department and the Cornell Department were... used to visit each other constantly anyway, and so that was a very useful... the head of the Rochester Department was DuBridge who was a very good physicist and who became the Director of the MIT Radiation Lab, and later the President of the California Institute of Technology.

It's a very stimulating atmosphere, certainly not the desert that I thought surrounded Ithaca when I first came here.
[Q] And just to complete that picture, before we come to another facet of the late '30s, you now have how many students doing PhDs for you by the '37, '38?
I think three. At least three I remember. Meiers, Baroodi and van der Lage.
[Q] And then the two postdocs.
And the two postdocs.
[Q] And you teach of the order of three to four courses a year.
Yes.
[Q] And summers are... You should say one thing about summers.
Well in the summer of '36 and '38 I went to the summer school at Ann Arbor, which was a great institution. It brought together many guest lecturers. Fermi was there at one time, not simultaneous with me. I think Breit was there at the same time as I. Ewald was there together with me in '38, and there was a stimulating group of theorists at Michigan: Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit and...
[Q] Laporte...
Laporte and Colby.

In 1938 Teller and Gamow decided to do astrophysics rather than plain theoretical physics, and I was really not interested in that, and I said I would skip this conference. But Teller persuaded me to come and it turned out to be very interesting. I had known Eddington's theory of the interior of the sun, and I had known that he predicted the temperature at the center of the sun to be 40 million degrees. Well I should probably mention first one thing that preceded that conference, namely Gamow had proposed his graduate student Critchfield to do something about the energy in the sun. And Critchfield found the suggestion by von Weizsäcker in Germany that maybe two protons could get together to form a deuteron with the emission of a positron and a neutrino. But neither [von] Weizsäcker nor Gamow thought much of this process. But Critchfield decided he'd do it anyway, and he started calculating it and it came out pretty well. So then Gamow told him 'Now really you should get together with somebody who really knows about the deuteron, namely Hans Bethe.' And Critchfield showed me... sent me his calculations, which looked quite good and I could somewhat make his calculations of the deuteron a bit more elegant, and so reduced the number of assumptions which he had put in. And so we wrote a paper together, making energy at the center of the sun by this reaction. Now this is quite a miracle because anything involving emission of electrons, positive or negative, is an extremely slow process. Beta decay of nuclei takes seconds or hours or days or years, whereas nuclear processes in general take something like 10-22 seconds, maybe as long as 10-20 seconds. And of course Fermi had explained that by his theory of beta decay and so the interaction, the weak interaction which makes beta decay is really just what it says, exceedingly weak. And so it is rather a miracle that such a weak interaction can give you enough energy to keep the sun radiating all the time.

The answer to this puzzle is that there is enormous time in the sun and there also is a very high number of particles, number of protons which can get together and the density of matter near the center of the sun being very high, you get an energy production which is large enough, 2 ergs per gram of sun per second. And because the sun has existed for 4 billion years there's enough time to produce all the energy that the sun has radiated during the interval. So the sun radiates just at the rate that is observed.
To be quite honest when we first did the calculation the sun radiated too much because we had those 40 million degrees, but, well, we put it down anyway. But then Teller persuaded me to come after all to that conference in Washington and at that conference was Strömgren, a Swedish astrophysicist who was most of his life in Denmark, and part of his life in Chicago, who had gone in to Eddington's calculations independently and had come to the conclusion to adopt the suggestion of Russell and Unsöld - namely that hydrogen is the main material in the sun.
[Q] May I interrupt you for just a second. The person who really should be given credit for that is Cecilia Payne, Cecilia Payne... and then it's Russell who picks up on that and popularises it, but it's Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin who's really the first person to...
Well, I am glad to learn. But it took quite a long time from their suggestion until Eddington himself and Strömgren, I think independently and I believe simultaneously, took up that idea and said 'Okay, the sun is made of hydrogen, and now our temperature goes down from 40 million degrees to 12 million degrees.' Well, that's a little too low, so Strömgren fed in a bit of helium and that got it back up. And at the moment everybody believes it's 15 million degrees, and that's just right so that the Critchfield-Bethe reaction, proton-proton giving deuteron plus positron, gives exactly the right amount of energy.

I came to that conference and was very astonished and pleased by Strömgren's long talks telling all of us about the internal constitution of stars and how it worked very well with hydrogen and helium, and that was very convincing. It was convincing also for another reason because with Eddington's old idea of a high temperature and the heavy atoms in the sun, he never could agree with the calculated opacity of material, opacity being the tendency of matter to absorb light and then to emit another quantum after the absorption. Now with the hydrogen helium it worked exactly right, the opacity was just what quantum theory predicted and so everybody was happy. Now, at the conference most of the discussion was about the build up of elements and I thought Weizsäcker had been there, but looking at the roster of the people at the conference, he wasn't there; it was Gamow reporting [for] Weizsäcker, and they had fantastic ideas that there should be neutrons made by beryllium and that would build up other elements and that all sounded to me wrong. In addition to that Strömgren made clear to us that heavier stars than the sun, for instance Sirius A, have a much higher energy production, not only total energy production but also energy production per unit mass. So one needed a nuclear reaction which would increase rapidly with increasing temperature. It was known from the theory of Eddington and Strömgren how the temperature would increase with the mass of the star, quite slowly, less than linearly with the mass of the star, and that was certainly not enough with the proton-proton reaction to explain the very high luminosity of brilliant stars like Sirius.

And so I went home from that conference and in the next several weeks I looked at other elements in the periodic table going just systematically to helium. Well, that wouldn't work, helium and hydrogen don't give you anything; helium and helium don't give you anything, because neither lithium-5 nor beryllium-8 are stable nuclei. So you had to go on and when you took lithium, beryllium, boron, they could give you a very big energy production together with hydrogen but they would then be totally exhausted immediately... until I came to carbon and carbon was totally different, namely when you start with carbon and add a hydrogen you get nitrogen-13 which disintegrates spontaneously into carbon-13. You can add another proton, make nitrogen-14, and then another proton making oxygen-15 and nitrogen-15, and finally when you have nitrogen-15 and add a proton, you don't get oxygen-16 as you might believe, but instead it disintegrates into carbon-12 and helium-4. And so you get your initial nucleus back, the carbon only acts as a... as a catalyst to bring four protons together to form a helium nucleus; from that you get all the energy release which is involved in that reaction, and you get it without having to invoke weak interactions like the proton-proton reaction. It is therefore generally accepted now that it is the proton-proton reaction for the sun, but it is the carbon cycle - carbon citrogen cycle - for all massive stars beginning a little below Sirius and going up all the way in the Stellar Table to the most luminous stars.

I then figured out that indeed the carbon nitrogen cycle at the predicted temperatures for instance for Sirius would give the right rate of energy evolution. And I wrote a paper on this which was published in the Physical Review early in '39, and before that in '38 I had a very brilliant graduate student by name of Robert Marshak who told me 'You have made such a fine theory, why don't you compete for the Cressy-Morrison Prize of the New York Academy of Science?' So I sent it in there and told the Physical Review to hold the paper until they had decided about the prize. I got the prize, $500.00 which was very useful at the time, and then the paper was published in the Physical Review.
[Q] But before then you had talked about it at various places and the report... that is, one can see reports in the New York Times and things like that before then about you having solved the problem. And Henry Norris Russell is a person who is influential in this dissemination.
Indeed. That's the way it went. I was asked, I think early in the fall semester of Harvard University, to give a talk at Harvard to which Henry Norris Russell came from Princeton and he asked some quite searching questions and I thought maybe the great man really doesn't believe me. But the great man did believe me and then made propaganda for my... for my theory from then on. This was the fall of '38, and soon the New York Times got interested and I gave an interview which was printed in The Times, that is I think the interviewer, probably Mr Lawrence, printed it in the New York Times and so it became known pretty well long before it was published in the Physical Review.

Marshak came here as a graduate student, I think it must have been early in '38, I'm not entirely sure.  
[Q] Fall of '37 probably.
And I gave him as a problem to think about the white dwarfs. The white dwarfs are peculiar stars; they have the mass about of the sun, they have much less luminosity and they have very small size, hence their name. And... so how... how can it be that the star of the mass of the sun can have such small size? Where is Eddington? And where is the energy production? Well Marshak very soon showed that if a star of such small size had the mass of the sun, then the temperature would get up to 10, 20 million degrees very near the surface, and so you would get energy production in hydrogen right there and what's left for the interior of the star? Well he concluded then that the white dwarf simply couldn't have any hydrogen, it could only have helium and heavier nuclei and only in that way could you explain that there could be such small size with such a large mass. Marshak's theory which was his thesis is recognized by astrophysicists as the fundamental theory of this... of white dwarfs. There is an astrophysicist at Cal Tech by the name of Greenstein who has worked on white dwarfs all his life and who says right from the beginning we would... be nowhere if it were not for Marshak's thesis. So after that thesis it was accepted that indeed they have no hydrogen, they have helium and heavier nuclei and most of them have helium only near the surface and in the interior they have only carbon and oxygen.

Now, the great question, how do you build up elements? How do you get beyond helium?   And there Edward Salpeter came in, who was a graduate student with Rudi Peierls in Birmingham and then was recommended by Peierls to me as  a postdoc. So whenever Peierls recommended somebody as a postdoc I eagerly took him, and vice versa, and so Salpeter came here and very soon he became interested in astrophysics. He came here, I think, in '48, but it took until '52 as far as I remember before he went to Cal Tech on a visit, being interested in astrophysics. He talked to Willy Fowler there and Fowler suggested to him 'Well, there's this problem. How are the elements built up?' And so Salpeter very soon found that indeed, if you had high temperature you could get from helium to carbon, namely two helium's can get together and make a beryllium-8. And if you have high temperature and high density, you have some probability of this beryllium-8 staying together, or maybe for one-billionth of a second, and that's enough to have a chance for another helium to get there while the beryllium-8 is there, and making... combining to make the stable nucleus, carbon-12. And he wrote that down and correctly calculated the temperature to be something of the order of a 100 million degrees instead of 20 [million degrees], and so at a 100 million degrees you would get this reaction and you would build up carbon.

Then came Fred Hoyle who said 'Well, once you have carbon, you... that very eagerly captures another helium nucleus to make oxygen, so you get both carbon and oxygen, and from there on it's not difficult to get further.' The important thing was to... to bridge the gap from helium to carbon. Now how do you get the high temperature? This was I think found mostly by Schwarzschild at Princeton, I believe still a couple of years later, who... and I think I also should mention Icko Iben at Illinois who followed the evolution of a star, let's say from Sirius in his... its later life, and he found that such a star would exhaust its hydrogen, and when it exhausts its hydrogen then the center would collapse and the center would get very... very hot, and I think that was first found by Schwarzschild. And the... the center then gets hotter and hotter until you get the Salpeter reaction of helium getting together, making carbon, and then the temperature stabilizes at 1[00] or 200 million degrees and it stays there for a long, long time building up carbon and... and oxygen.
[Q] Right, just a small footnote: When Ed Salpeter does his calculation he points out, I believe, in the beryllium-8, the existence of an excited state which is important in making... And it's a similar idea that Hoyle points to, I mean, for the carbon-12. I mean, so it just, pointing out...
That's... that's the way it was.
[Q] Yea, and Salpeter's contribution is really very fundamental to this.
Yes.
[Q] I mean it's... and...
Well the general ideas of... proton-proton reaction, carbon nitrogen cycle, and then contraction to... to a very hot star, is generally accepted and... and one of the nice things is that some of the giant stars in their later evolution have near them clouds which are very rich in nitrogen. Now that is a direct observational confirmation of the carbon nitrogen cycle, namely in... in that cycle the most stable element is nitrogen. So while originally you may have made carbon and oxygen, once you assemble these in a star like Sirius, you manufacture mostly nitrogen, and when that star gets older you manufacture it closer to the surface and you have convection near the surface which pushes out some of that material and you then get a cloud near the brilliant star which... which emits the lines of nitrogen in fluorescence.

In 1967, early in the morning at six o'clock or so, I got a phone call, and at the other end is a television producer at Stockholm telling me that I was just awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for the year 1967. And that of course was a wonderful... news. I got telephone calls one after the other and we traveled... my wife and I traveled to Stockholm and had a wonderful time there. The Swedes really know how to put on a feast and how to make everybody enjoy the week, the Nobel week, I should say, which in fact is taking place just now. In fact right on this day the Nobel Prize is being handed over by the King of Sweden to this year's winners, two of whom are from Cornell University.

The discovery by Hahn and Strassmann of fission; that the nucleus of uranium when bombarded by neutrons could split into two approximately equal fragments. Well, Hahn and Strassmann discovered chemical evidence that this happened, and Frisch and Meitner interpreted it correctly as the splitting into two parts, and they coined the word fission. Niels Bohr was very impressed by this. He had Frisch in his lab at the time and was conscious that this was a terribly important discovery with practical consequences. The Washington meeting which used to be held in early spring was this time held much earlier, I don't remember precisely when, but it was brought together and Tuve, one of the organizers, excluded the press this time.

The discovery of fission, as many physicists realized, brought with it the possibility of having a nuclear chain reaction, namely a neutron makes a fission in uranium and that emits several neutrons which then could fission another uranium and that could give you a chain reaction so that essentially all the uranium would disintegrate. And in this disintegration an enormous amount of energy would be set free, so it was clear to most physicists that this could lead to a new source of power and to a new weapon.   Tuve wanted to keep that secret from the press. There was a lot of discussion at this Washington meeting in 1939 not connected with far away stars, but connected with tremendous energies on this earth. Enrico Fermi had come over to the United States, just at the same time. He was settled at Columbia University and he made it his business to explore the process of fission in detail and possibly make the chain reaction a reality.

Niels Bohr and John Wheeler set out at the same time to understand the theory of fission and they wrote the fundamental paper on the subject and came to the conclusion that it was the rare isotope of Uranium-235 which was responsible for fission. That, in a way, was perhaps good, because in order to make a bomb it would be necessary to... to separate the uranium isotopes which turned out to be a very difficult task. In fact the Germans who were of course very much aware of the possibilities, decided very early that the isotope separation was beyond their means. Not so the English. In England very soon two scientists, Rudolph Peierls and Otto Frisch came to the conclusion that a bomb could be made, and another refugee scientist, Francis Simon, concluded that it was possible to separate uranium isotopes by a fairly straightforward method which in the long run however took an enormous amount of... of technical and industrial development.

Most people, certainly most physicists were aware that war between Germany and the Western powers was imminent, and it did break out early September of '39. America entered it only two years later in December of '41, but American scientists generally were very much aware of it and so voluntarily they gave up their normal research and in large numbers volunteered to do work useful for the war effort.   The most important effort was for the Radiation Laboratory at MIT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which brought together, I think, probably the best experimental American physicists and a few theoretical ones to explore the possibilities of radar. In this they followed the pioneer work that the English had done making radar useful for... in war and making it possible by radar to blunt the Nazi attack on England in the fall of 1940. The real impetus to this war work came in the summer of 1940 when the Nazi armies overran all countries in Western Europe that they were attacking. First of course - not in Western Europe - Poland, but then in Western Europe all the smaller countries and finally France. Everybody had expected that France would be a very strong country and could resist the Nazi aggression, but it turned out that France fell within a few weeks, and this gave a terrible shock to the people, both in England and the United States, seeing that the Nazi armies were essentially irresistible. We all knew that Nazi Germany completely overturned the Western values, so it was not just a defense of nationality, but it was a defense of the values which had grown up in the Western world since the Renaissance - 400 years. And it was this which made American scientists volunteer to do war work. Now war work by scientists, of course, was not a new thing at all. It goes back to antiquity when Archimedes of Syracuse defended the city of Syracuse against the Roman power with his inventions which were very ingenious inventions to combat a powerful army by use of his scientific knowledge.

[Q] At this stage you're still not an American citizen, but you're clearly very concerned, as you say, about Western values. And so, how do you get involved? You can't, so to say, officially participate since you're not a citizen. But on your own you already start.
I started very early and in particular I felt that I should use my talents to do something. In particular Edward Teller, my good friend, and I decided that we would go to a man who was prominent in aviation, Theodore von Kármán, who was well-known to Edward Teller and was perhaps the most knowledgeable scientist in the science of aviation. So we both went down to Los Alamos to Pasadena to consult von Kármán [on] what we could do without getting actual clearance by the authorities. 'Well,' said Kármán, 'there is something very important for us. It would be very helpful to us if you would investigate shock waves, shock waves being produced for instance by a very high speed plane, by a supersonic plane when it flies through the air. And now we' Kármán said, 'we aerodynamicists have well under control the general theory of shock waves, but we don't know what happens at the very beginning of a shock wave. After all, there's the air and it's in its normal state, but when the shock has gone through it is at high temperature, let's say 5000 degrees, and we know very well that an equilibrium in this case the molecules are in a high state of vibration. How does it happen?'  So Teller and I got together and he was very expert in molecular physics. He knew that to excite the vibrations of molecules takes a lot of energy; they get into equilibrium only when you get well above 1000 degrees, and so... and when you start out with air at normal temperature it's very difficult to excite the vibrations. So we thought about the problem and wrote a paper about the attainment of equilibrium after a shock wave showing that this is a slow process, it doesn't happen immediately after the shock, but it takes a certain time and especially the excitement of vibrations is difficult. Even more difficult is it to make chemical reactions in the air. If you go to really high temperatures, 5000 degrees or so, then oxygen and nitrogen will react and form the molecule NO, and that takes even more energy than to excite the vibrations.

So we wrote a paper together and since that was obviously of interest for aviation and probably for the coming war it was never published. It was printed and distributed by the Aberdeen Proving Ground arm of the US Army and I guess we could get copies of it. It was not classified, that is it was not officially secret, but it could not be published in a journal. It has not been published to the present day in any journal, but it has been published in independent pamphlets and it was the starting point for many experimental investigations after the war. In fact shock waves were used as a means to study the rate of chemical reactions in air, and it could also be used for other gases. In particular Arthur Kantrowitz made a life work out of this and studied the rate of molecule... of chemical reactions and similar things in various gases by using our paper.
[Q] You actually also write at this very same time and connected with the same project a paper on shock waves in systems with specified equations of state, I mean more general investigation of...
I did that, encouraged especially by John von Neumann who was deep in war work from the very beginning and it's not a terribly important paper. But I found one curious point, namely in a shock wave normally the matter is compressed, but if you take water between 0oC and 4oC, then it expands under a shock wave.

I thought it would surely be important to defend allied warships against submarine attacks, and so I wanted to understand the theory of armor penetration. Now this I did starting from the Encyclopaedia Britannica, which had a nice article about it, and then I got together with my friend George Winter, who was a civil engineer at the... at Cornell University. And together we did some experiments pushing metal cylinders through a half inch plate of other material, which confirmed my theory and I wrote a paper on that. And that paper I couldn't see during the war, but it was used afterwards by Nevill Mott in England with some collaborators to further study this subject.

I knew about the establishment of the Radar Laboratory at MIT and I wondered how to be useful on that. So I gave a course at Cornell University about the propagation of electromagnetic waves in wave guides, which was attended by both physicists and engineers. And I assembled a small group of theoretical physicists, including Julian Schwinger, to work on the theory of propagation in wave guides, and we, I think, produced a few papers which were found useful by the radiation laboratory. Finally, in... just about a day after the Pearl Harbor attack, I got my clearance and was able to come to the Radiation Lab in person and finally to join it in, I guess, May or June of '42.
[Q] And so - who... the beginnings of '42 you're involved in radar work. You actually publish even during the war some work on diffraction through small apertures and things like that, related to this work.
Yes, and there was a colleague at the radiation lab, who said 'Well, but you have done about diffraction through small apertures really was already done by Lord Rayleigh.' Of course I didn't know about that. But I did one useful piece of work, maybe two. One was to explain the action of a semiconductor which after the war led Bardeen and others to invent the Transistor. And the other, which I pursued much further was the problem of two wave guides coupled to each other the... through a small aperture, and it was possible just by theory to tell what would happen in the second wave guide - namely if in the first wave guide there was a wave running east, then in the second wave guide there would be a much weaker wave running west. And this device is known as the Bethe Coupler, and was then mentioned to my kid brother who is 28 years younger than I, studied electrical engineering and one day he was told about the Bethe coupler. And it is used to find out just how the waves run in a wave guide.

I thought I was settled at the Radiation Laboratory for the duration of the war, and this would have been quite satisfactory, but Robert Oppenheimer called me and said he needed me for another project. And he made it clear that this was related to uranium fission and I don't precisely remember how he made that clear. Anyway I agreed to join for the summer of '42 and proceeded to travel west to San Francisco and Berkeley, and on the way I visited Chicago. In Chicago in the physics department one part of the building had been closed off and made secret. That was where Enrico Fermi pursued his quest for establishing a chain reaction of fission in natural uranium. And after many tries it was now clear, it was made clear to me that the chances were very high that Fermi would succeed and that then the chain reaction would produce plutonium-239 which was fissionable just like uranium-235 and could be used as the active material in a nuclear weapon. Because of that the project at Chicago which was under the direction of Arthur Compton decided that it was now time to be serious about actually building a nuclear weapon and that to build, to develop the theory of that they had appointed Oppenheimer to lead that project. So Oppenheimer assembled a group of... of theoretical physicists: Teller and myself, and Robert Serber who was already at Berkeley as Oppenheimer's right-hand man, two younger people from Berkeley and my old collaborator, Konopinski. In addition to that, van Vleck from Harvard. So we had a summer study lasting two months or so.
[Q] I believe Edward Teller was there too.
I mentioned him, I think. Anyway Edward Teller was very much there, and it turned out that Serber and his graduate students had the theory of explosion of uranium or plutonium... bomb already well in hand and we just listened and it was clear that they done a... a very good job of that.

Teller suggested that we... we put our attention to a more difficult problem, because after all it was obvious one could make a uranium or plutonium bomb, and so one should now see how to go on from there. And in a conversation with Fermi, Teller had been stimulated to the idea that once you had an atomic explosion you would develop very high temperature and that high temperature would be enough to... to initiate nuclear reactions between light nuclei; just like there are in the stars. And so most of the time of this study group in Berkeley was devoted to studying what we called the 'Super', that is the device in which deuterium would be initiated and would be set to react and you would get a big cylinder of deuterium to explode.   The energy set free per unit mass in deuterium is much bigger than it is in uranium or plutonium, and also it was... it seemed that this was an unlimited possibility. Well, we soon found that it wasn't all that easy, first there were troubles from the fact that you would excite a lot of radiation and that radiation would then keep the temperature low. And, after many, many years, by 1949, it was pretty clear that indeed this scheme would not work, but it was our main... main idea at the time.

The work at Berkeley made it clear that one couldn't assemble an atomic bomb. And it was decided then by the leaders of the project that a special laboratory should be built to assemble a nuclear weapon. The overall leader of the uranium project was General Groves, and he selected Oppenheimer as the director of the laboratory. This was a very surprising choice because Oppenheimer had been a pure theoretical physicist, much purer than either Teller or I. Not that we wanted that job, but there were many other physicists who had been much more on the practical side than Oppenheimer. But it turned out that Oppenheimer was clearly the ideal leader of a laboratory. He was qualified for that by his very quick understanding of anything. He could understand the gist of an explanation long before the other person had finished his explanation. And he could then draw the conclusions of what... what to do next, until everybody at Los Alamos was conscious that Oppenheimer understood everything much better. And we were very happy to have him as a director.

Oppenheimer thought, to begin with, that we... he needed about 50 scientists to accomplish the job. At the end of Los Alamos, there were about 5000 people at Los Alamos. General Groves was very much devoted to secrecy, and was therefore interested in having the lab as a very remote place, whereupon Oppenheimer said 'Well, I know exactly where you would want to go, you want to go to the State of New Mexico, and in New Mexico I want... I know a very good place which has only a boys school in it and has lots of area which could be occupied by the lab.' So, together, Groves and Oppenheimer decided to place the laboratory at Los Alamos, about 30 miles north-west of Santa Fe. And this turned out to be a very good place for it. It was... could only be reached by a winding and rather bad road. And while this was possible to travel by individuals it was very difficult to... to carry big material up that road. The second in command of the laboratory was a Navy captain, Parsons, who insisted, after a short while that we get a decent paved road from Santa Fe up to Los Alamos. Well, the place was shrouded in secrecy from the very beginning, but in April of '43, lots of scientists and then machinists, other technicians, and many soldiers converged upon Los Alamos and the place was built. Well, it... among all these people were many very good scientists and so we had a very productive and very good time there.

Two advisors to Oppenheimer, namely Bacher, who had been my colleague at Cornell, and who was now at the Radiation Lab, and Rabi, who was Associate Director of the Radiation Laboratory, were advising Oppenheimer, and told him; 'Well, it's impossible to run the lab with 20 independent groups, all funneling into your brain. You have a marvelous brain but you can't direct all of this yourself, you have to have a structure as the Radiation Lab had, namely, the lab was first divided into divisions, each division having maybe five to ten groups and each group having maybe five to ten scientists in it.' And they then recommended to Oppenheimer to appoint me as the leader of the Theoretical Division. That, at the beginning, had about 20 or 30 members. At the end it was about a hundred, a very small division in the big lab. But we had a very interesting time because everything started with theory. I had very able group leaders. One of them was Serber, who had been instrumental at Berkeley. Another was Teller, and still another was Weisskopf, a good friend of mine from Rochester. And then we had several more.

There was a very young man in my division, Richard Feynman. And I very soon noticed that his ability was far beyond the very great ability of all the rest of my division. And so we collaborated from the beginning. We... we extended Serber's formula for the yield of a nuclear weapon, and there is the Bethe-Feynman formula, which I think is still secret and has worked very well. It has generalized Serber's work to the case when a large fraction of the fissionable material is actually efficient. So very soon I made Feynman another group leader, and we became good friends and remained so after the war. I had the impression at Los Alamos that I was really constantly urged to work harder. We worked eight hours a day, six days a week, and still there was far more to do than we ever could do. Feynman, by the way, turned out to be a wizard, not only in... in theoretical physics, but at one time we got IBM machines, that is mechanical, electrical, calculating machines, and he and another member of my division managed to... to build the whole machine - that is really not one but half a dozen machines - from the tool kit and the instructions that were given together with these tools. After about 10 days, we got an expert, an IBM machinist who was inducted into the Army and was assigned to us. And he just admired it and said he had never seen it before, that people, without previous instruction could put together these machines, they worked. Feynman became the leader of that group. And they calculated all the things that we needed to calculate.

In the middle of the Los Alamos experience, it was discovered by Segrè that plutonium, in fact, the isotope plutonium-240, had an exceedingly high spontaneous rate of fission. It fissions at a rate that was so fast that our chosen method of assembling a bomb, namely by shooting one piece of material into another target would not work. On the way of... on the flight from the gun to the target, the fissile material would already began... become critical and begin reacting, and we would get a very low yield, a fizzle. So another method of assembly had been suggested by Neddermeyer; namely to take the shell of fissile material and surround it by explosives. In that case you could get speeds about 10 times higher than you could get from a gun and you would have an implosion. So while in the beginning of the project, nuclear physics was the determining factor in the question of nuclear weapons, it now turned out that the really important thing was to study the implosion.  And we did that, both analytically and numerically by means of the IBM machines, the latter being under Feynman's direction.

We found out that indeed implosion would work very well, and Teller had suggested that implosion would compress the material. And when you compress the material then the critical mass goes down about as the square of the density that you achieve. So it would... it would seem natural to me to ask Teller, who was the leader of one of the group, that he would take charge of this and... and do theoretical work on implosion. But he refused to do that because he was still more interested in investigating the Super; the use of light nuclear deuterium for further increasing the energy from a nuclear reaction, so I had to get somebody else. And fortunately, at just about the same time, collaboration was established between the British and the American project, and I was told, was there anybody among the British scientists whom I would like to have at Los Alamos? 'Yes,' I said, 'let me take the best, let me ask for Rudi Peierls.' And indeed, Rudi Peierls was assigned to Los Alamos and became the Group Leader of the Theoretical Implosion Division - Group I should say - And he had very good people in his group, one of them was Bob Christy. And when the practical implementation of implosion didn't work quite satisfactory, Christy suggested 'Well, there's a very easy way to do it. We know that material is compressed, so why don't we assemble the material from the beginning, assemble one critical mass, 95% of a critical mass, and then let the implosion act on complete sphere of material. The implosion will compress it to maybe twice the original density, and then we have four critical masses, and that's splendid, and that will give us a very good efficiency.' So this Christy Method was adopted, and it was tested at what is called Alamogordo, in the New Mexican desert, on July 16th, 1945.

The reason for testing it at that date was that only then was [there] enough material available to serve for one test and have another equal amount of material available to actually use in the war against Japan. The test worked beyond all expectations. I had calculated, or rather Serber had calculated, it would give 8 kilotons of energy. But one of Serber's young men had calculated it might give 20. And, of course, I believed the authority, I believed Serber, so I said it would give 8 kilotons, and it gave 20. So it was successful beyond all belief. And thereby established the Plutonium Nuclear Weapon. It was then... a duplicate of that, that was then dropped on Nagasaki a little later.
[Q] The... so you were at Los Alamos essentially till the end of '45.
I was there to the end of '45, the end of the war was about one September, '45, so this was after the war. We were, however, now working on further improvements of the nuclear weapon. It was obvious that it would be more efficient to go back to our original design, namely have a shell of plutonium inside natural uranium and then implode that. And it would, at the same time, it became obvious that plutonium was more expensive to produce than uranium-235, so we were interested in a combined weapon with plutonium in the center and 235 around it, and then natural uranium around that. So this is what we worked on in the later months of 1945. I had got another group leader by then, namely Placzek, who... who had been my friend before. He had been in a project in Canada and brought with him a Canadian physicist, Carson Mark, who, after a while, became Placzek's successor as group leader and then my successor as leader of the Theoretical Division.

[Q] By the beginning of '45, in fact probably by the end of '44, it was clear that the Allies were going to win the war, even if it wasn't clear what the precise date would be. And people were already beginning to think about what will happen after the war.
We were beginning to think about that, especially after the surrender of Germany in May of '45, and even more after August when Japan also surrendered. It was clear to us, well... that our main interest, at least that of a large fraction of the Los Alamos scientists, was to return to the universities. And so, indeed, we made plans to do so. And I returned in January of '46.
Before we returned, we wanted nuclear physics to be well recognized at the university. So already in... I believe, already in September, Bacher, and I and Parrent, went back to Cornell University and said 'Well, nuclear physics, obviously is very useful. There are lots of things to be done. Scientifically, we would like to have a laboratory specifically devoted to nuclear physics.' The president of the university, Ezra Day, was very receptive, and said 'Yes, of course, we'll do that. We'll give you a laboratory.' And he got authorization by the board of trustees very quickly to have such a laboratory built, which would be under the direction of Robert Bacher. The... fortunately for Cornell University, in the end, the main cost of the laboratory was borne by the Office of Naval Research, the Navy Research Laboratory and... and generally some farsighted naval officers said it is important to have pure science continued, it is important for the government to support pure science, we want to support laboratories at universities which will train pure scientists, so that the country remains strong and becomes even stronger in pure science. And this was very farsighted. They did emphasize pure science, not applied science, not science useful for the Navy, not science useful for the military, but pure science, which gives the real training of the minds of young people.

The Office of Naval Research was a wonderful supporter of research here at Cornell and several other places, it financed the research at our nuclear laboratory, and only much later was this taken over by the... the National Science Foundation. It took much longer for Congress and the government, as a whole, to see the importance of pure science. And unfortunately, now we are in a time when the respect for pure science has diminished again, and there is far less willingness on the part of the government to support pure science.   Right after the war, it was not only the government and the Navy but it was also the great industrial laboratories; the laboratories of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the research lab of General Electric, and then the research lab of IBM, International Business Machines, were deeply in pure research, supporting it inside the labs, supporting it also in universities. And all this great recognition of pure science by government and industrial laboratories is now decaying, especially among the industrial laboratories. Bell Labs and IBM were really marvelous in supporting pure science. And now, day by day, they are reducing their support of pure science, even in their own laboratories, and long ago they stopped supporting pure science at universities. There still is the National Science Foundation, and it does support pure science, but it also is being urged to put more emphasis on applied science, on useful things instead of recognizing that pure science means the strength of the country; and pure science, while originally totally... totally remote from applications gives rise to the most important applications. There is nuclear power, which is very much along the lines I've talked about, but there's also the laser, which originated from a paper by Einstein about the emission and absorption of light, in which he said then, that light can stimulate other light. It was a purely scientific paper, he had nothing in mind about applications, and look at it now, lasers are everywhere.

We got the photographs of Hiroshima, at Los Alamos, photographs taken by American planes overflying the city after the bomb. And Hiroshima was devastated and we were devastated as well. We had carefully calculated how much destruction there would be from the atomic bomb. We knew its yield in energy. We knew, in consultation, especially with GI Taylor of England, how to translate the yield into the radius of destruction. But it was really terrible to see the destruction ourselves, in these pictures. And many of us, at that point, decided that this should not happen again, and that we should use our efforts to persuade the American people, the American President and Congress, not to consider the nucleus as a means of destruction. Well, many of us got together and formed the Federation of American Scientists. We gave some talks at various places. We had a magazine, The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, which has continued to the present day. The federation has also continued. And we went... some of us were invited to testify before the Senate, which was framing the law of atomic energy after the war. It was that Senate committee which conceived the idea of an Atomic Energy Commission. I was one of the many people who testified. Probably the most important testimony was that of Philip Morrison, who really can be very impressive in... in picturing the awful damage that is done by nuclear weapons. Well, one of the consequences was that atomic energy was put under the civilian commission rather than under the military. But the civilian commission, after a short time, was mostly interested in nuclear weapons, and that was certainly not our idea.

President Truman appointed a committee under Dean Acheson - who was then Assistant Secretary of State, and later on became full Secretary of State - a committee to investigate whether one could internationalize atomic nuclear affairs. And the Acheson Group again... appointed a committee under Lillenthal, who had been the Director of TWA... TVA, the Tennessee Valley Authority, making electric power, and became then the Chairman of the newly created Atomic Energy Commission. Well, that committee who devised a plan, and I think a very good plan, how an international agency could be created. And this was brought to the United Nations by Bernard Baruch, a very conservative financial wizard who had done some political work before. Baruch did not really believe in it. But whether he believed in it or not, the Soviet Union turned down the proposal flat, and they simply did not want an international organization, they wanted to have atomic weapons themselves. In fact, this, as we now know and as we... as we did not then know, immediately after knowing about Hiroshima, Stalin immediately gave orders to his nuclear physicists and engineers to build him an atomic bomb. And, in fact, they... their first bomb was a carbon copy of our Nagasaki bomb.

International control was lost at that time, and it is too bad that it was. But it did mean that each country, and in particular the... American Atomic Energy Commission had a free hand to develop what they wanted. In the years from then until now, statesmen in the big countries - particularly the United States and the Soviet Union, and also England and France, came to... and I suppose, also China - came to the conclusion that the use of nuclear weapons in war was impossible, because in contrast to the Japanese experience, it would not be two bombs which would end the war, but instead of that, if there were nuclear war, it would be hundreds of bombs used on each side, destroying the other country. And it would not be the end of the war but the beginning of a complete destruction of the other country and their own country, probably the destruction of civilization.

These activities took up a great deal of my time and kept me in contact with government operations. I didn't get as deeply into this as, for instance, Oppenheimer did, or Bacher, who became the Civilian Commissioner on the Atomic Energy Commission. But I was asked, much later, in 1956, to become a member of the so-called Science Advisory Committee, which then, in '57, was adopted by the President - then Eisenhower - and became the President's Science Advisory Committee. And that involved a great deal of time, a great deal of work and, I think, also a great deal of accomplishment.
[Q] Right after the war, as you have told us, you come back to Cornell and you and your colleagues, but you certainly become very, if not the dominant personality in this, in building up physics at Cornell and in particular high energy physics at Cornell. The laboratory gets built up as you said.
The most important person was Robert Bacher, but I was in it as well, and in particular, I induced Richard Feynman to come to Cornell. And in the ensuing years, he did his greatest work, namely, quantum electrodynamics.

The Shelter Island Conference in the summer of 1947 was outstanding, it was unique. I have never before or after attended any conference which was so influential. It brought together a lot of the leading theoretical physicists of the United States. It included Oppenheimer and Weisskopf and me, and it also included Linus Pauling. It included younger people like Feynman and Pais. And I don't think I could name all the people. It also included a number of experimenters, for instance, Rabi, and a group around him. It included a very important foreign theorist, Kramers, who had thought a lot about electrodynamics, quantum electrodynamics, during the war. Kramers told us that we really had misunderstood the self energy of the electron. He told us that, after all, the free electron has a self energy interacting with its own electric field, and that self energy is included when we measure the mass of the electron. And therefore, that self energy, which a free electron has, is already included, one shouldn't include it once more by calculating it. So never mind that it gives an infinite answer, you just disregard the self energy of the free electron, you have to consider the difference in free energy between the free energy [electron] and, let's say, an electron bound in the hydrogen atom, and only the difference was what counted.

Another great influence was Willis Lamb, who had done experiments using the newly developed microwave technique, he had done experiments on excited states of hydrogen, in particular, the first excited state of principle quantum number two. According to Dirac Theory, it should have a... two... fine structure consisting of two levels. One involving an S-electron... no, one having a total spin of one half and the other having a spin of three halves. And the Dirac's theory gave us the exact formula for this... the separation of these two states. So Lamb was able to verify that by microwaves. But he found in addition that there really three states, not two, that there were two states of spin one half, one having orbital momentum zero and the other, orbital momentum one, called, in spectroscopy, an S-state and a P-state. According to Dirac theory, they should coincide. But they didn't. And Lamb not only showed us that they didn't, but they... he also measured how much they differed in energy. They differed by about an energy corresponding to a frequency of 1000MHz, that is, a 1000 million cycles per second. And that is known as the Lamb Shift. Now, there had been vague inklings of that in spectroscopy before, but the resolution of optical spectroscopy was not good enough to make sure. And Lamb's experiment made it perfectly clear that these were two completely separate states, that one was an S-state and one a P-state.

The combination of these two talks that by... by Kramers and that by Lamb, stimulated me greatly and I said to myself, well, let's try to calculate that Lamb shift. Let's try to calculate the difference between the self energy of a free electron and that of an electron bound in hydrogen in the inequal two states.
[Q] When you say that you said this to yourself, this was still at the conference?
This was still at the conference. I said to myself, I can do that. And indeed, once the conference was over, I traveled [unclear] by train to the General Electric research lab. And on the train I figured out how much that difference might be. I had to remember the interaction of electromagnetic quanta with electrons. And I wasn't sure about the factor of two. So if I remembered correctly, I seemed to get just about the right energy separation of 1000MHz. But I might be wrong by a factor of two. So the first thing I did when I came to the library at General Electric was to look up Heitler's book on Radiation Theory, and I found that, indeed, I had remembered the number correctly and that, indeed, I'd got a 1000MHz.
[Q] And this was describing the electron nonrelativistically.
Yes, I was helped very much by a previous paper by Weisskopf, who had shown that in the Dirac Pair Theory, the self energy of an electron... of a Dirac electron only diverges logarithmically when you get to high energy. So I said to myself, once I take the difference between bound electron and free electron, the logarithmic divergence will probably disappear and it will converge. So let's just calculate the effect of... of quanta up to the energy electron mass x C2 - velocity of light square - and let's hope that a relativistic correction won't make any difference.

I still had to calculate some matter about the hydrogen wave functions which was done with the help of some people at the General Electric research lab. And when it came out to be just about a 1040MHz, and I published that. And as far as I know, this paper both disappointed and stimulated other people who were... who were more versed in relativistic theory, namely Schwinger and Feynman. And they each in... and also Weisskopf.   Weisskopf pursued the theory in a... in an old fashioned way and calculated the relativistic part, together with some of his collaborators. And Schwinger was stimulated to produce a completely new theory, relativistically invariant theory of quantum electrodynamics. But essentially extending the old quantum electrodynamics, making it relativistically invariant and so on. Schwinger finally came up... came up with the result for the Lamb shift and for another very important effect, namely the extra mass of an electron which had also been presented... not the extra mass, the extra magnetic moment of an electron, which had also been presented at the Shelter Island Conference, by Kusch. So, at the same time, Feynman at Cornell used the completely novel and independent way of getting at the same problem. He had his own way of doing quantum mechanics, his own way of putting in the electric field. And it turned out that in the end that Feynman's new way was very much easier than Schwinger's way. And he came to a similar result as... as Schwinger, they both calculated the Lamb shift, they both found about the right result, not quite the right result. Weisskopf was the... the first to find the exactly right result. And... both Schwinger and Feynman then presented their results at a follow up conference at Pocono Manor, in 1948. Their theories seemed to be totally different.

Well, at Pocono, Schwinger and Feynman, respectively presented their theories. Schwinger's was closely connected to the known quantum electrodynamics, so Niels Bohr, who was in the audience, immediately was convinced this was correct. And then Feynman came with his completely new ideas, which among other things involved positrons going backwards in time. And Niels Bohr was shocked, that couldn't possibly be true, and gave Feynman a very hard time. I was convinced that Feynman had done the right thing and... and told him afterwards 'Well, you're OK, what you've done is certainly right.' And Feynman also was very encouraged by having talked to Schwinger, and the two of them had agreed, very well.

Then there was another young man who was with me, namely Freeman Dyson. He was an Englishman who had studied mathematics in the Tripos at Cambridge. And, GI Taylor, who was a professor at Cambridge, not in physics but in hydrodynamics. GI Taylor, whom we... I knew very well from Los Alamos, who had consulted for us, wrote me a letter. 'Well, I have here a graduate student,' in typical English understatement, 'who is not entirely stupid. It would be nice if you would take him on as a graduate student.' So I wrote back that I would be glad to take him on. And it turned out that Dyson knew everything. I gave him a problem, namely to do the Lamb shift now, not for an electron which has spin a half, but for a particle of spin zero. And I thought this would be a thesis problem. Well, he came back in... in about two weeks, asking some questions which I couldn't answer, but he found the answers himself, and in two more weeks, he came back with the answer. The Lamb shift was very similar for a particle of spin zero, and I told him 'Well, OK, now you write this up and publish it.' He was astonished that this was enough to be published. But it was, I think maybe it came just about the same time as... as the publications by the... by Schwinger and Feynman, maybe it was a little earlier.
So Dyson was very much interested in Feynman's work, and talked to Feynman constantly, following Feynman's developments. And he... knew about Schwinger's work, he went to... to Ann Arbor to listen to Schwinger at the summer conference. And then Dyson was able to show that Schwinger's approach and Feynman's approach were really equivalent, which was not at all obvious because they seemed totally different. Dyson, after spending a year here, went to the Institute of Advanced Studies, on my suggestion, and Oppenheimer gave him a hard time. Oppenheimer had really not understood Feynman's work. And it took a long time before Oppenheimer recognized that Dyson was a really excellent physicist. In fact, it took an invited lecture by myself to present Feynman's theories to Oppenheimer's seminar, I think only after that, Oppenheimer came around to Dyson and said 'Well, maybe you are right, and maybe this is a good theory.'

In the summer of '48, after Schwinger and Feynman had talked at Pocono, I went to Europe, and of course, as an obvious thing, I went to Birmingham to talk at Rudi Peierls' seminar. So I... I presented the theory there, and said the problem of... of quantum electrodynamics had been solved by these two people. And Feynman's theory is particularly useful. And one especially useful person there was Freeman Dyson, whereupon Rudi Peierls immediately offered Dyson a fellowship at his lab to continue. I could also report to the Peierls Seminar that Dyson had written me that he had been able to prove not only the equivalent of the two theories, of Schwinger and Feynman, but also that the theory would converge in all orders. He later on showed that in spite of that, even if every order converges, fundamentally there still remained an infinity in the theory.

It was only a first approximation that Feynman and Schwinger had done, and now the question was what would happen when you took into account [the] interaction of two quanta with the electron. We had a very good graduate student from France, Baranger, whom we asked - both Feynman and I asked him - to investigate the effects of a second order in... in the fine structure constant. And indeed Baranger managed to do this and it turned out that the second order was really quite big, it added about 10MHz to the first order, and I think we wrote a paper, all three of us together.
[Q] And Lamb shifts have always been a little bit close to your heart, because you then also worry about Lamb shifts and heavy atoms, and students do work for you on trying to describe relativistically how you describe the constitution of atoms, taking into account...
Relativity and quantum electrodynamics. Yes, I did, but the person who really did it to completion was Gerald Brown in Birmingham working with Peierls. 
[Q] Right.

There was a report by Rossi who was in contact with Italian physicists. Italian... three Italian physicists working under quite difficult conditions during the German occupation had managed to investigate the interaction of cosmic ray mesons with atomic nuclei. And they found to their great surprise that negative cosmic ray mesons were not captured by the nucleus, and by all theoretical expectation they should have been because the meson had been invented in order to... to explain the very strong interaction inside the nucleus. Well... so this was a puzzle which took up quite some time at the Shelter Island conference, and several people had ideas about it, most of them silly. The good idea came from Marshak, my former student and now a professor at Rochester. Marshak said 'Well, maybe there are two mesons. Maybe there's a cosmic ray meson, and there is another which makes the nuclear forces and maybe the Yukawa meson is produced when cosmic rays come in to the atmosphere and hit a nucleus, they make a Yukawa meson and maybe that then decays into the meson which we actually see.' That was an ingenious idea, and a little later Marshak and I jointly wrote a paper about it.

Just a couple of month after the Shelter Island conference, came news from England, from Bristol. Powell and several collaborators had exposed photographic plates high in the atmosphere, carried by balloons, had exposed photographic plates and looked at the result. And it turned out that you could see that some particle was formed in the photographic plate, it went a certain distance, and then there was a kink, apparently a new particle started out. And both of these particles from the count of... of exposed silver grains, both of these particles had a mass less than the mass of a proton, and much greater than the mass of the electron. Obviously the first particle having a higher mass than the second one, because the first particle apparently came to a stop at one point, and then the second particle was emitted. So the... the group of Powell and collaborators had concluded that there were indeed two mesons, one which they called the Primary Meson, which they called pi, and stopping and giving rise to a secondary meson which they called µ for meson. So just about when Marshak's idea was conceived, it was proved correct by these experiments in Bristol by Powell and collaborators.
[Q] And mesons become an important part of your life.
Mesons became a very important part of my life. I've thought now we have the theory of quantum electrodynamics, there should be a similar theory for the nuclear force. It should also be renormalized, which would remove the infinities, and then we would have from the idea of the Powell Meson, the pi Meson, which could be 'primary' or 'Powell', the interaction of the p meson with the nucleon was obviously transmitting the nuclear force and we should be able to... to treat that nuclear force with the new methods of renormalized quantum field theory. And so I... had the idea that we should have a real effort here at Cornell in which many people were engaged, Dyson and Dalitz, one of... of Peierls' PhDs, and I believe Salpeter.

I should mention one collaborator in the endeavor, namely Sam Schweber, and they did produce a theory but it didn't really solve the problem. We also had a high energy machine which was started by Bacher, but Bacher was then called away to become the Scientific Member of the first Atomic Energy Commission. And fortunately we were able to induce Robert Wilson to take his place, so the nuclear laboratory was in... remained in good hands and under Wilson the synchrotron that was started was actually built and it was put into operation. And Wilson brought with him some of his people from his group at Los Alamos, and so we had a very competent group of experimental physicists working on the synchrotron.

Well, our role at the time was to produce mesons, pi mesons, by the interaction of electrons with nuclei, and indeed the Cornell machine was able to do that. And it showed that the interaction was increasing with electron energy, and it looked as if we were building up to a resonance. But we weren't quite there. But Berkeley, which was building a synchrocyclotron using Macmillan's ideas, got going a little earlier and I believe it was Wilson giving advice to Macmillan just how to get his cyclotron really operating, and then that cyclotron scooped us in produce... in showing the resonance in the interaction between pi mesons and protons. That was work done by Macmillan, Alvarez, and Panofsky, which showed the resonance for neutral pi mesons.

[Q] But while engaged in this high energy work, you still have a love for nuclear physics and in fact... 
I do.
[Q] And it's low energy nuclear physics.
Yes. I was hoping that high energy physics and especially the investigation of the pi meson interaction with the nucleon would give us the key to nuclear forces. I was most interested in finding out what are the nuclear forces, and how are they related to the fundamental interaction between the pion and the nucleon. Well, theoretically the key paper was done not here, but by Goldberger and Chew showing that...
[Q] Chew and Low.
No, Chew and Low, that is correct, Goldberger came in a little later. By Chew and Low showing, well that essentially you could treat the nucleon non... as nonrelativistic and the pion as relativistic and you could get a good theory of the pion nucleon interaction in this manner, treating the nucleon nonrelativistically, and I got... was very interested in that theory and how that could give us the basis of a theory of nuclear forces.

The work by Peierls and me had shown that the scattering of neutrons by protons up to about 10 MeV, million electron volts, was almost entirely due to interaction at zero angular momentum in the S-state. And Breit had done much more elaborate calculations for proton-proton scattering using different shapes of the interaction between two protons, either the square well, or an exponential decrease, or the form that Yukawa had proposed, and he always got the same answer, it always would fit the experiment. And, so it was very intriguing just how was it possible to always get the same answer.   So we got the idea and I think the idea was had simultaneously by Schwinger and by me, that probably one could describe it much better. And Schwinger produced a very beautiful theory using variational principle, and I thought it would be better to do it in a simpler way just using the wave function of the interacting two particles. So I was able to show that there was... that the interaction of two nucleons at low energy could be described by just two quantities; namely an effective range of the nuclear forces which could be deduced from the actual shape of the nuclear forces, and the scattering length at zero energy, which is measured for instance by the cross section of neutron-proton scattering both with parallel spin and with antiparallel spin. So you got two separate scattering length, the scattering length square gives you directly the cross section at zero energy. And so it was possible to describe scattering as all energy up to about 10 MeV in terms of these two quantities, scattering length and effective range. I did this first by myself and then together with Longmire who was at Columbia University and I took a sabbatic leave to Columbia, [where] we collaborated in doing the effective range theory of nuclear forces.

Salpeter was one of Peierls' students, one of the continuing exchange of PhDs between Peierls and myself. He came here and he obviously was very knowledgeable and we worked together. We knew the Feynman theory of quantum electrodynamics, but we said to ourselves 'Well, really one ought to be able to do this also for particles that interact strongly.' And, so we set out to... to do quantum electrodynamics in a... in an external field, let's say the field of an atom, strong field of an atom. And we convinced ourselves that one could generalize the quantum electrodynamics to include strong interaction, and we constructed an equation for two interacting... strongly interacting particles with the effect of the electromagnetic field included, and that became known as the Bethe-Salpeter Equation. We continued a little bit on that in rewriting the Handbuch article which I had written about one and two electron problems. Salpeter helped to generalize this to... to include relativity and quantum electrodynamics, and that produced the second edition which came out as a separate book. And we had a graduate student translate the old paper into English and added to it in English what we had newly found. So this was the Bethe-Salpeter edition of Quantum Theory of One and Two Electron Problems.
[Q] And, there were other people like Rohrlich?
Yes. Well, he became professor in Syracuse. Salpeter, as I have mentioned already, went into astrophysics and discovered how to make carbon atoms out of helium, and remained in... in astrophysics most of his life. There was Dalitz coming again from... from Peierls, who then became the chief assistant of Peierls at Birmingham and later on in... in Oxford.

There was strong physics, strong experimental nuclear physics under... under Robert Wilson, which in fact became so strong that it was the envy of other universities. Wilson was able to think about machines before building them, and that was very useful, as it was expressed by one Washington person: 'Robert Wilson can build machines at 30 cents to the dollar.' That is, they would cost one-third as much as... as it would if built by anybody else. And that then was the reason why Wilson was asked to build a much bigger accelerator in... near Chicago, which became [the] Fermilab. He undertook to do that with the condition that it be done in five years rather than eight, as had been proposed by Berkeley, and for I think $300 million rather than 500, as had been proposed by Berkeley. So that was one important development, and even after Wilson was gone the nuclear lab remained a very strong lab under McDaniel and has remained so to the present day.

Then there were strong solid state physics on the other side, beginning under Lloyd Smith who had brought me to Cornell, and then under different directors following. The two labs separated but they both were part of the physics department, and the two lab directors wouldn't always see eye to eye and there was a group of three, a steering committee of three people with me as a chairman. And there was a theoretical group being very strong under... immediately after the war with Feynman, then Feynman unfortunately left us because he had too many graduate students, the graduate students took away all his time. And so Bacher who in the meantime had become the Chairman of the Physics Department at Cal Tech, lured him away from here promising him that he would have only as many graduate students as he wanted to have, and lured him to California. Well, we got Dyson for a while in his stead, but unfortunately Dyson also got lured away. Oppenheimer who initially didn't think that Dyson was very good, was now convinced that Dyson was a great physicist and so after a very short time at Cornell, Dyson left and went to the Institute of Advanced Study. We managed to keep a good group in theoretical physics at Cornell, but the... the two real stars, Feynman and Dyson, left because they were lured away to more attractive places.

Yes, we get Ken Wilson, we get Kinoshita who... who followed up the work on the Lamb shift and on the extra magnetic moment of the electron and though with.. to... to fantastic accuracy using modern computers. The extra magnetic moment of the electron beyond the Dirac Moment had been discovered by Kusch, had been explained by Schwinger and by Feynman, in what was the second approximation in... in electromagnetic theory.
I was discussing Kinoshita who calculated the higher approximations of renormalization for the magnetic moment of the electron, and was able to... to do not only the term which is... goes as the fourth power of the electron charge, but as the sixth and more recently as the eighth power. And so he could predict the magnetic moment of the electron to a fabulous accuracy I think - better than one part in a 100 million. And fortunately there is an experimenter at Seattle, Dehmelt, who was able to measure it experimentally for a free electron and got the Nobel Prize for it, and it... to the great astonishment of both experimenter and theorist, the agreement is perfect. So this is now the best method to get the fine structure constant: 137.0360.

In another part of our department condensed matter physics is being done. And that is... that has led to this year's 1996 Nobel Prizes which in fact were given yesterday, December 10th, to two professors of condensed matter physics of Cornell, Lee and Richardson, and to their former graduate student, Osheroff, now at Stanford University. They jointly discovered that liquid helium of atomic weight 3 becomes superfluid at fantastically low temperatures, at temperatures in micro degrees, a few millionth of a degree Kelvin. Then in addition we had Kenneth Wilson, not to be confused with Robert Wilson. Kenneth Wilson came here as a theoretical physicist and pursued the idea of renormalization of the infinities of quantum electrodynamics and similar theories further, and found that there is a whole group of renormalization and he was able in this way to explain the phenomena of a gas near its critical point where liquid and... and gas flow into each other and he received the Nobel Prize for that several years ago.

[Q] There is a paper in the post-war period that, I think, illuminates a facet of your character which one doesn't usually associate... and there is a paper on the origin of the chemical elements with colleagues Alpher and...
Oh, never mind that, it was wrong. Chemical elements...
[Q] No I meant more the authorship of the paper, rather than the paper itself.
Well that was just a cheap joke. The authors were Alpher, Bethe and Gamow, but it turned out that the theory was wrong. Chemical elements are not made in the Big Bang as Gamow had assumed, but they are made in big stars when they obtain temperatures well beyond the carbon formation temperature, then successively heavier elements are being built up. And once you get to really high temperatures, you get the development of neutrons, and neutrons are then added to... to nuclei such as iron, making the heavy elements, including the radioactive ones.

I decided to concentrate on nuclear matter which means the limit of what nuclei would look like if there were no electric force inside the nucleus, if you had only the nuclear forces. In that case you could have infinitely big nuclei and that would make the theory very much simpler. I had nice starting point, a theory by Brueckner which concerned just nuclear matter, and the trick of that theory was that inside the nucleus, each nucleon had its own energy and the energy of individual nucleons could be calculated in a consistent manner - consistent with the calculation of the nucleus as a whole. I went into this theory and first simplified it greatly and then together with Goldstone, one of my graduate students in Cambridge, was able to solve one problem in that theory, namely what happens when there is a very strong repulsion between two nucleons at [a] very short distance. And such repulsion was in fact observed experimentally in Berkeley when they investigated the scattering of protons by protons at hundreds of millions of electron volts. And what Goldstone and I did was to investigate what such a strong repulsion would do to the wave function of a couple of nucleons interacting with each other. And this was very satisfactory and gave the basis of treating nuclear matter in general. Goldstone then went on to... to make a very fundamental contribution to the theory of elementary particles, finding that in a field theory you could create an extra particle which you don't put into the theory, and it is now believed that the pi meson is of this type. I had another very superior graduate student in Cambridge, both of them assigned to me by Nevill Mott who was then the Chairman of the Physics Department at Cambridge, the name of the second one was Thouless. He did a thesis with me after I returned to Cornell, and in that thesis essentially gave a much more fundamental description of the way the Brueckner theory works and the way you... you treat nuclear matter. Thouless went on to become one of the leading theorists in condensed matter theory. I believe he's about as profound in this area as any other theorist.

I had the goal to explain the binding of nuclear matter entirely on the basis of experimental results in the interaction of two nucleons. And the interaction of two nucleons can be well investigated experimentally, which was done at Berkeley and other places. And one gets very complicated but very intricate results on this interaction, and it was my hope that I could explain on the basis of these experiments that nuclear matter is bound by 16 millions of electron volts per nucleon, and at the same time explain the density of nuclear matter. Well, I didn't succeed. I worked on this for many years. I had several graduate students, some good ones in this. The best one among them was John Negele who is now a professor at MIT and who already in his thesis managed to use nuclear matter theory to calculate the density distribution in a very heavy nucleus, namely in lead of... of mass 208. And this calculation was the... really the paradigm for further calculations of many other people and to everybody's satisfaction it was then possible to measure the distribution of charge in the nucleus lead 208, and it turned out that this was exactly as calculated by Negele. In addition to that, people afterwards were able to get the difference between the charge distribution in lead and the next higher nucleus, namely bismuth 209, and that gives you then insight into the wave function of one particular nucleon inside the nucleus. So this confirmed the principle of the.. of the calculation, namely that each nucleon has its own wave function inside the nucleus and then these nucleons interact to give you the whole.

When we tried to calculate the binding energy of 16MeV, we failed. We had two choices: we could give the right binding energy, but then the nuclear density would be twice as high as is actually observed; or we could get the right density and then the binding energy would be much too high. The solution of that was found by a postdoctoral fellow of mine, Panderia Pandi who has stayed with this subject ever since and is a professor at the University of Illinois in Urbana. He has done the most elaborate calculations using of course modern day computers to the fullest. He works together with the Argonne National Laboratory and two of his former students are there as staff members, and they have found that you better start from light nuclei, namely start from nuclei containing three nucleons. Two nucleons is obvious - I did that with Peierls back in 1934 - but three nucleons is a real problem.   And so this group found that there is a force between three nucleons where you have a meson exchange between number one and two, then two and three, and then back from three to one. And from the behavior of the nucleus Hydrogen 3 and Helium 3, they could deduce the strength of this force, and they could then prove that helium 4 could be satisfactorily explained with just the three body force, you didn't need to go to four body [forces]. Well, a three body force gives about 1 MeV of the 16, and it gives the right density, and so you now can get the right density together with the right binding energy. But my initial plan to put it all in terms of the two nucleon interaction did not work out, and... but it stimulated a whole development of further calculations. I was busy with that for many years from '55 to about '68.

The phenomenological potentials were derived by a group in Bonn and a group in Paris which fit the scattering data very well, and Panderia Pandi at Illinois refined this still further. These are all phenomenological and we are only guided gently by fundamental theory. Gerald Brown has been very instrumental in that. The... back in 1947, 1948, 1949, we thought that the exchange of one pion between two nucleons would give the main force. Gerald Brown pointed out that a much stronger force comes from the simultaneous exchange of two pions, and one also has to take into account that you can also exchange a heavier meson, the rho meson, between two nucleons and only then can you fully explain the charge distribution in nuclear as well as the binding energy.

It was observed that certain stars gave microwave radiation.
[Q] This was 1967 or...
Yes, 1967, and this microwave radiation comes out in pulses of remarkable regularity. People thought for a moment that maybe there was... were some intelligent beings which were trying to communicate with us by sending out these pulses. They come maybe 30 times a second or something like that, and with absolute regularity. The prime example was the Crab Nebula, which is the remnants of a supernova and at the center of such remnant there ought to be a neutron star.
So when the pulses were explained, the beginning of the explanation was given by Thomas Gold, professor of astronomy here. Namely he said 'Surely these pulses come from a neutron star, and the neutron star rotates, and the neutron star has a magnetic field and this magnetic field produces those pulses.'

In 1969, 1970, I looked at the surface of those neutron stars and wrote a paper about it in Copenhagen with Baym and Pethick who were great experts in statistical mechanics and we thought we could explain the surface structure of a neutron star, that there is ordinary matter at the very surface, and then as the density increases you get more and more neutrons. The protons absorb electrons and once you get to a high enough density you have almost pure neutrons. So that then again made me interested in finding out how these... the neutrons themselves would behave on the... in the inner part of that neutron star. They obviously at high density come close enough to each other to have nuclear interaction and we pretty well knew that nuclear interaction, because we know it generally between any nucleon and another nucleon - proton-proton proton-neutron, and neutron-neutron. And so on that basis I, with another postdoctoral student, Johnson, calculated the behavior of neutron star matter at high density, density several times the density of an ordinary nucleus, and my previous work of course on nuclear matter was useful for that. And we got an equation of state for neutron matter at... at these high densities, and then together with another student, in fact a student of Salpeter's, Malone, we calculated how a neutron star may be constructed, how the density changes from the center to the outside. It has the highest density of course at the center, but that density mustn't be too high because if it got too high then it would collapse into a Black Hole. And I think the calculations we did were satisfactory. We calculated that the neutron star would have a radius of about 10km and a mass a little bigger than the mass of the sun.

It's very difficult to measure the mass of neutron stars because in order to measure the mass of a star you need two stars close together, a neutron star and another star in a binary, or two neutron stars together. And fortunately nature has been kind to us; there is one pair of neutron stars discovered by Taylor in Princeton for which he got the Nobel Prize. They are so close together that they emit gravitational waves by their interaction and due to the emission of gravitational waves they get closer and closer together in time. This is the first proof and the chief proof that Einstein's general relativity theory is correct in all detail to all orders, because to get gravitational waves you have to go way beyond Newtonian Theory and well, gravitational theory in the first order beyond Newton was proved by observations by Shapiro of the transit of electromagnetic waves close to the sun, which showed that the sun not only deflects these waves but also changes their frequency. Both of these are predictions of general relativity theory, but only the first order, so-called post-Newtonian theory, and so that post-Newtonian Einstein gravitation theory was proved very well by the Shapiro observations. But it was still an open question: is it just the first order after Newton, or is gravitational theory correct all the way? And the Taylor observation of the two neutron stars in the binary is the real clincher of... of this gravitational theory to all orders.

In 1967 the Nobel committee awarded me the Nobel Prize, so we... my wife and I traveled to Stockholm and so did our two children, then grown up. It was a beautiful feast and for the purpose I had to give a lecture on the main subject of the prize, namely the theory of the energy in stars. Fortunately I had available the work by Icko Iben on stars of mass about three times the mass of the sun, going to the end of the supply of hydrogen, then the center contracting and the outside expanding into a Red Giant. So in this Nobel lecture I reported essentially this further work in... in the evolution of stars. The evolution of stars has become a subject of great interest to astrophysicists generally and... and you go through all the stages; the formation of a red giant and then in the center of it, you make... Salpeter's process making carbon 12 and then it contracts some more, temperature gets higher, it gets to a billion degrees. And then to... carbon nuclei can react and make neon and magnesium and then finally to... oxygen nuclei can interact and make silicon, and finally silicon will capture the helium nuclei which are now present in abundance because it is now sufficiently hot to release helium nuclei from other ambient nuclei and silicon then captures one by one alpha particles, helium nuclei, finally ending up in Nickel 56, which is the biggest nucleus which is completely composed of alpha particles. So that is then the end of the story, nickel 56, after a few weeks transforms into Iron 56, which happens to be a particularly abundant isotope and element in all the world. And this is... what I have just given you is an explanation how this comes about and how elements are actually formed, not by the Alpher-Bethe-Gamow process.

Stellar evolution is different according to the mass of the star. If you have a small star, let's say one-tenth of the solar mass, it lives forever. If you have a star of about the solar mass, it finally uses up its hydrogen first in the center and then it undergoes the transformation that I mentioned. Namely the center collapses, the outside expands, and the reason why the outside expands is that it is important to let the radiation out, to make it possible for... for all the radiation which is made in the center to escape to the outside, and that makes it necessary for the density near the center to decrease and the star gets blown up to giant size. Now if you take the sun, it will do precisely what I said and in the center the Salpeter process will take place and you will make carbon and oxygen and as the star ages, there is a shell in which energy is produced from the hydrogen reaction with the carbon cycle, and this shell gradually moves outside as the hydrogen in the... near the center gets used up, and finally all the hydrogen is gone. And then follows another shell in which helium is processed, but the energy which you get from that is only about 10% of the energy which you get from the hydrogen reaction. Well so finally the energy producing qualities of the star are pretty well exhausted and so gravitation takes hold, and the sun - maybe five billion years in the future - will finally succumb to gravitation and contract into a white dwarf. The white dwarfs are the final product of a star of medium size, let's say, the sun up to... several times the sun.

Stars which are many times the sun's mass spend a long time in the giant stage, and in the giant stage the surface of the star is not subject to very much gravitational attraction, and so the star is able to eject a lot of... of matter. Even the sun does that at the moment. It's known as the Solar Wind and that ejects particles which, in the case of the sun, we see in the Northern Light. But in... if you have a big giant, then this wind is much stronger and it has been found by Pachinsky - an astrophysicist at Norwood, Princeton - who... that stars up to about eight times the solar mass lose so much matter by blowing out wind that they collapse finally into... into a white dwarf. Now, if however you go beyond that, then not all the mass is blown out. You go through all the stages that I mentioned, finally producing nickel 56, and once you have produced nickel 56, then there is no further way of producing nuclear energy near the center of the star. So the only force then acting is gravity, and the center of the star then collapses catastrophically into a neutron star, and that is such a strong collapse that it is able to expel all the rest of the star, and you see that then as a supernova. These supernovas were discovered scientifically by Zwicky and Baadere in the 1930s and they... there are two types of supernovas. One is this type, and that's the only type I want to talk about. The other type starts from white dwarfs coming to the limit of their stability before they collapse by gravitation. The white dwarf type is called Type One, and the end of evolution of... of a big star is called Type Two.

In the '70s I acquired the habit of going for one semester at a time to Copenhagen to the Niels Bohr Institute and to NORDITA, the Northern Collaboration in Atomic Physics. One person was there who previously had been Peierls's main collaborator, namely Gerald Brown, an American who after many years left Birmingham and went to Copenhagen to join this NORDITA. So very soon we got... became friends and when I came to Copenhagen in '78, Gerald Brown said 'Now, this time we'll solve the problem of the supernova.' He had already done some work on this and the main problem... well, there were two problems. One is: how does the collapse happen in detail; and secondly: how does the star then manage to expel all its outside? It would be entirely conceivable that the whole star would collapse into one black hole. But then in that case we wouldn't observe it.

About the collapse [of a star] there had been a good paper already by Arnett which followed the collapse until about, oh a millisecond, one-thousandth of a second before complete collapse. I should mention that the collapse takes about a second, and you have to imagine the mass which is collapsing is about the mass of a white dwarf, and what happens is that this central core of the big star reaches the Chandrasekhar Limit of Stability just as it exists in a white dwarf, about one-and-a-half solar masses. Now Arnett had done it very well, but he as well as many other people, especially Colgate at Los Alamos laboratory, had thought that the collapse stops at the density maybe one-tenth the density of nuclear matter. Well Brown and I found out this was impossible, there is nothing to stop collapse as long as the only force you have available is the Fermi pressure of the electrons in the star, the pressure which... which sustains the white dwarf. You have to get another force into play, and the best force you have available of course is the nuclear force. But a nuclear force will come in only when you get beyond the density of normal nuclei. When you get beyond that density, then of course you create pressure and that pressure increases very rapidly as you go beyond nuclear density. So Gerald Brown and I and two other people investigated this, concluded that you had to go way beyond nuclear density, maybe three times, four times, before you could stop that in-fall, and then you could stop the in-fall of the... of the matter outside. However, we also thought that this would be sufficient to give you a rebound which then would expel the outside of the star.

We had at our disposal some calculations under the leadership of James Wilson at Livermore National Laboratory, near San Francisco, and the calculations which he did at that time seemed to confirm our idea that indeed the rebound would expel the material. Unfortunately, a little bit later he... Wilson found out that he had been wrong, that he had put some wrong equation of state into his calculations and so the computer could do nothing but give him nonsense. So ever since then, since '78, Gerald Brown and I have been engaged in trying to figure out just how does the supernova happen, how does this collapse of the star manage to expel the outside? Well, the main... the clue to understanding this was again given by Jim Wilson. He said 'After all, you have assembled a tremendous amount of energy in this collapsed material,' the quasi-neutron star, it's not a neutron star yet, 'it has an enormous amount of excess energy which came from the gravitational collapse - that energy has to get out and the only way to get out is by neutrinos.' We knew that, that is Brown and I, but it was Wilson who said 'Now, couldn't those neutrinos expel the matter outside?' And he had the idea that indeed the matter surrounding this collapsed mass was sufficiently dense that even neutrinos could be partially stopped and could give much of their energy to the matter out there. So this is the Jim Wilson theory of the supernova.

Now we had to understand this quantitatively. We had to understand how this really happened and Brown and I together with two students of Brown; Cooperstein and Baron, worked on this very assiduously for quite a long time and only over many years did it finally become clear. Indeed, the neutrinos go out, but there is unfortunately a reverse process, namely when you have dense matter then electrons are captured by the nucleus and that makes additional neutrinos, and so the energy which is in the electrons and generates thermal energy of the matter, again gets transformed into neutrinos which escape from the star without doing any good.  Finally, in... oh I think '92 or so, it came to me that there is one place, one critical place where the energy given by the neutrinos gets to be bigger than the energy absorbed from the electrons, and I called that the Gain Point. And the gain point comes about because the Neutrino Flux, the energy flux of the neutrinos goes down as the square of the radius, one over the square of the radius. But the capture of electrons goes as the sixth power of the temperature, and the temperature goes down inversely as the radius, so the capture of electrons goes down as the sixth power of the radius. So there must be some point at which the gain from neutrino absorption gets bigger than the loss from electron capture. I call that the gain point, and outside the gain point now you get a net gain of energy by absorbing neutrinos. I wrote a joint paper with Jim Wilson on this problem, and then quite a number of papers by myself, and some with Brown.

There still remained one interesting question. When you have the gain point, the material inside the gain point has the feature that the entropy increases steadily with distance from the center. On the other hand, once you are beyond the gain point, the entropy will decrease from there on out. You have a maximum of the entropy at the gain point, and one of the difficulties was you make the neutrino capture and therefore the energy, close to the gain point; but how do you get them out to the shock which goes out through the... through the star? And that I then suggested is... goes by convection, because once the entropy decreases with increasing radius, it is known that this is unstable to convection. This was found by Karl Schwarzschild, the father of the Martin Schwarzschild who is the [first] modern astrophysicist. So you then get convection, so as you absorb neutrinos and heat the material, that hot material goes out to the surface and drives a shock. Now, then the shock starts just with a velocity which is given to it by the amount of matter which has accreted by further material falling in, and that velocity is a few thousand kilometers per second. That seems fast enough but when you looked at the... at the numerical calculations by Jim Wilson and his collaborators, you found that after a certain time the velocity of the shock gets to be much bigger: tens of thousands, or let me say 10 to 20,000 kilometers per second. How does that come about? And there I made a wrong theory. I thought it came about because the nucleons which you have produced in the shock at high temperature begin to recombine once the temperature falls below 10 billion degrees. So you get the recombination and that recombination gives you energy and that energy I thought accelerates the shock.

This is not the reason why the shock accelerates. It is much simpler than that, namely once the shock reaches something like 300 kilometers from the center, then the gravity has decreased sufficiently that just the distribution of gravitational force, the decrease of gravitational force at larger distance, that is enough to accelerate the shock in the way I indicated from a few thousand to 10 or 20,000 kilometers per second. That I found out only during the last year, I'm still working on it, and I am still writing papers on it. I am now at paper number eight which I just finished writing and which is presently being typed. I believe that I have now understood the mechanism, namely neutrinos are emitted from the core which has accumulated gravitational energy; the neutrinos give energy to matter between the gain point and wherever the shock is; the gain point usually is around 100 kilometers from the center and I can calculate that you use about 10% of the neutrino energy and give 10% to the matter out there, and then these 10% serve to expel the outside of... of the star.  Now that you see, the expulsion of the outside of the star and of course it gives you big fireworks, tremendous luminosity, very high temperature at the surface which then gradually declines. And we had the great good fortune that in 1987 there was a supernova, not in the galaxy, but in the neighboring galaxy, in the so-called Large Magellanic Cloud.

That supernova could be observed in all details, and it is still being followed. It now emits mainly infrared radiation. It could be followed in all details, close enough in fact that you could determine how much energy is given to the ejected material and that energy is a few times 1051 erg or, well, between one and two times, and only a small fraction of that, only about 1% of that comes out as light. The main part of that comes out simply as kinetic energy, so you have to observe the Doppler Effect and observe... thereby determine the velocity of the outgoing material, and from that it was possible to determine the energy release. I had some input into that, but the main analysis of that was done by one American and one Japanese astrophysicist, Woosley at University of California, and Nomoto in Tokyo University. They competed, one publishing a paper, then the other publishing a different paper and it is still going on at the present time, and they were able to analyze not only how much energy was released, but also how much nickel-56 was produced.  They found out that about 7% of a solar mass of nickel-56 is produced, and that's very interesting because the nickel-56 of course, gives characteristic radiation; it contributes to the optical radiation which was visible; it contributes also gamma rays when the nickel-56 captures electrons and turns into iron-56. And... so it made us... made it possible to understand what really happens in the supernova.

Supernovas are terribly important for the... the world because the giant star of large mass, 10 times, 20 times the mass of the sun, has made all these heavy elements, not only the ones I mentioned, but all others as well, and the supernova now ejects all these elements into the galaxy and they are then in the galaxy ready to form new stars. And it is, well, a star like the sun which is a little less than 5 billion years old, is much younger than the galaxy which may be about 10 billion years old, and so the sun when it was formed, collected all that material which had been made by the supernova.  Now, I should be still clearer; not all the elements are made in the supernova itself, but the... the material which is made in the supernova, which is mainly iron-56 and silicon, sulfur. That material then can go into another big star and in that other big star the temperature gets warm enough so that neutrons are produced just thermally by temperature, and these neutrons then gradually add themselves to existing nuclei and in that way you get the rich variety of... of nuclei which we see in the universe. As I said, it's this way that elements are produced, and it is nice to look back to 1938 when the main thing that Gamow and Weizsäcker wanted was to build up the elements. Time was not ripe for that. Time was ripe at that time only to explain the energy from stars, and later on astrophysicists, Schwarzschild, Iben, recognized that high temperatures would be formed after hydrogen is exhausted. Salpeter came along and made carbon; Hoyle came along and made oxygen; and then the other astrophysicists showed how other elements are made; then we get the supernova and then from the material of the supernova then other stars can make all the very rich variety of elements and isotopes which we find in the world.

You can observe hundreds of pulsars which are neutron stars, it is very difficult to observe the mass of the neutron star because you need a binary for that purpose. So Gerry Brown speculated about the way a binary of neutron stars could be made. And he found out that this is indeed very difficult because if you make a neutron star in the neighborhood of a... another big star, then this other big star would have a.. the halo which goes very far out, which contains matter and this matter would accrete to the neutron star and would bring it over the limit, make it a black hole and make it disappear. And the... well, he used work by van der Heel [sic] of Holland who had studied this matter in great detail and Gerry Brown concluded after long study that there was really only one way to... to make a binary of neutron stars, and that is you first have to have a binary of stars of approximately equal mass. Then in the course of time these stars would each evolve into a white dwarf and you would get then white dwarfs of approximately equal mass, and that's only possible that... that's only possible if the two stars have very nearly the same mass from the beginning.

If you have a binary of helium stars, that is stars which don't contain hydrogen any more but only helium, or white dwarfs if you like, then one of them will be a little bit bigger and it will become a supernova; but the helium star - white dwarf - has only a very tiny atmosphere so the younger star which is... which is still a helium star doesn't have much density in the neighborhood of the older star which has just become a supernova. So now this supernova which becomes a neutron star is not exposed to a great deal of... of matter around it and it can survive. That is Gerry Brown's theory of the formation of binaries of neutron stars. There could also be a binary containing one white dwarf and one neutron star. So while this has been accepted by van den Heuvel and other astrophysicists and is certainly very persuasive to me, it gives about the right number of binary neutron stars in the galaxy, the right frequency of occurrence.

The statistics of masses of neutron stars, and it turns out that the couple which was discovered by Taylor have the biggest neutron star masses that are known. One is 1.44 [solar masses], so the masses in the other is, I don't know, 1.42 or something like that. Most of the neutron stars whose mass has been measured are in the range of 1.3, and as far as I am aware there is no neutron star of less than 1.3. Well, maybe 1.2-something.
Now why is that so? I believe that this is... comes from the way neutron stars are produced. They come about by the collapse of a supernova and that collapse occurs when the center part of the star, the part which has been converted into nickel, when that gets bigger then the Chandrasekhar Limiting Mass, which is about 1.4, 1.5 solar masses. So this explains, I believe, why neutron stars don't have any smaller masses.

We believe, Gerry Brown and I, that there is an upper limit to the mass of a neutron star which is probably close to 1.5 solar masses, so Taylor's star is very close to that. Not everybody believes us on that. The older ideas which were first derived maybe in the work by Johnson, Malone and myself, was that it could be as big as 2.00 solar masses, maybe even a little more than that, depending on the equation of state matter at high density. Well, we think that the limit is about 1.5 and the reason for that is that... there is some evidence, not totally convincing evidence, that the neutron star which was formed in the supernova of 1987A that that collapsed into a black hole. We see no evidence at all of the existence of a neutron star in the middle of the nebula which was... is left behind by that supernova explosion. Again, not everybody believes that, but... but I think it is very likely.

Gerry Brown, together with other collaborators found that at high density another phenomenon happens, namely a condensation of K-minus Mesons, and K-minus mesons can condense and thereby lose their... thier normal mass so that their mass becomes smaller then... or let me say their MC2 becomes smaller than the Fermi Energy of Electrons which would exist at the center of a neutron star. And so there is good reason to believe that when the density at the center of a... of as neutron star gets higher than, maybe, three, four times nuclear density, there is this K-minus condensation and the neutrons near the center again convert, not into protons plus electrons, but into protons plus K-minus mesons. And thereby the limiting mass of a neutron star is reduced from something like twice the mass of the sun to something like one-and-a-half times. And it is very believable from Jim Wilson's calculations, it is very believable that supernova 1987A had more than that mass and therefore would collapse to a black hole. As I said, not everybody believes this, but it is a very interesting theory, and it is very interesting how the very small varies the, and very high energy the K-minus mesons, how that connects again to astrophysics. This is, as I said, mostly the work of Gerry Brown and my only contribution was about the mass of the neutron star which first forms inside supernova 1987A.

Peierls and I, back in '34, said that the only way one could observe a neutrino is if you capture it again in a nucleus. Well, that's correct, and that was actually observed after the war when... when very powerful nuclear reactors were built which emit tremendous densities of neutrinos. Fred Reines and Cowan observed the neutrinos emanating from the Savannah River nuclear reactor. So that showed that neutrinos can be observed, and then in the last 10 or 20 years when we had high energy accelerators, much higher energy neutrinos were formed and neutrinos were observed, for instance, in Fermi's lab, or in CERN in Europe, coming out of these very high energy accelerators. But once neutrinos had been observed, it was a nice, interesting idea that maybe you could observe the neutrinos which are made in the sun. I mentioned the proton-proton reaction; you make a deuteron and a positron and with the positron comes a neutrino and that reaction is then followed by a lot of others. You make beryllium-7 which captures an electron and again emits a neutrino and once in a blue moon the beryllium-7 gets further enhanced and becomes boron-8, which emits neutrinos of very high energy up to about 14MeV.

All this had been investigated by Willy Fowler and his collaborators at Cal Tech. All... he investigated all nuclear reactions which would possibly occur in the stars, experimentally by using an accelerator, and so we knew all these. So it was the idea of Willy Fowler and his student John Bahcall, that maybe one could observe the neutrinos that are made in the sun. I should mention in this connection that actually I believe the first person who had this idea was Pontecorvo, a former collaborator of Fermi's in Rome who was involved in Fermi's study of neutron absorption in nuclei. But, at any rate, Bahcall was the person who kept the ball and investigated this in more detail and came to the conclusion that indeed it probably would be possible to observe neutrinos from the sun. There would be many of them, but of course we knew the cross section was extremely small but there were some of relatively high energy and the cross section of neutrinos interacting increases with the energy very rapidly. So an experiment was set up by Ray Davis at Brookhaven National Laboratory, to observe the solar neutrinos by... he got a tank... car full of cleaning fluid, a carbon, chlorine, hydrogen compound, and chlorine contains one isotope, chlorine-37, which by absorbing a neutrino can transform into argon-37 which is a radioactive nucleus, a neutrino goes in and an electron goes out. You can't observe that electron, it's too weak, but you can observe the argon-37. Unfortunately that again doesn't emit very energetic radiation but it does capture its orbital electrons and then emits a converging gamma ray after such... such capture, and so you get from this X-rays of a few KeVs. These X-rays come out with the decay time of argon-37, which I think is something like a month, and so what Davis set out to observe was these electrons.

You put a counter into that tank, that would be totally useless. No, instead of that, you collect the argon which is a rare gas and a noble gas does not interact chemically and remains a gas, while your carbon chloride is a liquid, and so you collect the argon gas. How do you do that? You flush it with helium, which is a much more available noble gas, you pump that through the tank and out comes the helium together with the argon, and then you condense the argon by freezing it, and fill a counter with that and then you observe counts in that counter. Well, what do you observe? You observe a few counts a month coming from this very elaborate experiment. And so Davis proved in this way that indeed neutrinos do come from the sun and this proved maybe even better by the Japanese experiment which was done in an old mine in Japan in Kamioka, it's known as the Kamiokande Experiment, Kamioka Neutron Detector Experiment. That used a different method.

It used simply water and in water you have of course electrons and the neutrinos can collide with the electrons and simply bring the electrons to high velocity and then you have a high energy electron which goes through the water and as it does so it emits Cerenkov Radiation which can be observed by photomultipliers which you put around the water tank.   Well, the Kamiokande experiment I think has something like 7000 tons of water of which only 2000 are useful because the outer ones can be subject to particles coming from.. from the... container. But the inner 2000 tons are useful and you observe the Cerenkov radiation coming from those and with Cerenkov radiation you have the great advantage of observing these neutrinos as they are actually captured in... in the water and therefore you can determine not only the time of arrival but also the direction of arrival. And the Kamiokande people were able to show that... that many of these neutrinos came from an angle close to the direction of the sun. So it was really well established that these neutrinos really come from the sun.

Both in the Kamiokande experiment and in the Homestake experiment by Davis, the number of neutrinos observed was too small. In the Kamiokande experiment in particular you can only observe the neutrinos which come boron-8, only those have enough energy so the recoil electrons can be seen. But the Cal Tech experiments were good enough so one could tell with some accuracy how much boron-8 will be formed in the interior of the sun, and therefore you could tell how many neutrinos there should be, and Kamiokande observed only half as many. Homestake, Davis, observed only about a quarter of the number of expected neutrinos. Well, that was a great puzzle. We now knew that neutrinos did come from the sun, but why there... why then were there not enough? Well, [the] first thing to blame was the nuclear physics at Cal Tech and that's why the experiments were repeated and it was shown that they were all right. Second thing to blame was... were the experiments - now the Homestake experiments you could have some doubt about, but there was absolutely no doubt about the Japanese Kamiokande experiments. So it was quite clear that we did not see all the neutrinos that ought to come from the sun. Bahcall tried very hard to change the model of the sun, that is to give the sun less central temperature, that would diminish the formation of boron-8. No luck. Other people tried too, and Bahcall in the end proved that the standard model which had been developed and which he had contributed most to, was correct, and that really the temperature at the center of the sun is 15 million degrees and not 13. So boron-8 should be produced.

It remained a big puzzle. Finally this was solved, at least to my satisfaction, by two Russian theoretical physicists, Mikheyev and Smirnov, making use of a theory previously developed by Wolfenstein of Pittsburgh for a completely different purpose. Namely Wolfenstein said that when you have some very dense material and have neutrinos going into it, then there could be a transformation of the neutrino which we know, the electron neutrino, into another type which is associated with the µ-meson. And the two Russians took up that theory and said that's probably what happens in the sun; the neutrinos which are formed in the sun are interacting with the very dense gas of electrons in the sun and are converted into µ-neutrinos. Those you cannot observe on earth because in order to observe them by the methods so far used you have to have neutrinos of energies equal to the mass of a µ-meson because a µ-neutrino being absorbed by neutron or proton will give an electron... a µ-meson plus the other nucleon.   Well, that is a very attractive theory and it was brought to my attention by Davis who had done the experiment, and it immediately captured my interest and I... revised the Smirnov paper into one that is a little easier to comprehend and I became convinced that indeed the Smirnov theory is correct and that electron neutrinos are converted in µ-neutrinos.

How can you prove it? The way in which Bahcall made it very plausible is by showing that probably the neutrinos which arrive on earth have different properties according to their energy. The high energy neutrinos which come from boron and which are observed in Kamiokande are converted halfway into µ-neutrinos. The medium energy neutrinos, however, don't get out of the sun at all, they're practically all converted into µ-neutrinos and therefore are not visible. And he concluded that by comparing the result of Davis in chlorine with the result of Kamiokande, the comparison of this... these two shows pretty definitely that the beryllium neutrinos do not come to the earth. The beryllium neutrinos should be seen by Davis.   And then a third experiment was done using gallium, again I think suggested by Bahcall. In gallium you can observe the primary neutrinos which are made in the fundamental reaction making two protons coming together and forming deuterons. And... and now, this reaction has the great advantage that we know exactly how much there is of this reaction, namely this reaction after all feeds the energy of the sun, and therefore if we just look at the luminosity of the sun we can tell how intense this proton-proton reaction must be. And the proton-proton neutrinos can be observed with gallium. It was first done in Russia by a Russian-American group known as the SAGE Experiment, Soviet American Gallium Experiment, and then repeated in Italy by a European group.

I mentioned the gallium experiment which was done both in... in Russia and in Italy. At first they got different results, but after a while they began to agree quite well, and it turned out that these slow neutrinos, that is low energy neutrinos which come from the initial reaction, proton plus proton, are observed essentially in the right number. The agreement between the Russian and the Italian experiment was very satisfactory and it was of course very nice that it gave about the correct number for the low energy neutrinos. But then the real puzzle was: high energy neutrinos reduce to a half; medium energy neutrinos reduce probably to nothing; low energy neutrinos recorded in full strength; and as far as I can see the Smirnov theory, that is MSW Theory, is the only reasonable way to explain that.

We are looking forward to another experiment which has been in preparation for several years. The experiment is taking place in an abandoned... not not abandoned, in an old nickel mine in Sudbury, Ontario, which is quite far north and is known as the Subdury Neutrino Observatory, SNO - sno, and there's lots of snow in Sudbury of course.   The... this experiment uses heavy water, and the deuteron is a lovely particle which I have been dealing with in all my scientific life, in this case it can respond to a neutrino in two ways. It can either disintegrate directly into a neutron plus a proton, or it can disintegrate into two protons... and an electron. In the latter case you can see the electron with has a high energy if the neutrino has a high energy, and... I should say that only... again, only the boron neutrinos are observable in the SNO experiment. So you either get a high energy electron, or you get a neutron from the neutral reaction making a neutron plus a proton. The neutron in turn you can observe in two different ways. The way I like best is to have in the... embedded in the heavy water a counter of helium-3, a neutron and a helium-3 give you hydrogen-3 plus a proton of... and you can observe that fairly easily. It has an enormous cross section. So... then there is another way to observe the neutron, but let me not go into that.

You can observe both the charged reaction which gives you two protons and an electron, and the neutral reaction which gives you a neutron and a proton. The charged reaction can only be made by an electron neutrino. The neutral reaction, however, can be made equally by a µ-neutrino and an electron neutrino. And therefore it should be possible in this manner to catch the µ-neutrinos and to catch the sum of µ-neutrinos plus electron neutrinos by the neutral reaction. So we are looking forward to this experiment with great anticipation. If the neutral reaction really is sufficiently strong as we predict, then we will have proved that the... the MSW theory is correct, that is that the electron neutrinos really convert in µ-neutrinos and those can then be observed.

The theory as originally formulated by Wolfenstein gives you a connection between the neutrino mass and this process. And when you use all the existing experiments on solar neutrinos you can deduce that the mass of the µ-neutrino, assuming the µ-neutrino is the heavier one, that that mass is about 3 milli electron volts, that is three one-thousandths of an electron volt; as compared to the electron mass which is 500,000 electron volts. So the electron mass is then... some 100 million times bigger than the neutrino mass. That is... would be satisfactory, and this would be... this would be the best way to get access to the neutrino mass.

It has been a wonderful century and except for the first quarter I have been able to contribute to physics in this century. I came in at a very exciting and promising time when... when quantum theory was formulated. One of the remarkable things is that the fundamental ideas of quantum theory as formulated by Schrödinger, Heisenberg, Pauli and Dirac, the fundamental quantum theory is unchanged. It's the same today as it was in 1926, and I think this is sort of a miracle. It has been as durable as Newton's theory of mechanics and... and as Einstein's theory of relativity. Then another thing is that together with this new ability of the fundamental theory, there have gone so many discoveries of new phenomena, predicted by the radioactivity which was discovered just about a hundred years ago. Going through one of... the experiments and then going to the development, mostly since 1933, of accelerators, nuclear reactions being made possible by accelerators, going first into the millions of electron volts and more recently into the billions of electron volts, and 100 billions of electron volts. It was a spectacular experimental development and it is remarkable that quantum mechanics invented in 1926, still is correct. We have no experiment which is in conflict with quantum mechanics.

We want to understand the subatomic phenomena, the nuclear force and the subatomic particles, the many different mesons. Gell-Mann has been very productive in bring order into this chaos, and we have by the collaboration of many people, now what is known as the Standard Model of Nuclear Interactions which comprises all the mesons, comprises the nucleon and its many excited states. And also the way nuclear matter behaves at enormously high energy, in which again my friend Gerry Brown is deeply involved, where you get the transition from normal matter, nucleons and mesons to something... the Quark Gluon Plasma. And as far as we can tell at this point, again the standard model seems to be correct, though experimenters have tried to disprove it, and so far they have not succeeded. But one can hope that maybe some new insight may be obtained by the higher energies which... which are available now at CERN, their Proton Accelerator which will get us into the trillion electron volt region and maybe new phenomena will then occur which will better elucidate the interaction of all the particles that we know, and elucidate that standard model.

I probably won't be working on many problems any more, and I'm not a prophet. I cannot tell what will happen to physics. Of course the most exciting thing to me is the high energy physics; will the Standard Model hold up? Are we going to get more evidence on the quark gluon plasma which tells us how... what goes on inside the nucleus? And I think that there are good... good hopes that the high energy accelerator at CERN will indeed give us more insight into the fundamental interactions of the strong force. I think that the... the RHIAC, the Relativistic Heavy Ion Accelerator [sic] at Brookhaven will give us new insights into the quark gluon plasma which occurs at high energy and high density. The idea there is to make two heavy nuclei, like say, two nuclei of lead, collide and penetrate each other at high energy per nucleon. That's all very exciting and I wish I had more years to live - I probably won't - and this is one line of fundamental physics which surely will be very productive.   But one shouldn't forget other lines. One should not forget condensed matter physics which has practical applications, and we have had surprises in condensed matter physics, such as the high temperature superconductivity which probably will have practical applications in long distance transmission of electric currents, and which is a very exciting phenomenon in itself. I don't believe it has been satisfactorily explained by condensed matter physicists and there are more down to earth problems in condensed matter physics which are related to the properties of materials and so on. So there is lots to be done in physics. There is more to be done in chemistry, and especially in biochemistry which is only... has only begun to unfold. So fundamental science has a big future.
