howard.hiatt

Born in 1925, American Howard Hiatt set up one of the first medical oncology research and training units in the US and has headed up some of America's most prestigious medical institutions. Hiatt attended Harvard College and received his MD from the Harvard Medical School in 1948. He was a member of the team at the Pasteur Institute, Paris, that first identified and described mRNA, and he was among the first to demonstrate mRNA in mammalian cells. From 1991 to 1997, he was Secretary of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, where he began and directs the Academy's Initiatives For Children program. He is also committed to helping disadvantaged people access decent health care.

When I was invited to record my story for the Peoples Archives, I declined. I had seen of the reports from François Jacob, Sydney Brenner, Francis Crick and several other people whose stories are so very important. However, on reflection, it occurred to me that this would give me an opportunity to talk about how I've seen evolve the areas of academic... the areas of interest on the part of academic medical institutions from biology, from biochemistry and the other biologic sciences to the quantitative analytic sciences and now many of the social sciences. And, simultaneously, the concerns of the teaching hospital extending from the patient hospitalized within them, for which more and more can be done, of course, to the patient in the community and the community as a whole, with a corresponding emphasis on prevention. And, finally, more recently, to the health of impoverished people around the world, with a corresponding necessary focus on those conditions in addition to the organisms responsible for disease, those conditions that promote the disease.

I do a great deal of mentoring of students these days. Yesterday, I saw a medical student who told me that his parents came to this country from India when he was two years old. They've succeeded. He's now at Harvard Medical School, and he's surely en route to success. A common story about the United States, a place that has welcomed people from all over the world for a couple of centuries, and I mention that particularly because I feel that we're much less welcoming with our present administration, but enough of the political commentary.
My father came to this country when he was 15 years... not yet 15 years old, alone, from Eastern Europe, and went to the home of one of the two relatives he had in this country, a maternal uncle who lived in Southern Illinois. He worked in a coal mine until they knew enough English to take on other activities, and he then left. He subsequently joined the army in the First World War, was in the army until the war was over, and settled in the second place where he had a relative, in Worcester, Massachusetts where his paternal aunt lived. There he met my mother, a girl of just 18 years old. They were married before her 19th birthday and I was born before her 20th.
I grew up in Worcester, Massachusetts where my father... had a small business. His goal was... his goals were two, one to earn enough money to bring as many of his family to this country as wanted to come, and the second, to see his children educated. He was third of nine children, third in the line of five boys and then four girls. He brought three of his brothers here. The other brothers and all of his sisters chose to remain and were victims of the Holocaust. In fact, there was one surviving sister who lost her husband and child in a concentration camp and when she survived the camp and went back to the village where she had grown up and where my father had grown up in Lithuania, she learned that her family had been murdered, not by the Nazis, they hadn't yet arrived, the townspeople had killed them.

My father's goal to educate his children, certainly, was met. I, the oldest of three children, went to Harvard College and to Harvard Medical School. My brother graduated from Harvard College and my sister from Vassar College. My mother, when I was 12 years old, was hospitalised at a Harvard teaching hospital, had surgery and thereafter almost died from hemorrhage. I remember being so grateful to the surgeon who had taken care of her and who had seen her through the surgery and then her recovery, that I decided that this was a... a model for me, and from that time forward I thought of going to medical school. Well, at Harvard Medical School I had access to the records of the hospital where she had been so ill and discovered that she had had surgery for a problem that didn't require surgery and had haemorrhaged because she had a bleeding diathesis that hadn't been identified. I can't associated that story with my interest in my career in evaluating the effectiveness of medical procedures, but it is on my mind some of the time.

At classical high school in Worcester, I recall being advised by the Principal not to apply anywhere other than to Harvard where I wanted to go, because he felt confident that I would get in. When I was turned down for admission, and I had no back-up possibility, I went to see him. He was sufficiently troubled so that he went to Cambridge and saw the Dean of Admissions, said to him, you know the valedictorian in our class has applied to Harvard now several years and they've all been accepted. Is the fact that this one is Jewish in any way related to the action? Whatever the basis for the action, it was reversed on the spot and I did go to Harvard where I majored in English; did not finish because I went into the army and at... went into the army having been accepted to medical school, and had a brief period of basic training in the army before being discharged to go to medical school.
[Q] What was your exposure to science at Harvard?
I majored in English, had relatively little, took only those courses that were required for... for medical school aspirants, and was not moved particularly by the science I had, and subsequently at Harvard Medical School the exposure to biological science was really so unsatisfactory that I was virtually turned off by it. I subsequently became very excited by it, but for reasons I'll come to in just a... a few minutes.

At Harvard Medical School, I recall being interviewed shortly before commencement by the then Dean who, in those days, was able to interview all of the graduating class, and even then remember telling him that I thought I would return to Worcester to practice medicine. So, my decisions to go other than into medical practice came considerably later than that. I took a residency in medicine at Beth Israel hospital in Boston, was very taken with the Chairman of the Department there, a cardiologist named Hermann Blumgart, was really a wonderfully compassionate and... physician and cardiologist and a man of... who did some very important work in... in the early days of heart... heart disease research. I went from Beth Israel Hospital to a Fellowship in endocrinology at Cornell New York... Cornell Medical School, New York Hospital and there became interested in... in bone disease and in the effects of parathyroid hormone on bone disease.
It was while I was there that the Korean War broke out. Since I had not... I'd left medical school... I'd graduated from medical school at a time when the need for physicians was over, I now was a candidate for... for military service, and I joined the Public Health Service at the invitation of a person who was in charge of the National Institutes of Health. He had known the head of the endocrinology program at New York Hospital where I was working and indicated that if I joined the Public Health Service, I would be then welcomed at the National Institutes of Health to carry on work similar to what I had been doing at New York Hospital.
The clinical centre at the NIH, where the research on patients goes on, was being built and during the time that, before its completion I was permitted to stay at New York Hospital. I was sent for a year to Elgin, Illinois where there was a public health research project going on at the Elgin State Hospital. It was a distressing experience. The study was of vitamin deficiency in patients hospitalized at this hospital, and because these patients were not consulted they were subjected to vitamin-deficient diets, and shortly after I arrived I expressed concern about that and was... I asked to be relieved of that, of that duty and shortly afterwards, was.

My time at Harvard Medical School included my having met Doris Bieringer, a... then, while I was a fourth year... third year medical student, she was a senior at Wellesley College. We were married in the... during my fourth year at medical school and had our first child during my internship. She has clearly been the most important person in my life. Her values are such as to really keep me constantly looking at what I do and wondering how this would measure up to the standards that... that she's... that she sets. We have three children. Our daughter, once in a conversation with her, heard her mother say, 'Deborah, you know, daddy and I think of ourselves as being so lucky because we admire so greatly the values of our children'. To which Deborah replied, 'You admire our values because they're your values'. A more welcome response I can't think of.

From the New York Hospital, I went to the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda. New York Hospital was noteworthy for us for an important reason. It was where our daughter, Deborah, was born so when we left for Bethesda we had two children, John and, and Deborah, and before we left Bethesda our third child, our second son, Fred, was born. I arrived at the... when I arrived at the NIH, the clinical center still had not been finished. There had been a strike and the fact that it wasn't completed turned out to be one of the most important issues of my life. A friend had sent me to meet a biochemist at the NIH named Bernie Horecker, and because it wasn't possible to begin work in the clinical center I asked Bernie whether he'd have space in his laboratory. He... he told me that his colleague, Arthur Kornberg, had recently left to go to St Louis to Washington University and that he'd have laboratory space. The name Kornberg meant no more to me, at that time, than the name Horecker, and I wasn't above being willing to work in space that Kornberg had... had vacated.
At this time Horecker was working on elucidating the pathway of pentose phosphate metabolism, and that, again, was something completely unfamiliar to me. Bernie said to me, we're now in the process of purifying spinach transketolase. I had no experience with transketolase, some experience with spinach. It seemed like something quite remote from anything that really would ever have any meaning to me, but I joined that project and it was really a stunning experience. Bernie Horecker opened my eyes to what biochemical science can be, opened my eyes to what experimentation can mean, opened my eyes to the... the beauties of science.

The group working with him was deeply committed to their science. Weekday, every lunch time was devoted to a seminar. People left the bench at 12 promptly, gathered for the lunch seminar, heard one or another of the group present a paper and then returned to the lab at one o'clock, except on Monday. On Monday... Mondays was, were the days on which tickets were made available for the Budapest String Quartet concerts at the Library of Congress, and those tickets were free and were available at a music store on F Street in downtown Washington. Everybody in the group was interested in access to those tickets, so the Monday seminar was held on the sidewalk outside of the F Street music store while people were waiting for it to open and to dispense the tickets. The lab activity on Mondays went with only the briefest pause for lunch.

Early in my second year at the NIH I had a call from Hermann Blumgart, my chief at Beth Israel Hospital, who told me that he, he was organizing a program in medical oncology at the hospital and invited me to come back to... to take charge. I had no background in oncology, but he, and he knew that, but suggested that he'd be tolerant during my learning. Actually, my laboratory... my lab... one of my laboratory partners at the NIH was Henry Kaplan who was on sabbatical from his position as Chairman of the Department of Radiology at Stanford and one of the world's experts in the treatment of cancer by radiation. He introduced me to Alfred Gellhorn who, at that time, was the director of the Francis Delafield Hospital, the cancer hospital at Columbia Presbyterian in New York. I described to Alfred my dilemma. I was about to go back to Boston to organize an oncology program and I knew no oncology. What could he... how could he help me? He was obviously, and is, a very giving man. He has since become one of my very closest friends. And he suggested that I come to New York and that he would teach me what he knows, so I said, 'Well, I'm leaving here in Bethesda in June, shall I indicate to the people in, at, in Boston that I'll be away for six months?'  He roared with laughter, and he said, 'Six months! I... I don't know how you'd spend six months with me. Why don't you plan on coming for a week, I'll teach you all I know'. So, I did spend a week with Alfred at the Delafield Hospital. I didn't learn all that he knows, but I did get some confidence, and went then back to Beth Israel Hospital where I organized a clinical program in oncology, and set up a laboratory where I continued the work that I had begun with... with Bernie Horecker.

One of the questions that I asked when I worked with Bernie was whether the pentose phosphate pathway was the source of the ribose in RNA, the five carbon sugar in RNA and ribonucleic acid. And I began to examine that question, and in my lab in Boston sought to see whether, in fact, there were differences in... in the way RNA was synthesized in tumor cells as compared with normal cells. I did a series of studies of ribose metabolism using the background that I had acquired with Bernie, and wrote several papers in the biochemical literature on this subject, organized the clinical program and within... within two or three years of my return, Bernie Horecker, with whom I continued to do a fair amount of collaborative work, said to me, 'You know, if you really want to understand the neoplastic process, the cancer... how cancer... how the cancer behaves, you really should get to... some background in this new field of molecular biology'. Bernie had just spent a year at the Pasteur Institute in Paris which was, at that time, the center of the field now called molecular biology, and Bernie urged that I consider taking leave and going there.

In 1959, I had the first offer of a chairmanship of a department of medicine. Henry Kaplan, who had been my neighbour at the lab in... at the NIH, invited me to come to San Francisco... to Stanford, and he and a committee that included Josh Lederberg and Arthur Kornberg were looking for a chairman of the department of medicine. He invited me to come out and... and talk with them about it. This was pretty heady stuff for... for me at that stage and I, when I, in addition to which I got a, from him, a first class ticket on an aeroplane from Boston to San Francisco. I'd never travelled first class. In fact, when I got off the plane, Henry was there at the airport to meet me, said, 'How many drinks did you have?' I said, 'I had one'. He said, 'That drink cost Stanford $150', he said.
We went from there to the top of the Mark Hopkins where we began to talk about leadership of the department of medicine at Stanford and I said that it was flattering, but I was planning to go to - it was '59 - I was planning to go to Paris the next year, if they could wait I would consider it seriously then. He said, 'We can't wait, we're just really in a state where we need to find somebody now'. But, that was my first... that was the first time I really thought about the possibility of chairing a department of medicine.

I got permission. I was obviously a very junior faculty member, not anywhere near eligible for a sabbatical, but I took a year leave of absence, got a Fellowship from the Commonwealth Fund, and Doris and I and our three children went to Paris. It was clearly the most exciting year of our lives, for all of us. I worked with François Gros who was one of the people who had gotten a degree with Jacques Monod, and with, subsequently with François Jacob, and our children were in French schools. John and Deborah, then 11 and 9, in a private French school and Fred, then 5, in a... in a kindergarten.
The... my introduction to François Jacob came on day one. I walked into his office and he was sitting talking to a man. I excused myself for interrupting, said in the... the glorious French that I had learned during the year getting ready to go, stumbled through my introduction, and whereupon the small man sitting at his side said, in what was clearly a South African English accent, said to me, 'How is that yours is the only French I can understand in this city?' That man was Sydney Brenner and that compliment was one that I have remembered, as you can see.
I did have, actually, a comment on my accent. Later on, at the end of that year there, there was a biochemistry congress, an international congress in... Moscow and François Gros was supposed to present the paper that we had worked on during the year at the congress, but at the last minute was unable to go and asked me to go in his place. The French, at that time, were reluctant to have their funds used in ways that would not promote France, so I was asked to wear not a US badge on my jacket, but a badge that said France. I was entering the... one of the... halls where papers were being given and stopped to greet, be greeted by and to greet an American friend whom I hadn't seen for some time and we talked at length, and I saw somebody nearby watching me, listening, and then that person came over to me and excused himself for the intrusion, but said, 'You know, I can't help but notice', he said looking at me and looking at my badge that said France, 'I can't help but notice that you speak English with a decidedly American accent'. The, I indicated that my mother was American and felt that this was... the circle had come around from my earlier... the earlier comment about the quality of my, of my language.

The year in the lab was, was extraordinary. This was the year in which a team from the Pasteur and from Jim Watson's lab in Boston at Harvard that included Wally Gilbert, this was the year in which that team demonstrated the existence of mRNA. And again, an indication of the role of chance in my life, I happened to be there at that time and be a member of that team. From thereafter I was associated with messenger in the eyes of people who weren't close enough to know that I wasn't too much more than a glorified technician in that experience. Nonetheless, I... I really learned a great deal.
It was on day one or day two of, not day one of my time at the lab, but on the first day in which I carried out an experiment myself, that really led to results that were quite contrary to what then was the dogma. Jacquess Monod used to come into the lab every day after lunch, sit on the bench, cross his knees, and ask, 'Quoi de neuf, mes amis?'  'What's knew, friends?  And François introduced me, we had met, Jacques and I had met, but introduced me as now a colleague and said, 'Howard's gotten some really extraordinary results, it, it is something that really leads me to wonder about what we've been... what we've been accepting as the basis for the messenger'. And, Jacques listened and as was his wont, he got up, went into the library, everybody followed him, he took a piece of chalk, went to the board and built this fantastic picture of how my results would work into the messenger thesis. Well, I repeated the experiment the next day and, of course, it didn't work. It had been quite flawed, and Jacques arrived that afternoon, 'Quoi de neuf, mes amis?', and François Gros said, 'Well, Howard's repeated that experiment and it's come out really quite differently'. In the library we went, Jacques explained how relieved he felt that we now could put this all together in a way, never a word of criticism of what I had done or me, but it... it was a... lesson that I didn't, as you can see, I didn't forget.
[Q] Did this tell you something about molecular biologists?
It perhaps did say something about molecular biology in that the field was evolving and theories were, were rampant. This was at a time when some of the more traditional biochemists had great reservations about these people that they concluded, that they regarded as intruders. So many of them, Cyrus Levinthal, another friend, close friend of mine, like so many others, had been physicists before they turned to this... to this field.
The, the year for us was just extraordinary in other respects. John, our oldest, was learning Latin in French, never having... never having had any, either language, so that it was my responsibility, since I had had both, every evening to work with him. Deborah was a quick learner with respect to her French. After two or three weeks when I suggested that we change the language at our meals to French, said with a measure of disgust, 'I can't stand Americans talking French', and refused, refused to have any part of this. Fred excited everybody in the family. Fred and John shared - we had a very small apartment - Fred and John shared a room. Fred excited everybody in the family when he had his first dream in French, and he actually learned to speak French before... learned to read French before he knew to read in English. The books, the English books that we had brought for him, initially, offered some problems to him. He would look at a book and read, 'This is Mr Dog', and then he'd say in puzzle... great puzzlement, 'What is Mr Dog mean in English?' he'd say having learned, you know, language, learned... having learned to read phonetically. We travelled a fair amount. I worked hard. After John's... after our lessons in Latin I'd go back to the lab on many evenings and remember wondering what all of this might mean to medicine and to what I was going to return home to, but it was too exciting not to be in any way hindered by any concept of what, of, of its long-term implications.

We did return, of course, after a year. I'd changed considerably the directions of the laboratory in, I think, that, the studies that I carried out. Now, some collaboratively with people in Jim Watson's lab in Cambridge, were the first demonstrations of mRNA in the mammalian tissues. During the year, I had come back to Boston on a couple of occasions and was, several, on... on each of these occasions brought specimens from one lab to the other leading some people to designate me as le messanger. I was the messenger for... for, as far as that was concerned. I felt useful in that respect. But in, in the lab I returned to, to this, I undertook this work in Boston and really found that my commitment to the lab had grown, although I continued a very active clinical life and, in fact, two years after my return, when the chairman of the department of medicine, Hermann Blumgart, retired my name was put forward as a candidate to succeed him.

In 1963, shortly after Hermann Blumgart's retirement he... I was approached the then chairman of the Department of Surgery at Beth Israel Hospital, Jack Fine, who said to me, 'You're my candidate for this chair'. He said, 'It's time that...' I said, 'I'm really so involved, Jack, in, in lab work, it's just wonderful and I, I can't do it'. He says, 'It's time there was somebody with the experience that you've had who would look at the application of what you've been doing to medical issues'. That was in contrast to the view of the chairman of that department... of that committee. A very distinguished professor of medicine at Harvard, whom I had known both as my teacher and then as my colleague, who said to me, 'You know, your name has been mentioned as a candidate for the Blumgart professorship. But', he said, 'I don't see any relevance to what you've been doing to a department of medicine'. He said, 'You know, if you were a candidate for the chairmanship of the department of biochemistry here, I'd consider you very, very seriously'.
So, it was over, it was with that kind of reservation on the part of some of the people that my candidacy was looked at, and I really doubted that it would come to anything. But, I remember in 1963, I was in the cold room having done a sucrose gradient and taking drops, and at 5.30 in the afternoon, Jack Fine opened the cold room door, he said to me, 'Stop what you're doing'. I said, 'I can't, Jack'. 'No, no, stop. You've done it, you're, you're going to be the new chairman of the department of medicine'. And that was how that news came to me, in the cold room on the second floor of the Yamins Building. Well, I did think about it seriously. I did have reservations. But, the notion of really looking at what this new science might mean to medicine was very attractive, and I, without too much hesitation, I took the position. And, on April 1st, I think, of 1963 I took the chairmanship of the department.

At that point the department, the hospital was relatively small as compared with the other Harvard teaching hospitals. The department had very little in the way of research activity. There was Hermann Blumgart's work in cardiology and the work of a few others of his colleagues, but the opportunity to, to build that department was a great one and simultaneously... simultaneously the other departments in the hospital were being vacated, incumbents were retiring, so it presented an opportunity to have a voice in the leadership of the entire institution, and it was at that point that I approached a couple of the people whom I knew slightly who had departments that I admired greatly. One was Robert Loeb at... at Columbia Presbyterian, the other was Walter Bauer at the Mass General in Boston, both offered me encouragement. I asked both for suggestions of people I might recruit. Bob Loeb said, 'If I were you, I would look to Irv Goldberg. He's a man that has been with me for several years on my house staff, went from there to Rockefeller University to take a PhD with Fritz Lipman, and then went to the University of Chicago where he has been just a year or two'. So, I recruit Irv, and together we... we built the Department of Medicine at, at Beth Israel. One of the people who had been there, Dick Nesson, was somebody I came to know well during my days there, and I engaged him as my... as the person who would help develop the... the medical service and clinical teaching programs and he was extremely capable in that realm.
So, we recruited a group of people who had science backgrounds and strong clinical backgrounds, and it was a climate that was just marvellous. All of these people considered themselves physicians first, their caring for patients was of the highest degree. They considered themselves teachers. The service soon became the most sought after by Harvard medical students for residency training and it became a place where very interesting research was carried on. So, it, it was really an extremely attractive setting in all of these ways. The patients first, teaching and research second.

The Board of Trustees was committed to seeing the hospital develop. They signed on at once to my vision for the, the future of the hospital. I explained to them that, in order to attract the kinds of people that I thought would do what the hospital would profit from having done, required much more laboratory space than the hospital had, and that it was crucial that we address that need early. The then head of the hospital, the... the person who was the titular director of the hospital wasn't in complete accord with that and we... we did have disagreement on that point. He's, when the trustees supported me with respect to the priority of their building, that is to say, a research building first and a new patient care building second, he subsequently left and we sought a new director. I played a role in that. Mitchell Rabkin was... had had no previous experience in hospital administration, but he agreed to come in that role.
I recall the meeting that I had with the then President of the Hospital Board of Trustees, wonderful man, who was head of a local business called the Green Shoe Company. The man's name was Sam Slosberg. The Green Shoe Company made children's shoes, and about a year before my meeting with Sam Slosberg he, quite by chance, had recruited my brother who had a small children's shoe company and the one that Slosberg was in charge of was one that wanted very much to get my brother, so they bought the... the company. My brother, who has served as a model for me in many ways, an extraordinary man, deeply committed to the problems of society and has expressed that commitment in a variety of ways, my brother had... apparently had a meeting with Sam Slosberg on the afternoon of the evening on which I made the pitch for a science building to, to Sam. And, Sam turned to the people around him and said, 'All day, all day I've had to put up with the unreasonable demands of this man's brother, and in the evening, seeking a little bit of repose, I come and find myself putting up with his unreasonable demands!' But that was more or less the spirit of the, of the trustees of the hospital, and it was just an exciting place to be.
The men that we recruited that came to head the various units, hematology and cardiology and endocrinology, and kidney disease, people who were just starting out, by and large, when they arrived, by the time the, a... a period of four or five years had gone by, were getting offers themselves for chairmanships in various places around the, the country. Dan Kimberg ultimately went to Columbia Presbyterian as chairman of the department of medicine. Dick Nesson went to the Brigham and Women's Hospital ultimately as president of the hospital. Lou Sherwood went to, to the, to the, the Albert Einstein Medical School as chairman of the department of medicine. Who else? Lou Sherwood... Howard Frazier came to the School of Public Health to Head the Center for the Evaluation of, of Health Practices. Stuart Schlossman went to the Dana Farber Centre. A group of very gifted, deeply committed, wonderful colleagues.

When it came time to, to select a professor of surgery the... I was on that committee and felt that the relationship between the departments of medicine and surgery had to be as close as possible, so I was determined to try to identify a person whose commitment to teaching, to quality of patient care, to research, mirrored that of the group of people in the department of medicine.
A friend of mine, Bob Glaser, then the Dean at the University of Colorado Medical School, told me that... of a young surgeon who had just left his school to go to the University of California at San Francisco, Bill Silen, a man who was now a... at UCSF, an Associate Professor, but one who was doing very creditable work on the physiology of the gastrointestinal tract, and who was a superb surgeon. I put Bill's name forward and our committee selected him. He came to the hospital at a time before there was adequate research space, and I went to my colleagues in medicine and asked them to give up some of the space that we had, as short as space was, in order to make this an attractive place for Bill. The response was, was one of great concern and, and willingness to bring about Bill's coming, and of that, from that point on the relationship of the two departments was very, very close and, I think, a model for, for teaching hospitals elsewhere.

I had said, when I took the position, that I would do it for no more than 10 years and then go back to the lab, and in the seventh year I went to... I took a sabbatical. The hospital, the, the department was put in the keep of... of Howard Frazier and Dick Nesson, and I went to the Imperial Cancer Research Fund laboratories of Michael Stoker at Lincoln's Inn Field's in London. I went there to study nuclear transfer, a rather new area of biology, but I chose to do it in the UK because I was very interested in the National Health Service, and in the way in which general practitioners functioned, particularly the interactions of general practice and social service. Indeed, one of my former residents at, at the Beth Israel, a remarkable man named Brian Jarman had returned to the UK where he had become a GP.
And, I found myself in London out of the lab some of the time making house calls with Brian, something that, as a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, I had only rarely done, but it was, it was routine practice for Brian and it opened my eyes. I recall, on our first house call we went fifth floor of, of a, an apartment building on the south bank of the Thames, and were greeted by a man who was a truck driver who told us about his lorry, but told us about his child who had a very bad sore throat and fever, and a second child with the same problem. Well, Brian examined the first child and I examined the second. We both agreed that both kids had strep throats, and while Brian was making out prescriptions and filling in the paperwork, I did what I did on all of my ventures in such settings, I asked, 'What do you think of the, of the Health Service?' And, with this Cockney accent he said, 'It's the best thing here, Governor, the doctor, it's the best thing here'. He said, 'Every time I have a, I come into it in one way or another, it gets better, for example, how did you people know that there were two, we needed two doctors today?' This was a... an experience, not precisely in those terms, that I experienced from virtually everybody, their reaction to the health service.

Among the colleagues in the Department of Medicine, of course, were Dave Feingold who became a prominent dermatologist and Frank Davidoff who chaired the Department of Medicine at University of Connecticut and then became Editor of the Annals of Internal Medicine. On my return from England I, with my colleagues, developed programs in the community, that had been suggested to me by my experience in the UK and developed a primary care program at the Beth Israel.

We were surely the first Harvard teaching hospital to have a program in primary care, to have active community associations and it was then, as well, that we developed programs in computer technology and their... its application to, to medical care. Warner Slack and Howard Bleich were pioneers in that area. Herb Sherman and Barney Reifen, two engineers from Lincoln Laboratory became interested in what we were doing and joined us, initially, temporarily and then decided to stay.
I found then and this will... I'll mention this further when I talk about the next chapter in my career, I found then, that the relationships that I had developed over the years with people in other parts of Harvard University, not only in the biological sciences and chemistry, but throughout the social sciences as well, really played an important role in both my insights and in my... and the, the ideas that they helped generate for what we might do and what might contribute to the effectiveness of a hospital and of a medical active... and of medical activities.

I began to have enquiries about deanships of medical schools as early as 1967 or '68. Barry Wood, then chairman of Research Committee at Johns Hopkins, offered me the deanship there. I wasn't really ready for a deanship then and not ready at all to leave my place at Beth Israel, but other offers came. In 1970, I was offered the deanship at Columbia Presbyterian. This was while we were  in England. I made several trips across the water to look at the situation at Columbia and at Presbyterian Hospital, but I had great... and I was very eager to... to take that position. It was at a time when New York was in something of an uproar. The community... members of the community were expressing their unhappiness with the way they were being treated, and it seemed to me that there was a great opportunity for Columbia and Presbyterian Hospital to, to develop and strengthen ties with members of, of the community in Harlem and in Upper Manhattan.
I presented that to the then President of Columbia University, Andrew Cordier, who had been at the UN before he, he came back to Columbia, and to the then Chairman of the Board of Presbyterian Hospital. The latter had absolutely no interest in such activities. Said to me, on one occasion, 'Doctor, our community is the world', and pointed out that on the seventh floor of the Hartness Pavilion was Madame Chiang Kai-shek and her entourage. At any rate, I finally decided that there wasn't any way that I could really achieve what I wanted to achieve in a deanship and I went to see Cordier to tell him that I was sorry, but that I was withdrawing. He said to me, 'Howard, come here'. He said, 'Come to New York, come to Columbia. You and I, together, will approach the person in charge at the Presbyterian Hospital, we'll bring him around'. He said, 'After all, I brought Ben Gurion and Nasser together, and this seems to me like a small job'. Well, it was a job that I wasn't in the mood for and I said to him, 'Andrew, nothing would please me more than working with you, and if the next team does the job that needs doing it'll be a glorious job for the dean that follows, but I don't see myself in that role'.
So, I went back to London, finished the year there, came back to the... Beth Israel, really focused largely on building community programs, and in 1972 was about to accept the position as dean of the medical school at Yale when the President of Yale, Kingman Brewster, called his friend, Derek Bok, the new President at Harvard, and a person who had been a colleague of his, Kingman's, on the faculty of the Harvard Law School, Kingman called Derek to say that he was taking a member of Derek's faculty, and Derek called me to say that he was now looking for a dean of the School of Public Health, and he would really be grateful if I would take a look at it. He said, 'I've had a committee that has looked at the school and has said to me that it's not in good condition intellectually, and if you, if you really want to change it, he said, you've, you've got...  No, in fact, he, he said, 'You have three choices. You can close it, you can merge it with the medical school, or you can change it very appreciably from the outside'. He said, I...  Derek said, I can't do the first, the agenda is too important, if I merge it with the medical school it'll get lost, it's just miniscule as compared with the size of the medical school, and if I... so that leaves me only one choice and would you be willing to do it with me?

Shortly before I left the hospital, the trustees of the hospital asked for my advice with respect to my successor. I told them that the new professor had just been chosen for the Brigham, that I had spoken with him and that he was very eager to see a close relationship with the... with Beth Israel. Indeed, I said to the trustees, I... I have difficulty in visualizing two completely independent Harvard teaching hospitals within a few hundred yards of each other indefinitely, and if it were possible to pick a chairman for each of these institutions, that is, to pick a person who would chair medicine in both hospitals and surgery in both hospitals, it could be an undertaking that might have extremely important outcome for the... for Harvard Medical School and for the institutions in question. Braunwald, the new chair of medicine for the Brigham, had indicated his willingness to take responsibility for the two departments if he were invited. Bill Silen knew that the chairman of surgery at the Brigham was... would be retiring shortly, said he would be willing to step aside and, if the committee chose him, he'd be glad to take on the two institutions. If it chose someone else he'd be willing to work with the person whom it chose. That was a proposal that I offered that was considered, but it did not come to pass.
Subsequently, when the Department of Medicine at the Beth Israel was not doing as well as people would like, the head of the hospital, Mitch Rabkin went to the new chairman not... now not so new any longer, chairman of medicine at the Brigham, and invited him to share responsibilities, to share his activities taking charge, not only at the Brigham but at Beth Israel, and Braunwald did that for a few years until that department was strengthened.

I spoke earlier about the caring of the medical staff, the model that Hermann Blumgart established, and I went on to the floor - I had already left the hospital - came back one day to visit a patient and was... and met one of the oncologists at the hospital who had been a student at the hospital when I was chairman of the department. He invited me to make rounds with him and his students, and I went into a room where there was a young woman in bed. Steve Colm, the person I speak of, now an oncologist, sat on the edge of her bed, took her hand and said, 'You know, it's now been several hours since you and I talked earlier, and what questions have come up?' He had earlier told this woman that she had Hodgkin's disease. She expressed some concerns. He addressed them holding her hand, sitting on the edge of her bed, and then said to her, 'I'll be back this evening and we'll talk further'. We went out into the hall, into the corridor and the... and Steve Colm turned to one of the students and said, 'What did you think about that encounter?' And the student said, 'I was very impressed by your having sat on the edge of the bed and taken that woman's hand'. And he said, 'I learned that from Dr Hiatt, he did that one day when I made rounds here'. And I said to him and to the students, 'I learned that from Dr Blumgart, he then... he did that one day when I made rounds here as a student'.

I visited the Harvard School of Public Health, talked with several of the faculty members and was convinced that they, too, felt that change was required, but I didn't really go into detail to find out how deep the change nor its nature in the view of... of the people to whom I spoke. I accepted the position, however, because it did seem in keeping with my eagerness to bring more quantitative analytic science into the health field, to focus more on the community needs for healthcare, to address a whole range of environmental problems that were relevant to human health, and to address problems concerned with the health of impoverished people around the world.
Herb Sherman and Barney Reifen, the two engineers who had joined me at the School of Public... at the Beth Israel Hospital, expressed their eagerness to work with me at the School of Public Health and the three of us arrived on July 1st of 1972. We spent that summer in meetings with members of the faculty. We invited each department head and his or her colleagues to meet with us to describe what went on in their departments, and to tell us of their aspirations for those departments. It seemed clearer to me at the end of those discussions than at the beginning that public health was, in fact, not a discipline but a series of problems and problems that required for their amelioration the input from people from a variety of disciplines. It also seemed to me, from my conversations with colleagues in other parts of the university, that there was widespread interest in those problems and that it would take little effort to recruit people from the other areas to address some of the problems that were on the agenda of the school.

My introduction to university politics came soon after I arrived as dean at the School of Public Health. The university counsel, Dan Steiner, called a meeting of all of the deans on medical school... School of Public Health side of the river, and indicated that there was an incipient strike, not a strike, an incipient movement to... to organize into a labor union the employees of the various units on our side of the river, and the deans were asked to come together to talk about strategy as to how to deal with this. Dan, whom I liked very much, knew well that this might provide something of a problem for me because one of the organizers of the union was my daughter, who had at that time just become a secretary in the dean's office at the medical school, and on day one, when one of the deans asked her without much ceremony to get him a cup of coffee, she said, 'I don't remember that in my job description'. And, she... I don't think this was her... her turning to the union was a result of that, but she found practices of that sort and it was quite sympathetic.
It was at this time - I had just left Beth Israel Hospital where I'd been Chief of the Medical Service - and shortly after my departure another union was attempting to organize there. The lawyer that was representing that union was my older son who had just gone into the law and who became a labor lawyer. Finally, my third child, Fred, who was an undergraduate at Harvard at the time, was writing for The Crimson, and there were problems at that time because Harvard had investments in South Africa and the students were not happy with that arrangement and Fred was writing editorials for The Crimson, castigating the President for not taking the university out of that arrangement. At any rate, it seemed not to have a profound affect on my career and I confess that, at the time and ever since, I've felt some measure of pride at their activities.

Indeed, we started with a seminar on health issues that was led by Fred Mosteller who was chairman of the Department of Statistics at Harvard, and a member of the faculty of not only Arts and Sciences but of Government and who was widely respected within the university and around, around the world for his work in statistics. Fred, and perhaps 100 people from around the university, gathered at a bi-weekly seminar that we held on a range of issues that were chosen by the people in the group, but issues that many of which were on the Public Health School agenda, many of which were related to the public's health, but weren't on the agenda. Out of that series of seminars arose joint projects, books and plans for future activities. One book that was published by Milt Weinstein and Bill Stason. A decision, scientific treatment of the problem of hypertension was an early product. Fred and two colleagues, a surgeon names Ben Barnes and the chairman of anesthesia at Stanford, John Bunker, on leave at Harvard at that time, the three edited a book entitled Costs, Risks and Benefits of Surgery, which dealt with a series of procedures many of which were high on the list of frequent... were being carried out frequently by physicians, but the validity of which remained to be determined, and in some instances, where the validity had been excluded.
Fred became a close advisor and a year later, when the school started a search for a chairman of the Department of Biostatistics, he was a person whom I consulted and who joined... who served on the committee to find such a chair. That department at the school had three members, people deeply committed to teaching, but who did little or no research, and who... all three of whom, were eager to retire. Fred agreed to permit me to put his name before the committee that was seeking a chairman and his selection was virtually automatic. I was congratulated on the possibility of his joining us, and he agreed to serve. He said he would leave his post in the Department of Statistics in the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, but only for three years, and then help... during which time he would help build a department and then return to Cambridge. He did so. He built what shortly became, and has remained by... in the view of most experts, the outstanding department of biostatistics in the country. And, at the end of that three-year period, when Fred said he was going to return to Cambridge, I approached him and asked whether he would consider staying to chair a new department, a Department of Health Policy and Management which we had just created. To my delight, Fred agreed to do so.

Because the management of healthcare institutions had really received little attention from schools of management, and certainly from the Harvard Business School, and little attention in medical schools, a small group of us decided to create a program, a two-year training program in health policy and management at the School of Public Health and that was the first of the new teaching programs that we began. In order to recruit people to teach, since the school did not have many people qualified in that sphere, I went to the Department of Economics at Harvard and to the Harvard Business School and recruited people who joined us, helped conceptualize the programs and then helped teach them.
I mentioned, of course, the... the fact that the problems in the public health arena required experts from other departments, and in this instance it was crucial that we get people whose teaching skills and whose research capabilities were strong. We... we were able to do so, but with some concern expressed on the part of the faculty where I heard so often X or Y has had no public health background. That being a reflection in the view of many members of the faculty, a reflection of a person's lack of... of likelihood of succeeding in addressing public health problems. This demand for a public health background with relatively less attention to the capability in the discipline in which individuals were trained led to a fair amount of concern on the part of the faculty, with the new dean. When, for example, I was asked to put together a committee to evaluate a faculty member whose formal training had been in economics, but had been working at the School of Public Health in an area of health economics, when I was asked to put together a committee, and did so with members of the Economics Department, that was found troubling by some of my colleagues. The committee found this individual not worthy of a tenure slot and he was passed over. An even more troubling event took place a year later when the person who was in charge of one of the major public health programs that involved a background in chemistry and biology was nominated for tenure, I appointed a committee to evaluate his suitability for tenure.

I also invited professors of biology and chemistry on the committee and the candidate was found, again, to have carried out work that was not of tenure calibre. This person was president of the... the national association of his field which made for even greater difficulty in understanding such a decision on the part of some of the faculty, and that... that concern was expressed to me with some frequency. I... we did ultimately appoint... go outside of the area to appoint a person in the area. That individual, completely renewed the field, rejuvenated the field, although for the first two or three years of his service at the school, was refused research grants from the study section that included people from other schools of public health from the same field who couldn't understand how this individual, without a background in... in public health, so to speak, could... could succeed. As I said, he did ultimately change the field and the department at the school and in other schools of public health now, are greatly the stronger for what he and people he recruited have contributed.

In other departments in the school we often went outside the traditional public health area with considerable success. Nathan Keyfitz, one of the world's leading demographers, chaired the Department of Population Sciences for several years, and he was followed by David Bell who was the first head of the... the... David Bell who was the first Head of USAID under President Kennedy, and then the head of the Population Program at the Ford Foundation. Armen Tashjian chaired the Department of Toxicology, Armen having been at the medical school before coming to the School of Public Health, and he and the people he recruited redefined that field. John Cairns, one of the world's leading biologists, came to the school, set up a program in cancer biology and in epidemiology, and again, was met early on with a charge that he had no public health background, a true charge if one means by that no background in a school of public health, but a world renowned scientist who contributed much.
We didn't succeed in all of the ventures we began. I tried very hard to persuade Joe Goldstein and Michael Brown, two scientists who, of course, won, ultimately won a Nobel Prize for their work on cholesterol biosynthesis. I tried hard to persuade them to come to the school to chair the Department of Nutrition, but they preferred to stay in Texas. Subsequently Peter Timmer, a well known agricultural... agricultural economist did come to the school and after two or three years found that the business, the Harvard Business School would be a more hospitable environment for his work and he... he transferred there. Peter Goldman, a person trained in clinical pharmacology, but interested in nutritional issues, ultimately did come to the School and contributed a great deal.

I mentioned some of the people that came from outside of public health and outside of the school to... outside of the... the fields in question, and made so great a difference in terms of the teaching and research programs of the school. John David had been at the medical school, interested initially in microbiology, and had studied a range of organisms that cause human illness in... in our society, but then turned to tropical diseases, and came to the school in the Department of Tropical Public Health and organized a program that was of great value.

I met Herb Sherman socially at a time when his wife had just undergone mitral valve surgery at one of the Harvard teaching hospitals. Herb told me that she had had her valve replaced with a porcine valve, and he had just come from the library where he looked at the experience with porcine valves. He said that he found a shocking paucity of experience in animals as well as in people, but in animals before the valves were used in people, and in people before the valves were widely advertized as an important advance. At that time Herb was in charge of the communications satellite program at the Lincoln Laboratories. He said to me, 'You know, I, I'm responsible for the team that puts up communications satellites'. He said, 'If I did as little research or if as a little research were done on a... a satellite as I find done in medicine on heart valves, if I really were to launch a satellite with as little basis on... in research', he said, 'I would lose my job without question'. We began a friendship at that time. Within a short period of time he took a leave of absence from the Lincoln Laboratories. He and his colleague Barney Reifen were convinced that computers had something to offer to medical care, and they came, fully funded by Lincoln Laboratories, as they worked with me at Beth Israel Hospital to explore the potential usefulness of communication satellites... potential usefulness of computers to... to medical care.
Our first experiment was to determine how useful a computer might be in making a specific medical diagnosis, and what Herb decided to look at was the accuracy with which doctors diagnose streptococcal... streptococcus as the cause of sore throats. It took very little time before Herb decided that a computer would not be nearly as useful as a pencil and a piece of paper for carrying out the experiment that he proposed. What the experiment involved looking at... training a group of high school graduates as to the symptoms and signs that are consonant with the diagnosis of strep throat, and then comparing what a team of people that he and Barney trained, where the... the success of that team as compared with doctors and nurses who were looking at the same group of patients. They proved to have an accuracy of something of the order of, of 80 or 85%. The doctors were closer to 60 or 65%. This is before the, of course, the tests were done to ascertain whether or not strep was the cause of the sore throat. But that was the first study that Herb and Barney were involved in, and subsequently they remained at Beth Israel and came to the School of Public Health with me. When we set up the Center for the Analysis of Health Practices, they were invaluable in terms of their work with physicians like Howard Frazier and Don Berwick, and with colleagues, other colleagues, at the School of Public Health.

The Center for the Analysis of Health Practices, which was established outside of the departmental structure of the school, examined a range of... of medical practices and medical problems including some concern with the quality of medical care, and the results of that enterprise were really profound. Don Berwick, who came to the school, subsequently became one of the leaders, perhaps the leader, on quality of medical care issues in the country, in the world. Milt Weinstein, who was initially in that center, ultimately became a member of the Department of Health Policy and Management. Milt's background was rather interesting. Shortly after I took the deanship, I was approached by Howard Raiffa who is widely considered to be the, perhaps, the father of decision science. Howard said to me, you know, I think that the whole field of medicine and health could profit greatly from a person or people whose interest and experience is in the area of decision science, and it was Howard who recommended one of his students, Milton Weinstein, who had just finished his doctoral work with him, as a candidate. Milt came to the school because there was no ready home for him in a department early on, he was based in the Center, but ultimately became a very important man of... member of the Department of Health Policy and Management, and trained a whole group of people who had followed in his footsteps.
Another of the people who came to the school early and who created new areas for enquiry was Harvey Fineberg who subsequently became the dean of the school and is now President of the Institute of Medicine.

I spoke earlier about the reluctance of the departments at the school to take on some of the new activities that I thought, and some of my colleagues thought, could be so productive to address public health problems. And, we set up a series of units outside of the departments. One that was particularly useful, and I think important, was the Center for the Analysis of Health Practices which was directed by a colleague of mine who had come to join me from Beth Israel Hospital, Howard Frazier. And Howard, a marvellous teacher, wonderful doctor, and a... a great mentor for young people, had around him a group of people who have since become really very well known: Harvey Fineberg, who's now the President of the Institute of Medicine; Milton Weinstein, who is one of the leaders, perhaps the leader, in medical decision-making, and its teaching and its research; Don Berwick, who is the, perhaps the leading figure in quality of medical care issues in this country and around the world - he has a, actually an honorary knighthood from the Queen for his work in the UK.
Emerged... what emerged from their activities was a great deal of research, research that was encouraged by Herb Sherman, the engineer whom I had described earlier, and who came with me from Beth Israel Hospital, and they looked at a whole range of medical practices, evaluated them and published work on their effectiveness or lack of it. Milt Weinstein wrote the first book on the use of decision science in medical decision-making and that's... he has since really spawned a field. In addition, we began a series of courses for physicians, for medical hospital leaders, for people in medicine in a range of areas, courses that focused on economics and on management science, and for those activities we recruited a number of people from the Harvard Business School who have actually... many of whom have stayed on at the school and who have been leaders in their field. That was... those were some examples of extra-departmental activities that I thought were quite important.

In 19... 1981, a student came to me and said he was organizing - it was 1980, at a time when two presidential candidates were talking about fighting and winning a nuclear war - a student came and said he was organizing a meeting at Harvard on the topic of nuclear war and asked me to serve as the keynote speaker. I had not paid much attention to the problem. I just assumed that nobody considered nuclear war a... a feasible undertaking of any sort, but clearly I thought it appropriate to cast the problem in public health terms. And... I did speak at the meeting. I did focus on the implications of the... the use of a single nuclear weapon of one megaton strength, and the problem attracted a fair amount of attention.
A year later, the Papal Academy of Sciences called a meeting on the topic and I was asked to go as part of an American delegation of four people. The topic was, in fact, the medical issues surrounding a nuclear conflagration, and I was asked to write the paper that the Pope would subsequently sign and distribute to the leaders of the nuclear powers. Members of the meeting at the Papal Academy were asked to call on President Reagan, Prime Minister Thatcher, Mitterand of France, and Brezhnev in... in Russia, and I was a part of the group of four that called on President Reagan. Victor Weisskopf, Professor of Physics at MIT, David Baltimore, Professor of Biology at that time at MIT and subsequent Nobel Prize winner, and Marshall Nirenberg, also a Nobel laureate at the National Institutes of Health, and I called on the President, along with the papal nuncio. The President was not very comfortable with our visit. We weren't asked to sit down; we stood. Because I was the only physician present, Vicky Weisskopf, the head of our group, said to the President that they had asked me, as the physician, to carry the Pope's message to him. I apologized to the President for personalizing the message. There had been an assassination  attempt on his life, his, President Reagan's life, a year before and he had been hospitalized at the George Washington University Hospital in the emergency room, initially. And I said to him, 'Mr President, it... I apologized for making this so personal, but it's my impression from all that I've read in the papers that your life was saved by the group of doctors and nurses and other personnel at the GW Hospital'. He said, 'Undoubtedly that's true'. I said, 'Further, it's my impression from what I know about emergency rooms that were there three or four people in your condition brought to the hospital simultaneously, the resources of the institution would've been stretched beyond capacity, and there would've been no way to intervene on behalf of all four'. And he said, 'That doesn't surprize me'. I said, 'The Department of Defence has released figures that indicate that in the event of a 1 megaton weapon exploding over the White House, that as many as 300,000 or 400,000 people would be killed immediately, and many more rendered in desperate need of medical attention, and the George Washington University Hospital would cease to would cease to exist as would other institutions where such people might go'. There was silence. The President then said something about Armageddon, I'm not sure quite what, but he thanked me for my presentation. We were ushered out a back door and we went out. One of the members of our group knew that there was a large group of people from the press waiting to interview us, and so we went around to the... to the front door of the West Wing and went in and were greeted by the press where we described this event, and the... description of all but the personal exchange that I've just mentioned was headline news in the newspapers the next day.
I continued to work on that problem, along with colleagues, and I think that group that included Bernard Lown and others from this area, Herbert Abrams from Stanford, did have a profound effect.

After five years at the school, I had... I had told the president that I would take the deanship for a period of five years, and then leave to go back to a medical setting where my training and previous experience had been. And, after four-and-a-half years I told the president that I was going to resign. He... he was really quite adamant in not accepting my resignation, pointed out to me that I had recruited a group of people who were new to the school and often new to the fields in question, who would be cast... might be cast loose if I were no longer there. He mentioned Harvey Fineberg and Milt Weinstein and Howard Frazier, Don Berwick and others, and I relented and stayed on.
Two years later, however, the... the majority of the faculty did ask the president to replace me, and he declined to do so. At that point I made one major change. The Associate Dean, who had been a member of the Faculty of Public Health for several decades, and whom I had asked to stay on with me as the... as my associate, but had never really been wholly persuaded that what was underway was in the interests of the school, he stepped aside and I replaced him with Elkan Blout, a Professor of Chemistry from the Harvard Medical School who remained with me throughout the remainder of my tenure as Dean, and stayed on after I left. In 1984, 12 years after my arrival, seven years after I said I would leave, I did resign and I went back to the medical school.

There is an Association of Deans of Schools of Public Health and I attended the meetings fairly regularly. There was, I think, serious question on the part of many, maybe of most, with respect to my insistence that public health was not a discipline but a, a series of problems. They were troubled to see the changes that were going on at Harvard. They expressed concern that so-called traditional public health people were not finding Harvard School a hospitable setting for them and wondered about what I was doing. I think that most schools of public health, as best I can tell, followed us with many of the changes we made and I think the general feeling on the part of deans in subsequent years, was one... was a feeling that these changes had, in general, been, been important for the future of... of public health.

I spoke earlier of the fact that in 1984, 12 years after I came to the school and five years after Derek Bok declined to accept my resignation, I did resign, and at that time I left to return to the Medical School.
Seven years later, Derek Bok wrote me a letter that I'd like to read from. Dear Howard, it's dated April 26th 1971 [sic]. Dear Howard, the Corporation chose to conduct yesterday's meeting - the Corporation is the governing... one of the governing boards of Harvard - chose to conduct yesterday's meeting at the School of Public Health in order to see at first-hand what the School was doing. As I sat there, I realized that it was just 20 years since Jack Sneyder - Jack Sneyder was my predecessor as Dean of the School of Public Health - since Jack Sneyder invited me, as a President Elect (this was Derek's first year at... as President of the university) since Jack Sneyder invited me to see the school for the first time. I cannot begin to describe how much better the School of Public Health is in every way from what it was in 1971. There is a sense of excitement, a student enthusiasm of high faculty morale that is quite palpable. All this, as we both know, could not have occurred without the enormous effort you devoted to shaking the faculty out of its complacency and lifting its aspirations and its standards. I realise how lonely and difficult your efforts were. At this point, however, when one can assess the results objectively after the elapse of several years, the verdict seems clear and you should feel extremely proud. For my part I am simply grateful. 
I regarded... regard this as a... as a gratifying ending, but as perhaps is evident from the way in which I've told the story, this was not a particularly, not... not a gratifying period of my life, of my career. We did recruit many people from many parts of the university to programs in the... the public health fields, and those programs, I think, benefited enormously as a result. I think we changed really the attitudes of people in public health schools around the country, but I failed to convince a large number of my colleagues at the school, people who had been there for many years and, although none chose to leave, I found the experience not a particularly happy one, in... in retrospect than at the time.

In 1984-85 I took a sabbatical and I wrote the book that was intended to change definitively the healthcare system in the United States and healthcare in... in general. The book was entitled, America's Health in the Balance, although I chose the title, Medical Lifeboat I permitted my publisher to persuade me that the first title would lead to greater sales, and that's the way in which it appeared initially. The first review of the book took place in, in the New York Times by their principal book critic at that time, Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, and the review began, this... the review which was an altogether favourable one, began, 'this drearily-titled book' and went on in that fashion. Shortly after my paper arrived I had a call from my publisher, close friend. He apologized abjectly and promised that the paperback edition would be entitled Medical Lifeboat. It was. I'm not sure it sold any more copies than the original and the healthcare system today - nobody would quarrel with my suggestion that it's far worse off than it was then, so my goal was not... was not met. The book was translated into both Japanese and Korean by some of my students at the School of Public Health, and whether there have been changes in the healthcare in Japan and Korea, I can't tell, but it cannot have had a lesser affect than in the United States.

When I returned to Boston I had been invited to join the faculty at the Medical School in the Department of Medicine at the Brigham and Women's Hospital. Dick Nesson who had been a... my number two at the Beth Israel Hospital was now President of the Brigham, and Gene Braunwald, a colleague from my earlier days, was chairman of the Department of Medicine. Both offered me an opportunity to... to join the department as a professor without portfolio and that has provided me with, perhaps, a period as, as gratifying as the first chapter in, in my career.
I had been eager for some time to examine issues of quality of medical care and to look at the problem of medical malpractice. There was a great deal of concern with this issue and I had spoken with a colleague, Paul Weiler, a professor at the Harvard Law School, Joe Newhouse, a professor of economics, and we agreed that we would, first of all, attempt to collect data on the problem. Quite fortunately a former student, David Axelrod, was now the... was now the Commissioner of Health in the state of New York. An extraordinary man. He had been a scientist who turned to the problems of the healthcare system in New York at the urging of the Governor, Mario Como at that time. And, when David heard that we planned to do a study, he urged us to do it in New York. He said, the Governor has asked me to propose legislation to deal with this problem of medical injury and the associated court problems and I find only anecdote as I turn to the literature. If you do what you've assured me you propose to do, it'll help us enormously. And David's involvement in this, in this project is one that I think is really to be adopted by anybody doing such research. He made available to us all sources of information, all hospital records, all court records, and all insurance records. We obviously pledged to keep all of this confidential. He also provided the money for the study. The study took a considerable period of time and more than 3,000... more than $3 million, and the New York State legislature provided that money. When I, when I said rather apologetically to Governor Como, I said that we had calculated the costs and apologized for the, the size of the... for the figure we had put forward, three million dollars, he said to me, 'Doctor, the doctors in this state, last year, spent $1 billion in malpractice premiums, that means that the people of New York spend $1 billion in, in premiums. If you do what you propose to do for $3 million, we'll consider that a great bargain'.
We... we did carry out the study. We did a random sample of every hospital in the state. We were able to randomize scientifically because a member of our team was Nan Laird, professor of statistics at Harvard, and we were greatly helped in this. We couldn't have done it without the participation of two of my medical school colleagues, Lucian Leap, a person who had been a paediatric surgeon and turned to health policy later in his career, and Troy Brennan, a young physician who was trained at Yale in both medicine and the law. That team, along with others, did... did a study of all patients, a randomized study of all patients hospitalized in a random sample of all hospitals in the state of New York. They examined all of the court records of the period and all of the insurance records. We found that, of all of... we found that 3.7% of all of the patients hospitalized were injured as a result of some medical intervention in the hospital, unrelated to their illness - 3.7% of people whose hospital stay was prolonged or who were handicapped when they left the hospital. We found that, of the patients who brought suit that year in the courts for malpractice, only one in six had actually been injured. So, we found a... a system that was flawed, but a legal system that was equally flawed.

We found a legal system that was equally flawed. For every negligent claim... for every negligent injury that led to a claim, there were five claims for which there was no injury. This work was published widely and Axelrod intended to make it the basis for legislation in the state, but shortly after the study was completed, he had a tragic accident that led, shortly afterwards, to his death and his successor chose not to introduce the legislation that the governor had originally sought. So, while we published work widely while there were... while there was a lot of public press, the New York Times had headlines at the time that the material was initially released, and subsequently we published extensively in the New England Journal of Medicine, and in two books, the data really seemed to make no impression until, in 2001... when was, when did that study, the [Quality] Chasm report?
[Q] I think the White House event was 2000.
The [Quality] Chasm report?
[Q] And the White House event was 2000 and Clinton was still in office.
Yeah. It was, it was more than 10 years later that the Institute of Medicine published the [Quality] Chasm report in which they indicated that 100,000 people a year die of injuries incurred in hospitals, that figure having been derived from our study, and that figure led, at that time, to more attention, a great deal more attention. By this time Don Berwick was leading a non-profit organization called the Institute for Healthcare Improvement, and was really exerting an enormous effort on improving quality or helping institutions around the country and around the world improve the quality of their practice. Don, two years ago, using that figure of 100,000, enlisted something over 4000 American hospitals to work with the Institute to save the 100,000 lives that were thought to be the result of injury incurred in hospitals, and the results of that effort have been spectacular.

I spoke of the program on medical injury as one that as a research activity that I wanted to get underway once I came to the Brigham. There had been a teaching program that was very much on my mind when I went to the School of Public Health. I'd, during my period at Beth Israel Hospital, focussed on the new biology, on what was then the new biology, of bringing molecular biology and its implications to bear on clinical problems, on disease states of many kinds. I spoke also of the fact that we had done very little in the realm of quantitative analytic science, and that was one of the reasons that I was interested in going to the School of Public Health. We did build there an extraordinary program in biostatistics. We, of course was Fred Mosteller, one of the great men in the field, and that program, as I said, was and remains perhaps the strongest anywhere. But, we did not succeed in bringing many physicians in, who are concerned with, with clinical research, into the program there, and so when I came to the Brigham I had been advised by one of my friends who had followed this with me, who said to me: you didn't succeed in pulling doctors who are concerned with medical research into the program at the school, now that you're at the Brigham, how about pushing them? I approached a colleague at the... at the Brigham, Dr Lee Goldman, a cardiologist and a clinical epidemiologist, and together we created what was called and what is called the program, the Research Training and Clinical Effectiveness. We... we lassoed three Fellows at the Brigham the first year, and literally pushed them into the program. I had gotten a small amount of money from a foundation to make it possible to pay for the costs of such a program, and they had such an experience that in year two, eight people applied to the program and we... we took them. By year three, there were 17.
Early in year two, I was approached by a young woman who was finishing her chief residency in one of the surgical specialities, and she said, I would like to take the program in Clinical Effectiveness, but I'm having difficulty persuading my chief to let me do it. Well, I knew him reasonably well and I went to see him. And, I told him about the program and that we wanted to bring his resident in, and he said to me, but she's... she's very smart. I said, yes, I know, this is a pretty rigorous program that's why we're prepared to take her. No, no, no, he said, she's capable of real research. So, I said, you mean the kind of research that goes on in your laboratory? He said, well, yes, that's what I mean. Well, you know, I spoke very early about the concern that the chairman of the committee that appointed me as Professor of Medicine with what I was doing, molecular biology, he said to me, isn't that more appropriate for a department of biochemistry? I had this as a kind of reprise. We were now moving into the area of quantitative clinical science and yet were going to have a little difficulty persuading some people that it was, is, in fact, science. It proved to be not too difficult because the young people voted with their feet. In the less than 20 years, perhaps 15 years, that the program's been in existence, I'm told there have been 1500 people who have come through the program. Tony Komaroff is one of the people who directed it for some time, and he was himself trained in quantitative analytic science when we were together at the Beth Israel Hospital, and appreciated how meaningful it could be. Subsequently, when I come to talk about what Paul Farmer and Jim Kim are doing, I'll talk about a further evolution in what is real research when I mention the anthropology that... that they do, the approaches that they take to evaluating the effectiveness of treatment of patients with tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS, and the need to broaden considerably the... the stage on which we carry out the... the treatment research and teaching programs that are required in institutions as they discharge their obligations.

Shortly after the... the second year of the Clinical Effectiveness program, I went to the Dean of the School of Public Health, my successor, and suggested that we might move the program, at least in part, into the School of Public Health. He hesitated somewhat but agreed ultimately to do it, and that program has now been... become a degree-granting program at the School of Public Health and it is by far the largest degree-granting program there. It is a program that has, as I mentioned earlier, has been adopted in a Latin American version in Buenos Aires and we have some colleagues from... from Moscow, as I also mentioned, who will be starting a program at the Moscow Medical Academy fairly soon.
The program is set up in such a way that students come into it - I mention students, these students are generally people who have finished their clinical training and aspire to go onto to do clinical research, but many are far beyond that. We've had assistant professors, associate professors, and an occasional professor who comes to the program. They spend the first seven weeks of the first summer doing course work in biostatistics, in epidemiology, in decision science, and in a range of topics related in one way or another to health policy. They then return to their... their place of work where they undertake a research project that is overseen in part by somebody in their department, but in part by one member of our faculty who keeps in touch with them. And those who seek a degree come back for a second summer where they have seven weeks of intensive advanced courses in advanced science, and at that time they are eligible for a... an MPH degree in clinic... in clinical effectiveness or a Master of Science degree in clinical effectiveness. This, as I mentioned, is now by far the largest degree program at the School of Public Health and attracts extremely interesting students.

A great deal of my time at the Brigham has been spent mentoring students and residents, particularly those who are not following conventional pathways during their training. I've seen and been advisor to students who have strong backgrounds in economics, in engineering, in biology and chemistry, of course, those are the traditional backgrounds that see... we see so often in our students, but a range of, of areas. I suppose the two students, and subsequently residents, at the Brigham who were, who are by far the most remarkable are Paul Farmer and Jim Yong Kim. Both of these men graduated Harvard Medical School in the early 90s with MDs and PhDs in anthropology. When Paul was a student at... an undergraduate student at Duke he began going to Haiti during his summer vacations and at other times of year as well, initially as a teacher. But when he became a medical student, he began a, a clinic and subsequently worked there as a resident part-time. Early in his residency he won one of the so-called genius awards of the MacArthur Foundation, and without indicating to anybody at the Foundation, he turned the entire sum over to a non-profit organization called Partners in Health, that he and Jim started when they were still in medical school. That organization, Partners in Health, has been what Paul terms the effecter arm of the work that he and Jim, and now a growing number of others, have done. It really is the organization that makes possible buying drugs or buying gasoline for the jeep that they use in the places where they work, and it has, in Paul's view and my own, been a model that we think other institutions, concerned with global health issues, should look at very hard.

I became really quite actively involved with them in the middle of the 90s when they, after they had discovered an epidemic of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis [MDR-TB] in Peru in a barrio in Lima where they had been delivering medical care. That problem of MDR-TB was one that was, of course, lethal and they began treating patients with second-line drugs, as many as four or five or six a day. Now, their approach as anthropologists in the communities in which they worked then and where they've worked since, has been first to get to know the community, to train community health workers as medical assistants, and thus, when a patient is found to have MDR-TB and let's... is put on, let's say, five drugs a day, that patient isn't given the prescription or even the drugs, rather the individual, the neighbor in the next barrio who's been trained as a community health worker comes to see the patient three times a day, delivers the medication, watches the patient take the medication and reports any side effects to a nurse or to a doctor.
Resistance is great problem with respect to all micro-organisms, and one of the principle causes of resistance, of course, is when an individual takes a drug, but not long enough to wipe out the infection, thus the bug in question, the microbe in question, has had a chance to condition itself to the antibiotic and thus to... to be able to live with it. Resistance is a not a phenomenon that is seen in the places where Paul and Jim work. They showed me their results in... in Peru and they reached 100 patients and it was clear that 85 had been cured. They asked my help in approaching the World Health Organization that had really decreed that it wasn't cost-effective to treat people with MDR-TB. Paul and Jim are able to do cost-effectiveness analysis, but they don't... they feel it doesn't apply when a human life is concerned, and particularly the life of an impoverished person, so they persisted.

I might say that I became aware of how much difficulty they were having in getting drugs one day, when I was stopped in the corridor at the Brigham Hospital by my friend the president of the hospital who said to me, 'Your friends are in trouble with me'. I knew of whom he spoke. I didn't know quite what the trouble was, but Paul and Jim are people who can sweet-talk almost anybody out of almost anything, and their trips to Peru to take care of these patients were invariably preceded by trips to the pharmacy at the Brigham where they 'borrowed' in quotation marks the drugs that were necessary for that next week's activity.
They, the... the, they had a, and have now, a large number of people who help support them, but at that time a marvellous man in Boston, a man named Tom White had met Jim... had met Paul, had learned what Paul was doing and became his benefactor. Initially gave him enough money to build a clinic in Haiti, subsequently enough money to build a hospital in Haiti, ultimately enough money to do two things. First, to make possible virtually all of the other activities at that time that Paul was involved in and, secondly, for... to virtually bankrupt himself. Tom likes to say, I've never seen a shroud with pockets, and he has now, over the years, given literally tens of millions of dollars to the work that these two men and their colleagues have done.
It turned out that when I heard that there was, from my friend, the president of the hospital, that Paul and Jim were in arrears in an amount of something in excess of $90,000, I called Tom White and within a matter of a few hours a cheque for that amount was on the desk of the president.
Paul and Jim brought another problem to me - that problem they didn't bring to me that was brought by others - but Paul and Jim reported that they were having difficulties with the World Health Organisation, and by chance, the person in charge of the tuberculosis program at WHO had been a student at the Harvard School of Public Health. I called him and told him I was calling to ask a favor. Anything you wish, Dean, he replied. That was a broad response but one that I was prepared to exploit. I said, 'I'd love for you to join me at a meeting that I'm going to hold in Boston with the movers and shakers in the field of tuberculosis to see the results of Paul and Jim in the barrios of Lima'. Hesitation.  'But... yes, Dean, of course'. Well, an additional favour I'd ask... nervous pause. 'What is, what is that?' I'd like you to sponsor the meeting with me because I'm not regarded as a tuberculosis authority and you are. Again a short pause, but he agreed to do so.
He came to Boston. We did have that meeting. The results were presented and people were quite overwhelmed. We were invited, Paul and Jim and I were invited to Geneva within a few weeks to make a presentation at WHO. And, it wasn't long before the World Health Organization had changed its approach.
Shortly afterwards the Gates Foundation heard about our work. Now, I lapse into the first person from time to time - our work is their work - but since I've joined them I indulge myself and speak about 'we' and 'us'. The Gates Foundation had heard about this work and gave $40 million to take was being done in a couple of barrios in Lima and prepare it for dissemination throughout Peru and ultimately around the world. And now, MDR-TB, a problem of growing importance and of enormous potential harm, that program to deal with it is the program that Paul and Jim put together in that barrio in Lima and is now to be found in, in many, many countries.

My first trip to Haiti with Paul was enlightening. It is difficult to describe adequately what he and Jim and a growing group of colleagues have done. In Haiti Paul, not only built a hospital, but he loves to... to describe himself as a gardener of great tenacity. Haiti is a country that has been completely despoiled. It is the most barren country I've ever been in, in... on any continent and I've been on, on all. The tree... the, the setting around the hospital, the first hospital that Paul built is... that hospital is surrounded by trees, by gardens and by people who are working in them. I mention that the, the people who have been trained as community health workers are paid members of the organization, but also in the organization are people who tend to the, to the grounds, people who are responsible for helping to find food for the hospital.
Paul and Jim have really redefined public health. In the days when I first was associated with people who were dealing with problems in third world settings, it wasn't uncommon for a group of deeply committed people to go to a place where there was an epidemic of malaria or of tuberculosis or of tropical illness of some kind, help identify the source of the problem, help treat the patients and then come back to this country. Paul and Jim's focus is on poverty, primarily. The diseases associated with poverty are the consequence, in most instances, of the poverty. Of course, they treat malaria with the appropriate drugs. They treat tuberculosis, as I've just mentioned, with appropriate drugs. But, they also treat these problems with food, with clean water, with education and with efforts to find jobs.
Paul - very early on in all of these places research is carried and I'll say a bit more about that in just a minute - but, one of the early studies Paul did in Haiti was to take two groups of patients with tuberculosis. He treated both with appropriate drugs, this was the, the drug, this was tuberculosis that responds to the primary drugs that are used for it; he treated one, both groups with the appropriate drugs and one group with milk as well, and I don't have to state, I'm sure, which group did very much better. Applied research of that kind is a very important part of the work that Paul and Jim encourage.

In Haiti, there is more HIV infection, there is more AIDS than in any other country in the western hemisphere.
Paul began treating AIDS in Haiti in precisely the way that he and Jim treated tuberculosis, that is, using community health workers, so that patients who are in need of the antiretroviral drugs get them, not as prescriptions or as bottles of pills, but rather from community health workers who come see that they're treated and, as a result, the treatment results are no different than those that we see here in Boston. Indeed, in some instances better than we see with some people in Boston, the poorest people, are the people who do less well.
And, in fact, the approach that has been taken, the use of community health workers has been replicated here in Boston in Boston's inner city in a program that's called PACT. A program that is directed by one of the doctors trained by Paul and Jim, Heidi Behforouz, a remarkable physician who has identified patients here with AIDS, patients who were being hospitalized at the Brigham once a month or once every two months with infections of one kind of another at enormous cost to society, since these patients obviously are not able to pay their bills. Heidi has trained community health workers in Boston's inner city and these health workers call on the patients, see that they get their drugs, and so many of these people have now been restored to full function in our community. This approach, incidentally, the use of community health workers, is one that many people feel has enormous potential for dealing with chronic illness of all sorts in this country as well as elsewhere.

Paul and Jim are not only superb doctors and very, very capable anthropologists. Paul has been described to me by several anthropologists as the person who has redefined medical anthropology as a science. They are also pied pipers. They attract the most extraordinary group of young people. As many as 20% of the first year class at Harvard Medical School seek to do volunteer work with them, and what's even more important, is that many of these people want to pattern their careers after those that they see in Paul and Jim's lives. I think that's particularly important because while there have been, and are of course, many, many doctors and others in history and at the present time, who do wonderful things for impoverished people, who do wonderful things in third world settings, I think the way in which young people are flocking to work with Paul and Jim suggests to me that a movement may be underway. And what a movement that will be. Note I say 'that will be', because I'm confident that it will be.

Three years ago, Jim Kim was approached by the then new head... two years, two... over two-and-a-half years ago, Jim was approached by the then new head of the World Health Organization, JW Lee, and asked whether he would come to Geneva to set up an AIDS program. The World Health Organization had done very little in this realm, and Jim agreed to go, set up what he termed a 3x5 program, that is, a program in which 3 million people in... in impoverished communities, particularly in Africa, would be in treatment for AIDS by the end of 2005. That goal wasn't achieved. Jim never... Jim believed that it wouldn't be, but he felt that setting that goal that high would really lead people to take the effort seriously.
By the end of 2005 the number of people in treatment for AIDS in Africa had increased from a few thousand to over a million and it seems absolutely clear that that 3 million figure will be reached in a reasonable period of time. Well, reasonable is the wrong word. It can't be reached early enough, but we're on route to reaching it. The... the program at the Brigham, which I don't think I mentioned earlier, the program at the Brigham which is called the Division of Social Medicine and Health Inequalities is really the... the base for the physicians who are in the program, and these physicians come here for training, come here for some of their research activities and consulting others, and then go back into the various sites where we've been working.
I mentioned Rwanda. When Jim... before Jim left, Jim left the World Health Organization in the latter part of 2005 and rejoined the Division of Social Medicine and Health Inequalities and Partners of Health here in Boston, before he left the WHO, he had persuaded the king of Lesotho, a small country located within South Africa, to address the AIDS problem and the king agreed that he would test all of the pop... the entire population of Lesotho and offer treatment to those people who were found to be infected and in need of treatment - with HIV - and in need of treatment. Jim agreed that we would help, we, in the Division and in Partners in Health, would help in that effort and the Clinton Foundation had already agreed to provide the medications there.
Very early after his return, Jim suggested to Dr Jen Furin, another one of our remarkable young physicians, a woman who was trained as an anthropologist as well as a physician, to go to Lesotho to attempt to assess the situation there, determine what would be required in order to mount a nationwide program and, perhaps, if she were willing, to lead that program. Jen came back within a few weeks and reported that the country, with a population of 2.5 million, is one that consists of grandmothers and orphans, a country that she was told, in the absence of intervention, will cease to exist in 20 years.
We did agree, of course, to join the king, join the Clinton Foundation and Jen agreed to oversee our program there. She's there now full-time. There are others of our physicians who rotate through. We have an administrator who's gone out to work with her, and the Clinton Foundation is actively involved.
If, when that country has every patient with AIDS in need of treatment under treatment, the effect on the... the South Africa, on the nation of South Africa that surrounds it, could be of great importance. The people, the men in Lesotho all, virtually all, work in South Africa and then return at infrequent intervals to be with their families. The presence of a country within, within it offering treatment to the entire nation cannot but have very important effects around, around it and throughout all of Africa.
The Clinton Foundation has also agreed to go into Malawi, another country in South Africa, in... in the south of Africa, and we've agreed to, to join in that effort as well. So, our activities, using the Farmer and Kim approach, community health workers, nurses, doctors, that activity is underway and attracting a lot of attention on, on the part of, of our young colleagues but, and equally important, a lot of attention on the part of those people who can help support what's going on, because that support is urgently needed.

About five years ago, the Chairman of the Department of Medicine at the Brigham and Women's Hospital, then Victor Dzau, decided to set up a separate unit as a base for Paul and Jim. He asked me whether I would chair it and I told him that my days of chairing are long since gone, but I suggested that if Jim chair it, since Paul is away more than Jim, and Paul serve as deputy, I would be the deputy to the deputy, and that was the title I was given and now have served in that role.
Paul and Jim, as I said, attract large numbers of extremely gifted young people to work with them and who seek careers similar to theirs. Three years ago, we established a Residency in Global Health Equity, a Residency for young people who have in mind leading the lives that Paul and Jim lead. The interest in this program has been extraordinary. People, young physicians, have regularly spoken of how deeply committed they feel because of their observations of what Paul and Jim are doing, and the gratification that they feel they would get from what, if they were to do the same.
I see this in young people who come here seeking Residency training. The Brigham has always been one of the most sought after Residencies in medicine in the country, and it perhaps is even more now in demand, and in demand by a growing group of people who see global health as something that might serve them and in which they might serve. I saw a student from Duke just the other day, Duke University Medical School, who said to me when I asked him why he sought to come here, said, you know, I went into medicine because of my commitment to social justice and I don't know any place where I can have further training where that commitment can be better expressed than at the Brigham.
The acting chairman of the department two years ago said to me that over 60% of the young people that he interviewed in connection with the Residency program, expressed an interest in the Brigham, at least in part, because of this commitment to global health. And, I see it now on the part, not only of... of these, of young people coming along, but from people in other parts of the hospital. Yesterday, I had a call from the chairman of the Department of Thoracic Surgery who said to me, how would it be if I organized a group of thoracic surgeons who would come to the... Haiti or to Rwanda or to one of the other places where you people are working, and spend a month at a time; I think I could find a number of people, not only in my own department but in departments around the country. The Chairman of the Department of, of Neurosurgery, marvellous doctor named Peter Black, said to me recently, if I were to spend a month in Haiti or in Rwanda, would... would I, would that be useful? Could I do anything that might he helpful? And, to see this burgeoning interest in global health on the part of... of not only the young people but their seniors, is just so, so rewarding to me.

I spoke of Peru earlier. Haiti has been on the agenda for, now, 20... more than 20 years, and what was a single hospital, a single clinic in Haiti three years ago when I first visited there, when money became available from the global fund to fight AIDS, TB and malaria, from the President's fund for AIDS and from a foundation, that program grew. The year I was there we, we saw - again note the lapse into the first person plural - my colleagues there saw 100,000 patient visits. This year past, it was 1.2 million patient visits, not in one hospital but now in four hospitals and in seven clinics at widely dispersed areas on the central plateau.
The program has, has spread elsewhere. Early on we discovered an epidemic, or we were told about an epidemic, of drug-resistant tuberculosis in Russia and were asked to consult at a prison on Tomsk in Siberia. Paul and Jim and our colleagues began working there then, there... they found the, the prison overrun with MDR-TB. If one goes into a prison in that setting or any other where there is no opportunity to... to separate people with disease like tuberculosis, the spread is guaranteed. Paul and others refer to tuberculosis as 'ebola with wings' and it is a problem that is one that I think the world will confront in greater and greater fashion in the time ahead.
Let me... since I brought that up let me just mention that the problem of, of what was MDR-TB, multi-drug resistant tuberculosis, has evolved into something now called XDR-TB. That's a form of tuberculosis that's resistant to virtually all drugs, and in the absence of new drugs, in the absence of new ways to deal with... with this problem, we really confront the possibility of a worldwide epidemic of a disease that, in very, very many situations is lethal in a matter of very few weeks.
We began in, in Siberia to help train Russian physicians, brought Russian... some Russian physicians here to the Brigham and the School of Public Health at Harvard for the Clinical Effectiveness program, and there's now a movement to set up a Clinical Effectiveness program in Moscow just as some of our younger students in the early... earlier students in the Clinical Effectiveness program have set up a program in Buenos Aires for Argentina and for other Latin American States.

I indicated that... that Paul and Jim started in Haiti, that the Haitian program has grown greatly. In Peru, the goal of the program, as the goal of the program in Haiti, is ultimately, after training local people, to leave and in Peru Jaime Bayona, Dr Jaime Bayona, the head of the program there, has a group of people who are every bit as skilled now as the people in the program in Boston, and we are really remaining in a collegial relationship with Dr Bayona and his group, but there's very little, much, much less in the way of traffic between our program here and the program in Peru.
In Haiti, too, Haitian doctors, Haitian nurses and community health workers are trained and they're taking over more and more of the responsibility as the program grows there. Indeed, just over a year ago we were invited to set up a program in Rwanda, and Paul started the program there with Michael Rich, one of the young physicians who has been with Partners in Health for some years, and the first step that Paul took was to persuade some of his Haitian colleagues, doctors and nurses and community health workers, to come to Rwanda to help train local people, and what was a hospital that had been abandoned during the genocide 20 years earlier, has, within... within two months, was restored to function, and now is the base from which a second hospital is in the process of being outfitted and a major program in management of HIV/AIDS is underway.
The program that Paul and Jim began using community health workers for, the management of AIDS, is one that more and more people are turning to as the way in which AIDS should be treated with community health workers ensuring that there's no interruption of treatment, that patients who need help are identified at once and that help is recruited for them, and that program has become well known. We're working in Rwanda with the Clinton Foundation and when President Clinton visited the program a couple of months ago, he said to Paul that he hoped that he, the President, could persuade Paul and Partners in Health and our division, to work with the Clinton Foundation in the several places where they propose to go in Africa.

The division of Social Medicine and Health Inequalities established a Residency in Global Health three years ago. We agreed we would take two students the first year and... two Residents the first year because that's what we had resources for.
The two Residents whom we took were just extraordinary people. David Walton who was a medical student at Harvard had spent part time in two years  helping to build the program in Haiti, taking care of patients there, training community health workers, and then came to the Brigham for his formal Residency training when he finished medical school, and now he's in the Global Health Residency program, and since that program offers a period of time in other countries for training, David chooses go to Haiti for his, his training. A marvellous young physician who will really contribute in major fashion to world health, without question.
The second resident, wonderful young woman named Nancy Lange who had been a dancer before she went to medical school, and who, while in medical school in New York, worked at length with prisoners, with people who had been convicted of substance abuse and who needed help from the outside, and Nancy was there to help them. Nancy is now, along with David, finishing the Residency in Global Health, but has been, as part of her work, looking at the problem of malaria in Rwanda.
The second year we took four Residents. We got some money from, for this, from my brother, to whom I referred earlier who's available for good causes whenever I've called on him, and this year, for the four slots we had 10 people apply. I went to a former student of mine, Michael Crichton, who provided us with the money to make it possible to make the program available to not 10 - we can't possibly do that - but we have five marvellous young people, including some with rather different kinds of interest.
Marcella Alsan, for example, is a young woman who graduated from Harvard College five, almost six years ago with a degree, with Honours in Economics and she had questions on the basis of her thesis work with some of the conclusions drawn by the World Bank with respect to the effects of illness on productivity on the part of people. And Marcy decided that, as part of her Global Health Residency she would include getting a PhD in economics. She applied to Harvard, Princeton and to MIT, was accepted almost at once into all three, and has chosen to take her PhD at Harvard in economics. She will complete the first two years of her Residency training, will take two years off then to do her course work in economics, and then return for her Residency, she's... to finish her Residency, but she's already begun to collect some of the data she's going to need from people in Lesotho who are not yet under treatment, but who - for AIDS - but who will be soon.

It's clear that the need for the kinds of people who are emerging from our training program in global health is enormous; we'll never satisfy it at the Brigham no matter how big the Residency in Global Health becomes. And so, when we've been approached by other universities and other teaching hospitals, we've been more than pleased to help in their launching similar programs. Duke University, to which the Chairman of our Department of Medicine who set up the Residency in Global Health, Victor Dzau, has gone as Chancellor, has the issue of global health and training therein high on his agenda and we're working with Duke to help in any way we can.
The University of Miami has a similar program that they are hoping to launch, and one of our colleagues from Boston, Paul Wise, a pediatrician, who's gone as Professor of Stanford in the Pediatrics Department, is developing a child health program, a child global health program, that is to say, global health program for pediatricians, and we're working closely with him. So, the more groups that we can join with, of course, the more this will become the movement that we hope it will be.
I spoke at the outset about the image that Americans have around the world, and I can't think of anything that will do more to restore the image that I think we once had in the presence of such people as Paul Farmer, Jim Kim and some of these younger individuals whom I've described.

Throughout the years that I've been at Harvard Medical School, I've had the privilege of working outside the school in a range of activities. I spoke earlier about my involvement in the effort to apprise people of the implications of a nuclear exchange.
I was earlier approached by a family in New York, a member of which, a child in this family, had epilepsy and I was asked what they might do, since they have considerable means, to address the problem. I told them that in my view, this was in the late 60s, the field of neurobiology was opening up and that if they would... were willing to provide Fellowship support for young people going into the field, they might thereby move our understanding of the basis for epilepsy considerably. They... and I offered to support my position about this by introducing them to two young colleagues who had just come to Harvard - Torsten Wiesel  and David Hubel.
Torsten and David and I had lunch with the Klingenstein brothers and a year later, or two years later, when they won the Nobel Prize, my stock soared with them and, but even in advance of that they had agreed to set up a Fellowship program in neurobiology, and it remains one of the programs in the country that provides support for young people going into the field. It has been an extremely important program in that sense.
A short time later, I was approached by another family, wife of the man involved had died of breast cancer, and he wanted to do something in that field. I offered to him the same prescription that I offered to the Klingensteins, that is to bet on young people, to help them train, and they... he agreed. In this instance, I used as a colleague, Jim Watson, and we set up a program called the Rita Allen Program which recently celebrated its 30th anniversary, and it provides support for young people who are going into research careers in not only cancer, but into multiple sclerosis that also a problem that existed in his family.
And, even more recently, now 15 years ago, I was approached by the John Merck Fund to offer advice concerning a way of addressing a problem that confronted John Merck. John Merck was the son of the person who started the Merck drug company, George Merck, and Mrs Merck was eager to do something on behalf of the problem that confronted John Merck. He had severe... he had an early age - age two or three - had severe encephalitis, as I was told, which left him with both a terrible learning disability and a severe personality problem. The John Merck Scholars program which we set up 15 years ago, has attracted young... brilliant young people who have... many of whom have made a mark; the first of our selections won a Nobel Prize last year.
Each of these programs is fashioned in a way that almost cannot fail, that is to say, instead of opening the option of applying to the program to all comers, we go to the universities to where there are strong programs in these areas and tell them that there are scholarships, fellowships available, but that each university can nominate only one person, or perhaps two. And, as a result, Harvard finds itself, or its people, in competition with young faculty from Yale and Stanford and the University of Chicago, and eager to get support for these people, obviously puts forward very strong people. So, the committees in each instance are able to pick from individuals who are almost destined to do creditable work and to become, in many instances, leaders in the field. Those activities have been ones that I've welcomed an opportunity to take part in.

I was, for several years, on the board of Physicians for Human Rights, an organization that has identified human rights problems in countries around the world. The organization was very much involved in the problems in Bosnia and Serbia. It is now heavily involved in Darfur and seeks to call attention to the problems there and to help people to the extent that the organization can by calling attention to the difficulties.
Don Berwick, whom I mentioned in conjunction with his work at the School of Public Health, established a non-profit organization called the Institute for Healthcare Improvement in the early 90s, an organization that has made quality issues its primary concern and has, using Don's genius for identifying people who have addressed a given problem in the realm of medical care, and have succeeded in solving it or ameliorating it effectively, of taking that finding, or those findings, and generalizing them to other institutions that are receptive to them. As a result - and he's done that not only in the United States, but in the UK and throughout Europe - it's been an extremely successful enterprise. I mentioned earlier the campaign to save 100,000 lives in this country and Don has really encouraged that kind of activity elsewhere.
Recently Don has become involved, but has been come interested, well, he's always been interested in Third World problems, but recently he's become involved in the AIDS problem in South Africa, and has done a great deal of similar work, that is, identifying small groups that are addressing the problem well and helping disseminate the approach in question to other areas. I served on Don's board for whatever the term limit was for that. I had two terms, I think, of five years each and it was a particularly rewarding activity.

The last several years I've been on the Board of the Gateway to Higher Education, a program in New York City's... New York City school system that is designed to help minority kids get into science and medical careers. The program takes children... well, originally was directed at kids starting ninth grade, now it starts at seventh grade, offers them special classes in math and science in schools, within the schools in which the program begins. They're offered special training in math and science, a longer school day, Saturday mornings of enrichment experience in a place like the Museum of Natural History or Rockefeller University, a summer of one month vacation instead of three, and two months working in laboratories at Mount Sinai Medical School or elsewhere in New York. And, the results now in something of the order 15 or 16 high schools throughout all of New York, the results have been extraordinary. In high schools in which the drop-out rate is over 50% the situation in New York schools as in inner city schools around the country, around this country, are very, very unhappy ones. The results in the first 2000 kids that went through this program were that 97% graduated from high school, 95% went on to four-year colleges, and of that group, at the time the last study was done, 80% had graduated and many had gone on to medical school or to degree programs in science.
We have a Gateway Graduate here at the Brigham. There are two Gateway Graduates in the present fourth-year class at Yale Medical School. There are Gateway kids in many, many places. We're now in the process of moving that program to Boston and I hope that once we launch it here we might get it to schools around the... the country where the need is so very great.

Among my extracurricular activities was a five- or six-year period spent at the, in part at the American Academy of Arts and Sciences where I established a program called Initiatives for Children. I did this shortly after I came to the Brigham and before I got heavily involved in work here. It was a part-time activity. It seemed to me that the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, which is a venerable organization, had a number of issues on its agenda, but nothing concerned with children, and since there was no dispute but that children represent the most fragile members of our society and the people that we have to, or should be, worrying about most, I thought we could encourage members of the Academy to join me in a range of issues that we would approach.
It was a successful venture in the sense that very early on I was able to recruit Fred Mosteller who had retired from Harvard and who was very interested in the possibility of looking at education in much the way that he had looked at medical practices, and I suppose that was the most successful of the ventures we undertook. Fred and a group of colleagues from around the country did undertake studies of educational programs and subjected them to... and evaluated them in much the fashion that he evaluated the approach to cancer treatment and to other medical procedures. Books were published and many seminars were held and I think young people were encouraged to continue the work that began there and that was a chapter that I was glad to be associated with, but when I became more involved at the Brigham, particularly with the work in global health, I did give that up.

I was invited by the medical students to give the Faculty address at their annual... at the annual meeting at which the students present the results of their research and a Faculty member talks about his or hers. In my presentation, I urged them to keep in mind the importance of mentoring and also spoke of the role of chance that one should anticipate and attempt to take advantage of.
If it hadn't been for the chance of the strike at the clinical centre in Bethesda when I went there to do research on an in-patient service, I would never have met Bernie Horecker who subsequently opened my eyes to biological science and served as an important mentor to me throughout the early part of my scientific career.
It was chance that the year I was in Paris was the year that messenger RNA was the topic of concern at the... and that I was given an opportunity to participate in that activity. I... I ended by telling them that despite the fact that I've had this rich and busy life, that there's been nothing more important to me, of course, than my family. Here, I guess, one also has to acknowledge the role of chance and in that sense I've been extremely fortunate.

I ended my presentation to the medical students by talking about my family and how fortunate I've been. It's somewhat embarrassing to acknowledge that absent... the tremendous degree to which my wife put aside her own interests to promote my career, that I was able to do as much as I've done.
It is our great fortune, hers and mine, that we've had the marvellous children that we have, and our further great fortune that they, in turn, have picked spouses about whom we feel as strongly as we do about them, and that the third generation are... is proving to be every bit as important to us and, in our view, potentially contributing citizens, as our children have been. One of our granddaughters has just started teaching fourth grade and in a public school in Boston, inner city Boston, and when you have... and since I've already talked about how crucial I feel the whole area of our children and education is, you know how gratifying that is to me.
So, a marvellous life, one that has been full of extremely good friends, people whom I've been fortunate enough to be mentored by, and people whom I've been even more enriched by helping to mentor.

[Q] Where do you think all of these areas that you've talked about and that you've been so involved in are going? Where are they going to be 30-40 years from now? 
I wouldn't pretend to, to guess. I would say that unless we, as a nation, the United States, blessed as we have been, unless we decide that the issues that I've been talking about: science, children, global health - unless we decide that these issues belong to all of us and have to be pre-eminent on our agenda, I despair to think of where we will be 30 or 40 years ago... from now. I worry about it. I spoke of my children, of their children; they won't have the good fortune that Doris and I have had unless there is a major change, I believe, in the way that we look at our responsibilities.
We are the strongest nation in the world. We have the greatest access to resources. At the present time we're diminishing the attention to science. We're diminishing attention to education. We continue to build up a military that seems far stronger to me than anything we could ever need, a military, in fact, that is presumably based on a war that is of another era.

For the last five years, I've been teaching an undergraduate class at Harvard College. I've been doing that with Don Berwick. Teaching undergraduates has been one of the most satisfying aspects of my teaching career. They are wonderful young people. Their pores are wide open, their knowledge is, you know, is extraordinary, and their eagerness to apply that knowledge to important problems is wonderful.
Often the... the title of the program, of the course is The Quality of America's Healthcare. Very often - and obviously the kids who take the course are people who are concerned about the quality of America's healthcare - very often I'm asked by a student: what can I do that would make a difference, shall I go to medical school? Well, I tell them, if you want to be a doctor, if you want to take care of sick people - and there's nothing I've done that's been more gratifying than taking care of sick people at that stage in my life when I did it - then you have to go to medical school, and I urge you to consider that seriously; we need people like you in medicine.
But if your goal is to change the healthcare system because it's in urgent need of change, despite my book, then going to medical school will occupy years that would be much better spent in other areas. If you were to train yourself in economics or in law or in political science or in anthropology, you might do much more for the healthcare system than via the route of being a doctor, and increasingly, decision-making in medicine is less in the hands of doctors and more in the hands of the public, and for that reason alone you should think about a career outside of medicine, unless, as I said, it's patient care that interests you to a large extent.
But, have you thought of public service? Have you thought of the possibility of running for political office? Of becoming a council person in your city or town? Ultimately considering becoming a Governor or a member of Congress? We need, desperately we need people like you in public service.
And, you know, I think I've maybe nudged one or two people over the years in that direction. So often the response is: I wouldn't go into politics! Why would I want to do that? And, of course, the cumulative attitude of that sort means that we don't have the people in public life that we want.
