jan.klein

Born in 1936, Jan Klein is a Czech-American immunologist who co-founded the modern science of immunogenetics – key to understanding illness and disease. He is the author or co-author of over 560 scientific publications and of seven books including 'Where Do We Come From?' which examines the molecular evolution of humans. He graduated from the Charles University at Prague in 1955, and received his MS in Botany from the same school in 1958. From 1977 to his retirement in 2004, he was the Director of the Max Planck Institute for Biology at Tübingen, Germany.

Perhaps I better start by introducing myself. I am... my name is Jan Klein and as you have noticed from my accent, although I am a citizen of this country, I have not been born here... I was not born here, and in fact I was born in what was then Czechoslovakia. Czechoslovakia at that time was a lizard shaped country on the map where the head of the lizard was Bohemia, the middle part was Silesia and Moravia and the tail part, trunk and tail was Slovakia. And I was born in Silesia, which was once a very large country and always actually belonged to the Czech kingdom but then the Prussians took part of it and later it became part of Poland. So I was born in Silesia on the border of Poland and not far from there was Germany. The ethnic composition was very mixed; there were some Polish people but mostly it was Czechs and German-speaking immigrants. The immigrants came to the country, most of them, very long time ago but they settled down there and they stayed. Some of the villages there were totally Czech like ours and others were mixed and some were completely German speaking. So this is the part of the country where I was born.

The name itself is a double irony in a way. Jan is spelt 'J A N' which in this country would be pronounced Jan and of course Jan is a female name. And this often led to many confusions. I remember on one occasion in... early in my life... early in my career in the United States, I went to a meeting, I believe it was in Seattle... was a meeting of the Genetic Society of America and they... it's a big meeting and so they make it usually in... at the campus and the people stay in the dormitory. Well they segregated males and females and without realising I found myself in the women's dormitory and so I went to the registration and there was a sour looking woman there and then I said, 'Well, you put me into women's dormitory', and she looked at me and said, 'And you are complaining?' And I said, 'Well I have a problem of going to the bathrooms; they don't let me into the bathroom'. So, oh. So they put me into the male dormitory. There were many such occasions because people always, by the name, judged that I am a female. The last name is also kind of strange, in my case, because as I said in the part of the country where I was born many people speak German so they know, and even if they don't speak they know a few words in German, and they know that Klein means small and, well I must have been born very tall already and then I grew taller and taller, so that was always target of many jokes that I had to take on many occasions. It's not so much any more here because most of the people don't know what Klein means. But even in Japan, I must say, one professor was joking about the connection because he spent a few years in Germany and learnt that Klein means small. But that's my name and I have to live with it.

You may have seen a couple of movies which are called Smoking and Not Smoking [sic] by the French moviemaker, Alain Resnais. In the first movie the story unfolds and at a certain point the main protagonist of the story goes out on the terrace, I believe, and lit a cigarette and then the story continues. In the second movie, the Not Smoking, the beginning is the same up to the point when this actor gets out on the terrace but he does not lit a cigarette and from then on the story evolves in a completely different direction. I believe the filmmaker wanted to make it a metaphor for critical events in our life, which appear to be trivial, but which change our lives and send it in a completely different direction. I have often been reminded of this story when thinking of my life and recently I've been involved in studying... learning much about Mendel's life that this is really amazing and that we ever come to such points which change our lives and we are often not realising that. And the story that I am going to tell you today is... will be full of such nods of when there is a chance, a necessity, and serendipity, inevitability that decide about our lives. I think it's... if it were Ronald Fisher or some other statistician that he would say that the fact that the two of us meet here today and that I am telling you a story, under these circumstances, a story for the series that People's Archives are making, which appear to be a modern version of Canterbury Tales, that Fisher would say it's impossible. Just as he said that the Mendel's results were impossible on the statistical basis. But the fact is that on this day August 21st 2005 this place, 752 Storch Road in State College in the middle of Pennsylvania, my colleague for many years Dr Colm O'hUigin is sitting here to listen to my narration of the story of my life.

I guess the reason why I'm here today, telling one of the Canterbury Tales, is that at one time of my career I was involved in a science that was exploding. It was immunogenetics and so my participation in that area of research might be perhaps of some interest to the listeners or viewers of this series.
I was born in a small village, it's actually a hamlet rather than a village... just a few houses... but this is what I would still call my home although... although the village still exists it doesn't exist the way I remember it. In my memory, if I close my eyes, what I see is a road... wide road leading from Neplachovice, which was where I went to school, to Štemplovec, to where I was born. The road is lined with cherry trees, each of them different, each of them tasting different and of course they belonged to somebody and there was a watchman to guard it, but when we were going home from school he could not... it was some two kilometres long road, so if we knew at which end he was we just waited until the other end and then tasted. So I tasted all of them. I can still remember where particular trees of a particular taste were located. And I... so I was going closer to my village, I remember the road was sloping down and then it suddenly turned right, crossing a river... bridge. And then it continued straight for a short distance and then it was like if it was going... enter into a farmhouse but it actually turned left before the farmhouse and went through the village. Well the place where it was like going to enter the farmhouse, the farmhouse was the house where I was born. On the right was a garden with peonies, dahlias, bleeding hearts and all the other plants. On the left was a vegetable garden, in the windows were nasturtium and petunias and all the other plants. Then there was the house and behind the house was a big orchard and then somewhere on the hill was a manor house... manor park surrounding a manor house. In my time it was... the lord was no longer living there, it served some other purposes. But the park was full of magnificent trees, truly magnificent trees. I remember, for instance, two tulip trees, huge tulip trees. Well I have now one in my garden. Many of the plants I mentioned I have now in my garden, so that's my reminder of my home. Behind the park was an alley of linden trees, about 500 metres long. Wonderful trees. And on the hill was a small patch of woods with a chapel.
Well that was my home and it was... it remains in my memory as it probably never existed. It has, kind of, quality like the Dutch paintings where you have the golden glow on them.  They look very realistic but in fact they are idealised landscapes. And that is also what probably is now in my mind, in fact I know when I visited it, it's no longer the same place. It has changed physically and it is different. So, but in contrast to people who were born, for instance, in this country, I would still call this my home. Although I am citizen of this country and I have lived in many other places which I loved, this was my home and I realize that it has influenced me in many, many respects.

I was born on a farm.  My father was drafted into the German army before... when the war started, which means I have... and he never returned back... so I have practically not know... I don't remember him. So it was run by my mother. We had a... it was a small farm, about seven hectares. We had a few cows and so it was... it meant that all the children who lived on the farm, and there were two brothers and two sisters, that all of us had to work on the farm otherwise it could not.. we could not live. So in the fields, in the farmyard, in the garden, in the orchard, we were fully busy with various chores and work that needed to be done. The... we went to school but when I came home from school, especially in the summer, there usually was a note on the table saying your lunch is in the oven, take Zora... Zora was the very wise cow... and come in such and such field and join us. So there I worked doing all that a child can do, depending on the age, until the dusk fell, then quickly do some homework and then to bed. And that was six days a week. On Sunday we would have to go to the church in the morning and the only time we had for ourselves was in the afternoon... Sunday afternoon. And I remember how we envied other children who were not born on a farm, they had... we could hear them screaming from the creek and having a lot of fun while we were working. But, I think, it had influenced me to a great degree too. I don't know whether... people say people are workaholic, I don't know whether there are endorphins in... released by working hard but certainly from that age on, until now, I got used to working very hard and it didn't... I cannot actually live without working. So it had some good effects, I think, also. But it was hard time that has had an impact on me.

But the hardship on the farm was not the only factor that was disturbing the golden glow that I now see in my memories of my homeland. Another was the development... political development in the country. The part where I was born was, as I said... they were occupied by many German-speaking people and at the time of my birth they were becoming very vocal and they wanted to have... join... have to join Germany. It's called... the general area is called Sudetenland and Sudeten Germans, many of them, were on the side of Hitler. So... and Hitler of course responded to this and demanded that Sudetenland would be joined to Reich, to great Germany. In a very sad and nasty decision in 1938 Great Britain and France agreed to... gave Hitler his way. So suddenly Silesia, the part... my homeland... became part of Germany. Of course the history is known to everybody, then Hitler didn't... was not satisfied with what he got, he wanted the rest of Czechoslovakia, he got the Czech, the Bohemia and the Moravia, then he wanted Poland, he got Poland and that led, of course, to World War II. I have many memories and actually my earliest memories of my childhood are somehow associated with the war. I will just mention a couple of them.

Shortly after the beginning of the war the Allied planes made raids on different cities in Germany but also in the occupied countries, so in Poland. Not far from my village was a city called Racibórz which was already in Poland, and it was a major railroad junction and also centre of factories and so it was a target of bombardment. We used to watch the planes... they flew always when the weather was good... so I remember the little silver crosses, groups of silver crosses against the blue sky, very high, they flew high in the sky. And then we often could see how they... when they were approaching Racibórz... we could see the white puffs appearing around the planes as the flaks, the defence was shooting at them and occasionally we could see also a plane being hit, spiralling down and sometimes even the parachutist jumping out and being... well we couldn't see how they were... what happened to them but we could see that they at least managed to get out of the plane. Well it was good to see that but on at least two occasions it was not just an innocent watching that we experienced. On one occasion I remember I was coming home from somewhere and close to the... to our house I could see the... well you could hear them first, the humming noise of the airplane, of the group, of the squadron, approaching and as they were just above my head I could see suddenly something detatching from one of the planes and it was falling right on me. And while it was falling it was making strange noise like shhhh, shhhh, shhhh... I mean it was rather big and it appeared to be heading on me and I ran a little bit away and it was like following me. Of course this was just an illusion. I was a small boy, so if I would have thought rationally at that moment I would have realized it's probably not a bomb but... which I thought it was... but anyway it fell down in that manor park, about 50 metres from me, and then it turned out to be a fuel tank that the... one of the planes either lost or just got rid of. So this was very innocent experience but tell a child of my age, I might have been, what, six years, seven years old, that you don't need to worry about things like that.

On another occasion it was... it could have been very serious. Again we were watching them, I remember with my elder brother in the farmyard as they were... well we could hear them actually coming and we didn't see them yet and suddenly the sound changed dramatically. Normally it was a humming but suddenly it was like a siren and my brother just yelled, 'Run, run, run in the cellar'. And I was... I had a slice of bread covered with butter and with lekvár... you know what lekvár is? A kind of plum jam, which I liked very much. And I didn't move immediately so my brother pushed me as we were getting on to the steps and I tripped and I remember the slice of bread falling on the... on the ground... on the floor and then we somehow got into the cellar, but by that time we could hear already the explosions. One after the other. I would like to know what actually... why they were bombarding the village? There was nothing there, no military target or anything. No factory, nothing. Whether it was a mistake or a... whether they just had enough... that they wanted to get rid of or something. The fact is they... the village became a target of the bombardment. And fortunately they missed. When we then later went out we saw right after the... well we were close to the end of the village and right after the last house the craters began in a series, one after the other, about 15 or 20 big craters. If it had fallen on the village it would have covered more or less the length of the village. I don't think there would have been much left of it and it would not have saved us if we were in the cellar or somewhere else. So, serendipity... by serendipity I survived and the improbable event that I am here was just because of the pilot error or some mistake in the mission that they were supposed to achieve. I must say the... that Mars, the god of war, tried once more on my life. That was in the last days of war as we were practically living in the cellar and because the front was not very far from our village in the city of Opava where I then went to school, which was almost totally destroyed. And... but as they were bombarding but also artillery fire was reaching our village also and one day in the morning when it usually... the bombarding, the cannonade was during the night... we got out and we realized there was a big hole into the... right next to the house, into the... where the garden began. Again about a few metres from the house. Much later my brother actually dug it out and it was a big, huge shell which, if it would have hit the house and exploded, there would not have been anything left of the house. So Mars missed again and I'm here to tell the story.

One other thing that stuck in my memory was again at the end of the war when I was roaming the park of the manor house, by that time the German army was there already, they took over the house as they did also part of our house and most of other houses in the village and from a... from a brushes? What do you call it?
[Q] Scrub? Bushes? 
Bushes. From the bushes I could see the Germans involved in some strange activities, so I... hidden in the bushes... I stayed and watched for a while and then I realized that what was going on was actually an execution. Toward the end of the war many of the German soldiers tried to desert the army. There were apparently four that were caught and they were brought to this park and I could see them being led to the chairs that they were... that they put there and the hangman's noose put around their necks and they were executed. I think these and other war experiences made me a person who cannot understand two things in the present society. One is the violence that young people, especially or I think in general, especially in this country, that people seems not only to tolerate but enjoy. Including my kids, they think well it's just... the blood is just raspberry juice or something. I cannot think like that. I always have in the back of my mind these pictures from a real war and I just don't understand the obsession of people with violence. They are taking as fun but the real violence is never fun. The second that influenced me was that war is not something that you just send a few bombers and destroy a city somewhere else and you are not affected by it, that bomb... that war is really something very horrible and that... well from that time I cannot be in favour of wars that are not really fully justified.

On many... on several occasions the story of my life might have ended. But it did not, I was not on the bridge, I was not determined... this was not this time to be on the bridge of San Luis Rey... as you remember, that was the bridge that collapsed, and by chance there were some other people... so by chance I was not on that bridge.

I think that the first stimulus that made me interested in science was a textbook... botany textbook that I found in the attic. It was actually only a fragment of a textbook because there were pages torn out already and it was in a bad condition but I could realize that some of the plants that were depicted there were growing in our garden or somewhere around our village and so I became interested in identifying them and this was my first approach to actually learning that plants have scientific names and that there are some interesting stories about it... interesting stories about them. But I think that... well I actually don't know why I became interested in natural history, I just know that as long as I remember I was interested in nature. Plants, especially, but birds, mammals and all fish and all other kinds of natural things. It could not have been just the environment, you could say I was born in a village, I was surrounded by nature all the time, others were exposed to the same environment and they didn't develop this feeling. For me it must have been, I think, in the combination of our genes that, for some reason, I inherited from my ancestors, although again there is no indication that anybody in my... among my ancestors was interested in natural history. But somehow it appears that it was wired in... in my brain and it was a feeling that I think only people who have similar feeling will understand. I could... I think there are two kinds of people; some have that relationship... the nature wired in and others that do not understand that at all. I just... I remember once hearing on the radio someone talking with some businessman and they were talking about yards and gardens and so on, he would say, 'I don't know why these people bother to have anything green around their house, I just feel that with concrete I'm quite happy with it'.

This is the other extreme. On the one extreme I'm among the people who cannot live without nature and who feels, if I were not a scientist, I would say almost a mystic relationship to natural things. And on the other are the people who don't know what we are talking about when we talk about the need to preserve nature. It might be that this is really a genetic difference and that will lead to development of two different species... human species. If that happens my recommendation would be, since the people who don't care about nature are happy when they are surrounded by rocks and concrete, well let's send them to the moon and have then a colony established there and they should be quite happy there, they don't need to worry about anything growing in their garden, weeds or anything else. The feeling that I experience when I'm in nature is very similar to that I experience when I'm exposed to art. For me standing in the Sistine Chapel and looking at the frescos, at the ceiling, is the same experience as when I look at a flower, especially a flower that I have never seen before. It's a creation that I'm experiencing, once it's a creation of a human being and another time it's a creation of forces of nature, of evolution, of millions of years of evolution and it doesn't need to be a plant that we all find beautiful, roses or tulips or peonies and so on, actually my favourite plant is a weed. It's called Anagallis arvensis; I think the English name is Scarlet Pimpernel. It's a very tiny plant that I used to see when we were harvesting grain.  At that time we still were harvesting grain with a scythe and the kids had to help by gathering the grains and tying them into groups. And that's backbreaking work because the whole day you are bent over and you are gathering and you are in the stubble, but in the stubble I would see these little plants, always bent down with the head, I could see these little plants with a tiny, beautiful scarlet flowers. And eventually I learnt that it's called Anagallis arvensis and it still is my favourite plant. I realize I'm not the only one who likes that flower and the other day when I went through books, art books of one Czech painter, Josef Mánes, I found it depicted a beautiful picture of Anagallis arvensis - Scarlet Pimpernel. So anything... doesn't have to be spectacular but a creation of nature, a bird, a fish or anything else has... is for me an ecstatic experience and emotional experience, I would say.

Well of course from the book that I found I didn't find many names of the plants that I was eager to learn what they are called because, first of all, there were pages missing and second, this was a textbook of botany so there were all kinds of exotic plants but not the ones that were growing in my surrounding. But then I went to the high school and I was... this, what I was describing happened when I was seven years or eight years old and I went to the high school one day, and again it's very clear in my memory, I remember going upstairs and there were big windows and in the windows suddenly there were plants exhibited.  There were tubes and in each tube was a single plant and under it was a tag with the name of the plant. Well, that was wonderful. I spent hours there learning what the plants were and of course I was noticed by the person who put it there. It was a new teacher of biology and his name was Karel Kousal, and he soon learned... realized that I was very interested in plants and so very quickly a relationship developed which turned into, eventually, into a friendship. I still correspond occasionally with him; he's still alive, though not well. We differ politically very dramatically but in terms of loving nature and especially botany we were like one person. I owe him very much, not only did he introduce me to the science of botany but also introduced me to people who were professional botanists and through him I became involved already in the high school in actual research, in the floristic research. We were mapping the flora of Silesia, in my case my surroundings, but at one time also I was, during the vacation, I was sent into the Beskidy Mountains and around Lysá hora I was registering the plants that were growing.

Already by that time I had a good knowledge of the plants in Silesia and certainly around my village, I knew everything that was growing there. In fact me and a few other enthusiasts from this school, with Karel Kousal, were roaming the countryside looking for new species.  New, of course, not in the sense that it would be new to science, by that time it was all known what was growing in the whole Czech Republic, but species new for us that we never saw before and you cannot imagine, or a person who has not had this experiences cannot imagine, what a delight it is to come across a new species of this kind. One of my major findings of the new species was actually a plant... was a mushroom, scientifically its called Geastrum and the English name is Earthstar. It's a kind of a puffball except that it... the ball is actually... consists of two layers, one of which, the outer one eventually breaks and opens and breaks in such a way that it forms lobes, that when they open completely look like a star.  So the star is spread out on the floor, on the ground and here in the middle is the ball, so it's a puffball. At least in the part where I was born it was very rare mushroom, so I knew it from some magazine where somebody in Prague was advertising that anybody who finds this mushroom should contact him because he was making a monography... writing a monography on this particular genus and he was interested in their distribution. I... when I was going through the woods and suddenly I saw this wonderful, beautiful Geastrum there on the ground; this is an experience you cannot describe, it was just wonderful. And so I could not wait until the next morning and will go to school and show it to the teacher. The teacher actually then contacted this person in Prague and not only that, he wrote an article about it because in the meantime we found some others also in some other places and how proud I was, my name was mentioned in the article, that Jan Klein... pupil Jan Klein found this in the village of Štemplovec and was showing everybody in the family. This is my first scientific contribution to be mentioned in... in an article.

Because of this interest it was decided, in my mind, very early in my life that I would become a botanist. I liked nature in general, everything else, as I said, I liked about nature... all the other creatures. But flowers were still in the centre of my interest and so I wanted to be a botanist. That meant I had to go to a gymnasium. Gymnasium is not what it is in English countries, it has nothing to do with physical exercise it's just a higher level... a secondary level of schooling that you have to go through if you want to go to the university. So I went to the gymnasium in Opava which was the nearest town to Štemplovec, about 10 kilometres distance from my village. I had to go by bus or by train there every day and it was the same school that 100 years ago was the school where Gregor Mendel was educated. Now it's called Mendel's Gymnasium actually. At that time, my time, Mendel was a persona non grata, that means you could not mention his name but the fact was that that's where he went to school, just 100 years ago...
[Q] Years before.
Yes.

The gymnasium which I visited from 1951 through 1954... it was decided that I wouldn't go to... I would attend the university to study botany. Botany, but not as a professional botanist, but as a teacher. My very naive thinking was at that time that I could be both, that I could be a teacher and a botanist. Many of the professors at the gymnasium in the older times, were that kind. Most of the studies on the flora of Silesia, of Czechoslovakia were done by these kind of people; it was a hobby for them. They were teachers of biology and in their free time they were registering the plants in the different areas, so I wanted to be of the same kind. I thought it's not fair to be a scientist and be paid for it, to me it looked like it was always fun. And I didn't think I should be paid for having fun so I wanted to have an occupation where I could... which I could be paid for and then on my free time be a botanist. So I applied to the university which was directed toward educating teachers. I sent the application to a different school than I normally should have done... the closest  such university, to my area where I was born was in Olomouc or in Brno. Olomouc and Brno, both in Moravia, so most of the students who went from Silesia went to either of these two universities and I was expected to do the same thing.

I decided that I will apply for admission in that university in Prague. There was two reasons for it. I knew a lot about Prague from reading and always wanted to see it, was interested in it's history and it's art and so on. By that time I was interested in music also and Prague, of course, had a much better music life than either Olomouc or Brno. So I was hoping that I could study in Prague and have also these opportunities on the side. Of course it was very risky because the admission was more difficult to Prague than anywhere else because simply there were more applicants and you had to pass the entrance examination. Well at the entrance examination a funny thing happened. I was doing well in most of the subjects except, for some reason, in physics. I just didn't know the particular area that I was asked about so it didn't look too good. Then the last examiner was from biology, he was a young person who was apparently an expert on violets.  It sounds funny that people can be expert on different plants, but it's the fact. There are many different species of violets and if you want to know... everybody can learn how to identify them but the different forms and varieties and where they grow and under what circumstances and so on, for that you have to study and you become an expert on it. So he happened to be an expert on violets. And I had, in my application, I stated that I did some botanical research in association with the institute that was in Silesia and so he asked me what did I collect and I told him, and he asked violets... of course about violets and I told him all the violets that were growing in the area and we got into the discussion like we were two botanists rather than examiner and examined person.  So he obviously realized that I knew a lot about this particular area, and so I think it was mainly on his recommendation that I was accepted, although with the recommendation that I should fill up on the physics, which I did, I think, just a few years ago, only.

I was accepted and I could study in Prague and that... and I should say there was another... I had an experience... a one-day experience, in Prague before that. Already in the gymnasium... or rather let's start from a different end. One very important commodity in Czechoslovakia was, and it still is, is beer. And for beer you need hops and hops you have to harvest at a certain time and the time is relatively short, so they... the growers asked the schools to send the children, the students there, to help them with the harvest. So it was fun for us.  So every year for two weeks or so we went to northern Bohemia where the hops was mostly growing and harvested hops. And on the way back we took one day stop in Prague and this was my first day and I was just... I just fell in love with the city and that love persists to this day and, so when I... and at the end of the day, I already loved music by that time, at the end of the day before the train... the train left like midnight or something and we were lucky to get the standing entrance ticket to the opera. It was the most wonderful Beethoven's Fidelio I ever heard and never forget that. So Prague it was to be.  And then when I studied in Prague, in the first year in particular, I spent more time in the churches and in all the other architectural wonders of Prague rather than in the classroom but... and I think I could have been a guide through the city if I had the opportunity.

Czechoslovakia was liberated in May 1945 and it remained a free country until February 1948. In that month and year there were free elections and the Czechs elected the Communist party. Communists took over and that was the end of freedom in Czechoslovakia.

In the west, many young... especially young... intellectuals were flirting with Communism or were infatuated by Communism. The same was in Czechoslovakia; there were many enthusiasts among the scientists as well as in general population for Communism. It seemed like it was a good regime to be under because there were... in the free Czechoslovakia there were many social problems and the Communist government promised to solve them and take care of people and so on and so on. So as I said there were people who were very... either sympathetic or enthusiastic about Communism, not only in Czechoslovakia but also amongst scientists in the west. I could never understand that, I don't know why... part of it was perhaps my environment but there must have been some other reasons. I never understood how could people be so stupid and go for such a regime. In my family, the whole family, although we were small farmers and so it could have meant improvement for us, the whole family was against it. I think the main reason was that the Communists immediately wanted the small farmers to join together into collective... they not only wanted it but they enforced it. They forced people to join, if they wanted or not, it didn't matter, they had to form this cooperate. Who doesn't know the mentality of an owner of a small land, like a farm, will have a hard time to understand it but the conviction of a farmer is to keep the land that he has because that's the only security that whatever bad times come he should be able to keep his family alive from that land. So they were almost uniformly against it. I must say we children saw it differently, a little bit, because for us it meant, if the farm would be part of a cooperative we would not have to work in the fields because there would be equipment and all the other things that would take care of this and it would not be any of our responsibility. But my mother could not... we tried to convince her that she should join but in the end it was joining by force. But the general... I think the main reason why I was not impressed by the Communist propaganda was that I was from the beginning very individualistic. I always wanted to read what I was interested in, what I wanted to read and to study what I wanted to study and everything should be my decision. Suddenly under the Communist regime you were not supposed to do that. They were supposed to read what they tell you to read and even think what they told you to think. You had no longer freedom of this and Marx was telling the economists what they should do and think, Engel was telling the biologists what they should study. Lenin, the physicists and Stalin to almost to everybody else... to linguists, he was telling Shostakovich how he should write symphonies and so on and so on. I could not see myself to be voluntarily a member and a supporter of such ideology. So I don't understand the western scientists who were supporters of this.

In biology it was perhaps more pronounced that in other areas how strange the ideology was trying to influence the development of the science. There was a breeder by name of Michurin who was quite capable and did many good things for the country, but was a very simple breeder, nothing else and then there was a charlatan called by the name of Lysenko. Somehow Lysenko got the ear of Stalin and Stalin became a supporter of Lysenko. Lysenko became very powerful and was telling scientists what is right and what is wrong, was telling peasants what they should grow and what they should not grow, and how should they grow and when should they grow, even they knew it much better than he did. Well in short he turned out to be a disaster in the end for the whole economy, but the young biologists in Czechoslovakia, in Russia and somewhere else, fell for Lysenko and there were many who thought that his ideas were good. For example, he believed that properties can be... acquired properties can be inherited... Lamarckism. This was disproved long time ago by many experiments but Lysenko revived it and made it a major theme of his new biology concept. He also dismissed the existence of genes. He claimed that instead of genes in the nucleus and in chromosomes the whole cell is a unit... a unit of inheritance so anything in the cell, in the cytoplasm or elsewhere, functions as a factor of inheritance. Then there was a woman called Lepeshinska who basically went back to middle ages because she claimed that cells can arise from acellular matter and was publishing papers that were apparently demonstrating that. Well, as somebody who has read something on biology... knew something about biology, I couldn't understand how this can pass, this just didn't make sense. It was against everything that was done by Mendel, Morgan and Weismann and all the others but these people were, by Lysenko and Lepeshinska, labelled as reactionary and were forbidden. Mendel was deleted from all the textbooks and where he was... the museum where he was... in the monastery where he was... where he worked, was disbanded and people who tried to continue teaching basic, classical genetics were persecuted. But in the west the Communist sympathisers took never stand against this. There was for instance JBS Haldane, geneticist, western geneticist, Mendelist, Morganist, population geneticist and yet he never publicly, because he was a member of a Communist party, he never publicly said this is nonsense, what Lysenko says. So he became a strong argument in Russia, in Soviet Union and in Czech Republic... Czechoslovakia. They were saying, see western scientists support Lysenko so it must be right. So Lysenkoism took hold of Czech science... Czech biology for a long time. But I must say, some of the Czech scientists did not accept it entirely blindly. They tried to prove it, experimentally, that it was correct. And later I will have to say more about this... some of the scientists, how they proceeded and what has happened with these experiments... they were supposedly supporting Lysenkoism.

I graduated from the gymnasium, I went to the university for four years, became a teacher with specialisation in biology and chemistry and got a job in Prague. Actually it was not so... it didn't look like this would happen. When you finished the university there were positions sent to the university which were available, they were all over the country. Of course everybody wanted to stay in Prague. I wanted to go back to Silesia but there was nothing, no position, so I also said I want to stay in Prague. Everybody else got it... I didn't. So I got a position which was at the border of Czechoslovakia and Germany.  It was a wild country. It is to this day. I will not name the place, because I could be sued maybe for it, but it was known to be the worst that you can get. Again, if I would have gone there, would have been Not Smoking, it would have been going my life in completely different direction, we would not be sitting here. But as I was in the final years at the university, we had to practice teaching and I was teaching for short times at different... even elementary schools we had to practice and then high schools and then gymnasium. And the professor who was responsible for that liked... thought I was a talented teacher and so he insisted that I should get a position in Prague in the model school where the other university students were practising and where I was actually practising. So it was on his... and there was a position available and he got me into that school. So again there was deus ex machina that means decision that came out of the blue which I had no influence on and which would have... would change my life.

So I was at the school still naively thinking that I should... I will be able to do research but I had some doubts already as I saw the situation on the schools, I had some doubts. And of course it turned out that it was impossible. You were not supposed to just teach, you were supposed to be involved in all kinds of other activities, political and cultural and administrative and everything. They just kept you so busy that there was no possibility of doing research and it was simply just not done. Nobody did that and it was not possible, I realized that. So after three years I thought if I want to be a scientist I have to get out and have to get either a doctorate at the university or the other possibility was the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences which were purely research institute. But it was difficult to get into one or the other. I applied at the university but got a cold shoulder. There was a geneticist and by that time I was quite interested in genetics already, but there was no possibility that I would... I could go to the university, because they were taking students or applicants who, after graduation, stayed at the university or did already some research. I didn't, I was a teacher.  So you are teacher, so go and teach. Then I... at the academy there was three...  or, I think, two or three positions open for PhD student, that you could enrol in a PhD programme and do just research. I mean you did the university and now you went and did your thesis work, your PhD work. So I applied there, I didn't have any hope actually because, again, the situation was the same, they preferred applicants who had already research experience. I didn't. But there was an examination and they were choosing these three people out of, I think, there were 30 or 40 applicants and they were choosing from this on the basis of the examination. Well the questions were in genetics and I knew, by that time, genetics quite well. I was studying genetics... genetics was forbidden in Czechoslovakia, classical genetics, but when Stalin died in 1953, Lysenko began to lose power as well and so Lysenkoism was on the decline and the Russian... even in Russia they were publishing books that were translations from English to catch up on what they missed. It was a time when molecular biology, microbial genetics, molecular biology were exploding and they realized they were 50 years behind, because of Lysenko. So they were publishing books that they translated from English. They didn't pay anything for it, they did it like the Chinese I think might still do it today because they were not part of the convention, or they just ignored the convention.  They... if you wanted to read something in English you cannot... you could not get the books in Czechoslovakia, first because they didn't bring them into Czechoslovakia and second even if they did they were so prohibitively expensive that you could not buy them there. So the only possibility was to get these Russian translations. So I studied genetics ironically from Russian books. They were... they translated all the symposia on the phage genetics and everything. I knew it quite well and I did well at the examination and I was accepted.

While I was a teacher I was evaluated, not only as a teacher but also as a person and politically, that means how I was engaged politically. All these evaluations were secret, they were written by the party... Communist party, local Communist party members... but they were dossiers that stayed with you, that whenever you moved somewhere else they were sent with you, without your knowing what's in them.

By chance later I got hold of the... what was written about me when I was a teacher by the members of the Communist party and part of it I would like to read here. It says, 'Comrade Klein'... comrade was of course anybody, you could not call Mr or whatever, you were comrade whether you were a Communist or not. So... 'Comrade Klein is a bourgeois intellectual'. It is true, an objectivist true... bourgeois I don't know... 'He is interested in various philosophical trends but approaches them from a position of a bourgeois objectivism. It will be necessary to guide him politically in the right direction. He is a person of integrity, critical and fearless. Has tendency to individualism. Comrade Klein is introverted, a person who does not seek out the collective and service to the collective has not yet become a need for him'.
Well, when I read that I was surprised I was accepted anywhere, although some of the things were true, they were dirty words, if you called somebody... if you called... an intellectual was a dirty word already, but bourgeois intellectual you were finished at a school where you were teaching young people. So I think I got out of the teaching job just in time. I could not have persisted there under these circumstances. Just... this might sound strange to anybody outside... intellectual - why should that be a dirty word? But not so long ago I was in Prague and I took the subway and it was crowded and I was trying to get out and there was a man standing... an old man standing... not old, I mean, elderly man standing in my way, and I ask him, 'Excuse me'.  He didn't hear so I just tapped him on the shoulder, he got very mad that I touched him and he said, 'Oh you intellectual'. I don't know why he got the idea that I was an intellectual but it was, you know, calling names... intellectual still is in these people's mind, but bourgeois intellectual, I don't know actually. Bourgeois, what would be the right word for translation into English? But anyway it was... that's how they saw me. That's how the Communist party at that time saw me.

From 1958 through 1961, for three years I was a teacher at a gymnasium. I then applied for the position at the Academy and I was accepted. I didn't have much choice of the advisor. That was more or less assigned to me, but it was all right with me, I had no problem with it. I... this was an institute of plant genetics or physiology, and it was therefore botany, which I wanted. And the project, or the lab, where I was going to work worked on chemical taxonomy one could call it. It was an old method that was developed actually at the beginning of the last century and then used by many scientists who classified plants. But then it was abandoned and this man who was in charge of the laboratory revived it and was using it. The... the principle was very simple. You took some plant tissues, made an extract of it, and then injected it into rabbits. The rabbit produced antibodies against various proteins in the extract, and that was then used by various methods to precipitate the proteins and compare them since the antibodies were rather specific, but they cross-reacted with related proteins. Not exactly the same proteins, but related proteins of another species. On that basis you could classify who is closely related to one... which species is closer related to another. So it was interesting for me and I was happy to join the laboratory, and for a while it worked all right.
I, among other things, learned how to pollinate plants, how to make hybrids the way Mendel used to do many years ago, and other things. But I became impatient. I wanted to have my own project. I want... I lost three years of... on teaching and I wanted to catch up. I was getting older and I wanted to have a position... have a project on which I could work myself. But the advisor kept evading my approaches and I... I couldn't get a straight answer from him. I asked others and they said, well it's very simple. He doesn't have the approbation for it. He cannot have a student like you. So he still has to pass some... to get a doctorate or... it was doctor of science in... at that time. And he didn't have it, and it looked like he was going... it was going to take two, three years before he would get it. So I went to him and I said, 'Look under these circumstances if that's the case I cannot work here because that's... I cannot wait that long'. And he got very upset and said, 'If you are not going to work here, I make sure that you don't get a position somewhere else'. Well, I didn't know what to do. But then the friends again said, well the best thing if... if you want to stay in the Academy, the best thing would be to go to the Institute of Experimental Biology and Genetics, which was downstairs where the plant physiology was located, and speak to Milan Hašek, who was the professor who was the head of... of that institute. He might be the only person who will go against a recommendation of somebody in the Academy already. So I did. I had an interview with Hašek and I explained to him my situation. Oh he just said, 'I don't care about these things', and wanted to know what I was doing and what my interests were and, and so on. And in the end he said, 'Okay, if you want you can work here'. Just as simple as that. Not like people say, well we will let you know or we will think about it and then so on. He decided and I think one of the reasons was very simple because when I stood up and we shook hands he was almost as tall as I. And he said, well, I need someone that I can look straight in the eyes in my institute.

And so I was accepted by him. And that of course was another Smoking/Not Smoking [sic] situation where my career at least was derailed or on to a completely different track because I was abandoning botany and was getting into a new area because Hašek was working, and all his people were working, on animals. Mice, rabbits, chickens and... and others, but no plants. And that Hašek made very clear. If you work here you will be working on an animal project and so I had to accept that, and that was a very considerable change for me. Now, then it came to... and I think even the same day that he decided what I'm going to work on. So no postponing, nothing, he said... he was thinking for a while... I can see him puffing on his pipe and humming something. That was his usual style. And then he said, 'Hmm, let's have some fun. Have you heard of Georg Klein?' I said, 'I'm sorry, no'. He says, 'Well you will hear about him. He and Eva Klein are working on something that might interest you, and so let's have some fun. And you will be the third Klein who will be... to make some confusion... the third Klein who will be working on the similar system'. So then I... and that was it. That was... I think I'm exaggerating only slightly if I say that it was not until I came to defence of my thesis that Hašek knew what I was doing. But that was fine with me. I... actually that was perfect for me because I liked that. I wanted to have my free hand.

So let me just briefly explain what it was that Georg and Eva Klein and their co-workers Göran and Erna Möller and Hellström and others in their lab were working on. You know who was Hašek  first of all? Milan was one of the enthusiasts who embraced Lysenkoism. He believed there was something to it and he wanted to test it.  And he did test it. He wanted to prove that really heredity is not concentrated in genes. That it's in the plasms, cytoplasm or in the whole body. And the way he wanted to prove it, or test, it was by so called parabiosis. He took two eggs from different breeds of chicken and made a small window opening in each of them with cut out just... just a piece. And then joined the eggs together, incubated them, and weaned or hatched the chicken from the eggs. It was known that when you keep them like this, the blood circulation between the developing embryos become joined and they exchange blood. So his thinking was that he would, by exchanging blood he would exchange also the genetic factors  from one chicken to the other, and that should then appear as inherited property in the other breed.
So he did the experiment and I still remember he then wrote a booklet about it and there was a colour picture of the two chickens hatched. And he... he was... the caption said that the change is obvious, but I couldn't see any difference between them. But what they did see was that it appeared as if the chicken of the one breed had acquired blood group antigens of the others... of the other chicken. So, aha, here was inheritance. Blood group antigens are controlled by some genetic factors and there was a change of inheritance in the chicken by the exchange of blood. He published that in 1953, but I believe during that time he already got wind from England that make him think that the interpretation could be different of the results. The results were clear. The result was clear. The chicken had different blood group in their body. But in 1953 Peter Medawar, Leslie Brent and Rupert Billingham published a paper in Nature where... in which they took a mouse in that case, a new-born mouse and injected into these newborn mice... I used to then do it later. It's very tricky. You have to have a very fine needle. You have to get into the vein and you have to inject... I mean with my big fingers that were bigger than the embryo it was really tricky. But they did it and they showed that such... when you then wean the mice from it they grow up into adult. When you then exchange skin... skin grafts... you take a piece... patch of skin and place it from one in-bred mouse strain on to the body of the other, normally it's always within one week to two weeks it rejected... destroyed. The immune system destroys it. But in this chicken... in this mice treated this way the grafts survive. So you could have a white mouse and there would be black patch of skin growing on it. Evidence that there is no immunological response against the graft.

But that was one approach and then the Kleins in Stockholm, Georg and Eva, were trying another approach. It was actually suggested by Lederberg and they accepted it, and developed then the method. It was the following. You could induce... you could take a mouse, make an F1 hybrid.  In the F1 hybrid you induce a tumor and the tumor will have... it is a heterozygote it will have antigens of the Parent 1 and Parent 2 - both of them. And then you take the F1 tumor and transplant it on to one of the parents. The parent... now the F1 hybrid has antigens from both parents. The parent will recognise the antigens of the other parent and will mount an immune response against it, and it will destroy the tumor... it will of course not react against its own antigens. Well, it will destroy the tumor, but if there is a variant... genetic variant... if one cell of the tumor will change its antigens by whatever means, maybe somatic crossing over, maybe mutation or some... by some means... if it changes the antigens, that that cell will not be rejected. So you have a very good system for selecting very rare variants of the tumor. And they tried it and it seemed to work, and they could show that by selecting these variants you could lose some antigens.
Now, what were the antigens? The antigens were so-called H2 antigens. Now, I'll explain what is H2 a little bit later, but let's just say there were some antigens, and these antigens happened to be expressed on both red blood cells like normal blood groups, but also on other tissues and including the tumors... whichever tissue it was derived from. So it was a change of H2 antigens that they were observing, and now they were doing all kinds of what is lost and under what conditions and so on. And this was the system that Hašek gave me. In retrospect I think it somehow resembled... reminded him of what he tried to do originally. He called that at the beginning of his experiment, what he was trying to achieve was vegetative hybridisation. It's like somatic hybridisation. He was putting bodies together and trying to influence one by the other. So... and the fusion of cells was kind of vegetative hybridisation you could say. So it... I don't know. He never told me this or... but this is my sneaking impression that that's how he... why he favoured that system. But anyway somatic cell genetics at that time was already the catchword of the time because everybody expected hope for... hopes... great achievements from this area. And so he wanted somebody to work on that so I was the one who was supposed to do that.

It took me a while to understand the H2 system that I was supposed to work on because, already by that time, it was rather evolved and rather complicated and rather baroque one could say. So it was not easy to get into the details lets say of the system. But in the end I did. So let me just finish that part and then I will come back to the H2 system.
So I did the experiments... I got... at the beginning I got great help from Pavol Ivanyi who was working at that time on blood groups in rabbits... genetics of blood groups in rabbits. Hašek didn't like it, but this is characteristic of the atmosphere of the institute and of Hašek. He thought that Pavol wasted time on blood groups. It was not interesting to him and he was trying to persuade him for several times to give it up. I remember at the time very well that Pavol would come to me from a session with Hašek and then scratching his head... what to do because Hašek again tried to convince him to give it up. But Pavol was very stubborn and he didn't give it up until he himself came to the conclusion that he has no sense to continue it. But typical for Hašek is that he let him do even if he was convinced that it doesn't lead anywhere,  it... he let him do what he wanted. And it's not true that it didn't lead anywhere; I mean Pavol discovered several blood group antigens in rabbits and it was useful for some other studies. But it was not something terribly exciting.
So Pavol knew the techniques that were necessary that I had to learn when I was going to work with mouse blood groups. So we did experiments together. He... I helped him, he helped me with something and... and Pavol remained... Pavol died about two weeks ago. Pavol remained one of my dearest friends and we... for a long time we collaborated still in other things. But at that time I began to work on the mouse and Pavol was working on the rabbits. Eventually Pavol switched from rabbits to the mouse also and we worked together on H2, but... and then he became involved in HLA studies, which is the mouse... which is the human... the system corresponding... human system corresponding to the mouse H2 system.
And before I forget it I would like to say that he worked on the HLA system with Jean Dausset in Paris. Jean Dausset got the Nobel prize for this work. But I think Pavol's contribution was never really properly appreciated and his contribution was great. He helped very considerably since he knew both systems, H2 and MHC. He could transfer his knowledge of the H2, which the HLA people couldn't understand, to the HLA people. And the H2 system was far more progressed in that time in terms of genetics than the HLA system so that the transfer of knowledge was very important. And Pavol was essential in the acceptance of the idea that the HLA system was an analogous system to their homologous system to the H2 system, and that it was a single system. It's hard to imagine how it was at that time, but I know. I visited Pavol several times in Paris and I would come to the lab and there were huge charts all hanging on the wall. They were the results of typing of one antiserum with a panel of 100 or 200 or several hundred of cells, and each antiserum gave you different results. But they were looking for a common pattern for something shared. So you could not do it on the basis yes or no. You had to do it statistically really and that's what they were doing and so... it was the interpretation was far from simple. What did all these patterns mean? And you really have to look from a distance at the charts. Like the chart, like on a modern painting or some impressionist painting to see the whole picture emerging from it and that, I think, in that respect Pavol was tremendously contributing to the right interpretation of the system.

So back to the H2. I did my work on two levels. One was the somatic level, which was based on the variant selection model. And the other was... I decided to do a straightforward classical Mendelian genetics on the H2 system to look for a recombinance. It looked like it's not a single gene - that it might be multiple genes, or that there was an intragenic recombination in the H2. So I began to look for such recombinants and was getting... I was not the first... there were before Snell and his co-workers, Stimpfling and Gorer, and others, but as you will realize later the recombinants I got were then essential for some of the studies that followed later by myself and by other people. So in terms of the... at the somatic level I... the main result I was getting was that there were many antigens by that time known in the H2 system already. And the question was, was each of these antigens specified by a different gene? Or did some of the genes specify multiple antigens? And so I was taking one of these antigens after the other and asking can I delete one of these antigens without affecting the others? Which would indicate that it's separate... on a separate molecule and perhaps a separate gene. Or if I delete one will the others go with it? I don't want to go into any details... the end result was that some of the... most of the antigens you could not delete alone, but some of them you could delete together while others would remain. The... basically it appeared that there were two regions in the H2 genetic segment. One so-called K and the other D, they were just called by the antigens, and that you can delete them separately. The K with all the whole entourage of other antigens you can delete as a single unit while the other unit, the D, will be untouched. The same thing you could do in the reciprocal way. So it appeared like there were two parts of the H2 segment in this.
So this is as far as I brought it. I was awarded a PhD degree in 1964, I think, and in that... by that time I was more interested... I didn't feel like that project will lead too far. I mean there was... whatever could be done I thought I did and I didn't how... how to... how I can do more. But the H2 itself began to attract me very much. I mean here was an example of something that seemed like it was complex genetically and it was very exciting to find out what does the complexity mean. There was no, in mammals, no other system, no what... how are genes organised? Or what do they... in cases of blood groups, for instance, what is the relationship between the antigen and the genes?

So I was more interested in the H2 system to continue. In 1965 was the hundredth year anniversary of Mendel's presentation of his results on... well results that were the foundation of modern genetics. And this anniversary was to be celebrated in Czechoslovakia. Things have changed since the meantime... Lysenko, at least in Czechoslovakia was out, although it persisted in some circles, but in general you could say, well it's not true what he was saying. The sign of it was that I was asked in early 1965 by the Rudé Právo, the official newspaper of the Communist party to contribute an article on Mendel, which I did. And it was entitled 'Mendel's return' and they really let me say whatever I wanted and I didn't mince words, saying that what has happened was a tragedy and that it's good that Mendel can be back in his own country. Anyway there was the meeting and the meeting... the anniversary and there was a celebration in Prague and Brno, which would be a series of symposia. And I was asked to organise one of these symposia on somatics of genetics. It was very interesting experience. I could invite some of the people that I wanted to meet for a long time. Among them was Len Herzenberg from Stanford University who tried to work on the F1 hybrid, the H2 heterozygote system in tissue culture rather than on tumors in vivo in mice, in vitro. So I was very anxious to hear what he has to say and so he was invited, he came. We spent a nice evening together with him and Lee Herzenberg, his wife. Nice evening in a place which I should have known, but I didn't know. It was a bar and... which was frequented by foreigners. It was... well, I think that's enough.  And during that discussion Göran Möller and some other Swedes came to our table and we... somehow it got into politics and we were talking about politics and they were asking questions. And I always was as outspoken as I always was. I was telling them what I thought about things. We came out. They sorted us. Suddenly we were surrounded by plain clothed men, but police or whatever you want to call them, state police. The foreigners were sent off and I was taken... apparently they were simply, they had a listening device under each table and they were listening to what was said and they didn't like what was said obviously. So I was for a while in trouble and... but I think it was mainly thanks to Hašek again, it was somehow put off the table and placed under the carpet.
Then Herzenberg invited me to come to Stanford as a kind of a post doc and the next year... this was '65 so in 1966 I went to Stanford. I worked. I thought I was going to a lab that was working on tumor variants in vitro. But I came and I was surprised to learn that, oh no we are not doing that anymore. The whole lab was focused on allotypes, which were antigens in serum proteins and immunoglobulins basically in these... in mice. And so I did kind of a compromise of.. I had two papers published from that year. One was on allotypes and one was on H2, not variants but H2. So it was a reasonable compromise for both of us. It worked very nicely and I had on the trip back, I toured the H2 labs... Stimpfling, Snell, Shreffler and so on. Then I went back. This was '66, '67... and '67 was the time when things began to change in Czechoslovakia politically.

The so-called Prague Spring was happening at that time. So things looked well... better. I mean you could... suddenly there was much more freedom than before. The change was that the Communists themselves decided that they want to change things. They wanted to give Communism a humane face. Now, that in itself was an admission that the face that it had before was anything but humane. But to me it was a contradiction in terms because if you say Communism is a dictatorship of a proletariat, how do you put this together with... Communism human face? So anyway... so I didn't... but it was fun. It was nice. It was... you could read suddenly things that you never could before, and you could travel and some of the freedoms that everywhere in the west were a matter of course, here you take them all for granted. But for us in this system... under this system they were something terribly refreshing. Terribly new, exciting and so on. So, although I had thoughts about not returning already then, because of these things happening I decided to go back.

In September of that year, 1968, there was an international congress of genetics in Tokyo and I, Milan Hašek and Pavol Ivanyi went to that meeting. It was in that time, you know, we didn't... it was a problem to pay with hard currency. So we had to pay with Czech money, which was not accepted everywhere, and... so we flew with Czech airlines as far as we could. They didn't fly to Tokyo, but as far as we could. So we... I remember that this trip I don't take travel easy. I get... not anymore, but used to... used to get at the beginning, I get sick on the plane. But the memorable thing about it was that is hopping flight. So, first stop was in Athens. Then it was in Kuwait. Then it was somewhere in the India. Then it was not really Australia, but somewhere down there, and then slowly up north again to Japan. So a very memorable flight in that time.
Now, I was at the meeting and one night I came home and the telephone was ringing in my room, and I got there. It was Len Herzenberg on the phone and he said, 'I know you are terribly upset now but think about it and call me in the morning. If you don't want to go back we will go tomorrow to the American embassy and I will arrange everything that you can go to the United States and you can then decide whether you want to go back or not'. I said, 'Len, what's the matter? What's the...?' I didn't have any idea. They all knew already. On that day Prague and Czechoslovakia was invaded by the armies of the Warsaw pact, of course led by the Russians. So there were tanks in Prague and the situation didn't look very rosy obviously.

So I said, 'Len, okay, I will think about it until the morning and I'll let you know'. So I had about a few hours to decide what to do, and in the end I decided, okay I will go to the US. And in the morning we went to the embassy. Thanks to him it was arranged without too much red tape and in a few days I was on the flight to San Francisco with one suitcase in which I had a pyjama and you know a few shirts and that was all. It was a flight through Honolulu. I don't think they fly it anymore that way, but in Honolulu I met Hašek who had a planned trip already to the US. So he was not defecting and somewhere, I think in Palo Alto, then I met Pavol. So the three of us met at Stanford at that time.
Pavol was very upset. Very difficult, facing very a difficult decision whether to stay or what, or go back. In the end he decided to go back. I think the main reason in his case was he really... I'm not saying I didn't love the country. Of course there were my friends there, my home there, my family, everything. But somehow it was... I could live without that, but Pavol it seems like he couldn't. He... that was not the reason why I decided not to go back. I will tell you in a minute why I decided, but Pavol had a very hard time to decide. Hašek... Hašek was drinking and in a good spirit, but he faced a tough decision as well. And he was going, I think, then from the United States to England, to Germany and trying to postpone the... to make the decision. I know that for instance, in England there were some scientists who tried to convince him that he should go back. That he's needed in his own country and that the right... his right place is in the... in the case of need that he should go to his home country. Whether it had an influence that in the end he did go back or not I don't know. But I, to this day I don't understand that argument of these people because I think it can be only an argument that somebody who has not lived in the totalitarian system could make. And they didn't know what it really meant. It must have been clear, should have been clear to them that he could go back. But whether he is going to help or not... he was already too deeply involved in the reforms himself and he... his hesitation to come back already indicated that he was not the firm Communist as he started. So there was only one thing that would happen to him, which it did. That he was eventually deposed very quickly of the directorship of the institute, and to the end of his time he could hardly do any work. So that was the end of him and it didn't help at all that he did go back, because the situation was worse than it was before and there was not much he could do about it. Before he was part of the party echelon and he could do a lot of help, and he did. And many, like Pavol... I'm sure he helped me in many cases and he helped many people. So the fact that he was a Communist, that he was drinking with the... drinking buddy with all those in the hierarchy gave him the possibility of doing things that otherwise he could not do. And he did it and there are many cases like this. So I think when one judges a person like this it's... one has to always take into account what in the end came out of it. And I think in Hašek's case it was very clear.

Well I decided not to go back. And the reason as I said it's... the reason was complex. It's not easy to say... to cross the rubicon. So in... with the idea that you know that you cannot return, that was clear to me. That you... that I might never go back to the country. Well, it was not never, but it could have easily been never and that was clear to me. So it... a decision like that is a tough decision and I made it in a few hours. But I think I managed it because of one thing, and now I'm going to tell you something that I didn't tell anywhere... anybody before. But it gives you an insight of the situation for people who live outside, would not otherwise understand.

When I was still in Prague, one day I received a letter from the police. The state police, which means it's like the KGB. I mean, it was not signed by KGB or something, but I was... from the address I knew where I was supposed to go. I mean it, it was an invitation... you are to come on this hour to this room in this street. I went there. Now, this was obviously very ominous. This was before the Spring... Prague Spring and everything. And I was in trouble with the police already once before. Not only in that with Herzenberg, but then at another time where I was apparently saying things somewhere in the... not in the public, but among friends who were not really friends apparently. And so I was... well, in that case it was actually more dramatic. They just... one day there was a knock on the door and they came and showed me their insignia and you had to come with us. I didn't know... I said, 'Should I take something?' 'No, no, just come. Just come.' And there were two guys and they took me down into the limousine... the blackened limousine like the Mafia here or something. It was Russia-made limousine, and they took me to interrogation. So they interrogated me.  From the way the interrogation was going, from the questions I realized where they had the information and so they kept me. It was like a whole day the interrogation or something. But in the end they let me go. I was still at the university. I expected I would be fired from the university. For some reason I was not, I was allowed to end my studies.

Anyway, that was my first encounter and now I had to go to this place. There was a guy sitting, and he was very friendly, and he says, 'Oh don't... I know it's, you know, in this place... next time we will meet at some other place'. I said, 'Oh next time?' 'But you have a cousin, right?', he told me. I say, 'Yes'. 'Where do they live?' 'Well', I said, 'in West Germany'. The sister of my brother... not my brother... the sister of my mother married a German from... in the next village. He was a really nasty German. A real Nazi and my elder brother would tell stories about him.
So after the war the Sudeten Germans who could not show that they were anti-Nazi were expelled from the country. Now, whether it was right or wrong there is still great animosity between the two countries because of this act. But my aunt and this guy with... the whole family were expelled also. So I had two male cousins and two female cousins. Are they cousins also or what are they?
[Q] Yes, cousins. 
... living in West Germany. So he was asking where do they live. Of course they knew everything better than I... I say, 'Yeah'. 'And where is Walter?' That was one of them. I said, 'In Germany I presume'. He says, 'No. He is in Paris', and... okay so he is in Paris. 'And do you know what he works for?' I said, 'No'. 'Well you know what the NATO is don't you?' I say, 'Yes'. 'Well he works for NATO'.
Well after a long discussion he said, more or less, 'I have the following proposal for you. We will send you to Paris and you will find out whether Walter would be willing to help us'. And he says, 'I give you two days to think about it. If you are willing to do that, fine. We will arrange everything for you. If not, well I don't think I need to go into details what it will mean for you'. I knew what it would mean. They would probably not put me in jail. They would just... I would never leave the country... would be allowed to leave the country and probably far from the institute and so on. So in a few days he called me and... 'Let's meet in the café such and such, you know'. And we went there and again very polite, very civilised, and smooth and so on. In the end, how did you decide?
I... at that time I read Graham Greene's Our Man in Havana, and if you remember he was in somewhat similar situation. And he was sent to spy or was supposed to spy and sent... so then on some secret weapons or something he was sending them an outline of a vaccuum cleaner or something and for... and well what could happen? I could go and I will just say he's not interested or something like that. And so I said, 'Yes'.
So I went to Paris. It was the first time for me abroad and I met my cousins. They... I couldn't speak German very well. Not very well... I hardly could speak German at that time and so they translated the letters into German for me... everything you know they arranged... they were prepared for everything.

He invited me to his house. We went to the sea. It was the first time I saw the Atlantic and so on. I didn't ask him, but I realized one thing. When I was there, one day they asked me to babysit. That they need to go somewhere and I said, 'Of course', you know. They had a small baby so I would stay home with him. But I realized that he probably went... left me alone intentionally. That there were somewhere either cameras or something. He was... I still don't know what position in NATO or what he did, and it never really interested me. And as by chance there was a stack like, it looked like some documents or something. Well, I knew if I would tell him what the real situation is that he would have to report it to the NATO. And I'm sure they had somebody already in the NATO who would report it to the Czech authorities. So I was in a quandry.  What to do?  Because if they... if it comes that way I would appear like... well they would want me to be a double spy in the first place, and second in Prague they would learn what happened, that I told him openly or something and that I was not interested in anything. So I would be in more trouble. So I said, 'Okay I'll let you know in some other ways in case there is a camera'. So I took the documents and I was like pretending I was... it didn't mean anything to me. I don't know whether it was anything important or not. But it looked like I was, you know... so that they would... if there was a camera they would know yes, this is the purpose of his visit and that would be it. So I did that and I came back and I said that, 'Look it's going to be very difficult to convince him because...' and that was true, we got into an argument about expulsion or Czech history and Czech-German relationships where we could not agree at all. So we got into a heated argument. I said, 'Well he is certainly not going to help Czech Republic... Czechoslovakia because he is... he feels very bitter about what happened to them and I don't think you have any chance'. He said, 'Okay, okay. So we will see how it develops and you might help us some other time. You... have you heard of Porton?' I said, 'No'. You know Porton?
[Q] Porton Down?
Yeah. Well, he said, 'Well you know there is a nuclear programme and you are a scientist... maybe you will have an access to it?' I said, 'Well I don't. I work in a completely different area. I don't have a...'  Well you know Mary Lyon was working at that time? Mary Lyon was working on T alleles as were we, and we had contact with her. Those bastards knew everything, you know. 'So you might be helpful to us at another time'.
And so... but then came the Prague Spring. Everything began to change and I didn't hear from them. And I thought, okay maybe now it will be different. But after the invasion I realized if I go back, I am in their hands. I am in their hands and they can blackmail me I don't know how. So this was my real reason why I decided so quickly, relatively, that there was no place for me in Czechoslovakia anymore. So it was... the dies were cast and I went to Herzenberg's lab again for a few months. Then Don Shreffler offered me a position.

Actually from that time on, if I think of it, my application to the academy... to the admission to the Academy of Science for the PhD... into the PhD programme was the last application I ever made about a job. Since that time it was always offered to me. I never looked for a job... it came by itself.
But... so Don Schreffler invited me and I spent in Ann Arbor, Michigan five years. First, in his laboratory and then on my own in the Dental School, and then that was... then came a five-year period. For the next five years I was offered a job at Dallas at the University of Texas, and finally after five years... another five years came the offer from the Max Planck Institute in Tübingen to become a director of one of the institutes... of the Institute for Biology in Tübingen. Which you know, and that's where our paths crossed and where we get to know each other.

[Q] What, what year was it that...? How long before the Prague Spring? 
I was thinking about it. It was not too far. I mean I was... it was before I went to the United States. But it was not long before. It must have been 'short' before. So '60... '67 I came back. It must have been right after I came back.
[Q] Right, yeah then it would have been pretty much within months of it. 
Right, yeah, because they waited I guess whether I would come back. I think Hašek had to guarantee that I would come back. He didn't tell me that, but this was one reason. Then I was married. My first marriage... they allowed my wife to visit me, but the son was left in Czechoslovakia. So, you know, defecting at that time was not easy... would not have been easy. I mean... in the marriage it already didn't work well. So it would have... I knew that it would end up in a divorce so it was not impossible, but it was not a simple decision at that time.
[Q] No, it was a brutal decision in as much as there wasn't time. Sometimes it's... sometimes it... maybe it helps not to have too long to think about it. 
I think so. I think the problem with Pavol was that he had much... I mean and he had several... a couple of weeks or something to think about it, and actually even longer because I think he also went to... I think his brother defected immediately and then they met somewhere, and Pavol went back. But it... after a long time afterwards he defected as well. It was much more difficult. After the invasion it was for a few months it was not difficult at all. You just jumped into the car and crossed the border if you were inside. But later it was hard.

I was thinking sometimes and... it took them a while to declassify the documents. I would have been interested in seeing what that guy... I mean I must be... it must be recorded somewhere. There must be somewhere they... What?
[Q] Was your political profile obtained before or after? 
Oh this was before.
[Q] Okay. So it wasn't...
No, no, no, this was before. No, I was... this is... I couldn't help it... I couldn't help my mouth... keep my mouth shut even if I knew that it made no sense to say things... that it would bring me into trouble. I just... it just... I just couldn't. I'm...
[Q] Were many other scientists in the same boat? 
In what way?
[Q] In that they talked and got into trouble with the authorities? Or were you the only...
I didn't know any other case. I mean usually the Czechs are very careful you know. You... they got into trouble when they trusted somebody and that somebody turned out to be a... how do you call them? I mean they do reports on you? There were a lot of people. I mean we knew who they were usually. So when you were in front of them you didn't say things, but some of them of course you couldn't know.
[Q] Informers? 
Informers, yeah. Well it would have been interesting to see what... whether they believed my story or not.

I think at this stage I should say something about the H2 system that I've already alluded to several times. But for the sake of clarity I think I should explain what it was and how it came into existence. Actually it was the result of a convergence of two different fields of research. One was the blood groups, which were discovered in 1900 by Karl Landsteiner in humans - the well known A, B, O blood groups. And later it was shown... they were shown to be blood groups that means that different people have a different type of antigen on their red blood cells. And several... many years later only it was shown that they were genetically controlled, that they were genes that specified the antigens. How they did it remained for a long time a mystery. But that's a different story.
So that was one area because with the first human blood groups then there was a search to find other blood groups. They were found in humans' RH systems and many other antigens were discovered, and also in animals. Many mammals were then studied and a series of antigens were described. Surprisingly the mouse for very long time was... well in the mouse there were no antigens found. But in the mouse, the very popular laboratory mammal of experimentation, there was the other research area that in the end would converge on the blood group antigens. And that was tumor transplantation. For reasons that would be... would take us too far to explain, people began developing so called inbred strains, which meant strains in which every individual was genetically identical. So it would be like cloned animals today or like identical twins that always have existed. And they noticed that when a tumor arises... a cancer occurs in the particular inbred strain that you can transfer the tumor on the individuals of the same strain and it would kill the host, the recipient. Whereas if you transferred it into another strain, a completely different strain, it will be destroyed. It will be rejected by... later it could be shown that it was because of the immune system that would... just like it attacks bacteria, it will attack the tumor cells because they have foreign antigens on them. The strain had other antigens on them.

When JBS Haldane visited the United States he toured the laboratories. He also went to Bar Harbor in Maine where there was a major group of researchers working on mice and also made... largest collection of inbred strains in the world. And Snell was working on... later on the H2 system, but this was later. When he went there he heard about these tumor transplantation experiments and he knew about the blood group experiments. So apparently it occurred to him that there might be some relationship between the antigens that stimulated the immune system to reject the tumor and the antigens... the blood group antigens stimulating antibodies specific for them by which they... the blood groups were detected. So when he... so he took some inbred strain breeding pairs back into... to London and then gave them to Peter Gorer and said, 'Look this would be a good thing to test whether there is some relationship between the two'. And Gorer did this. Gorer was a pathologist by training and so he was interested in tumors, he was also interested in antigens so it was a good project for him. That was in 1936 and in 1936 he discovered yes, mice have blood groups, and he discovered four antigens and gave them names. Roman I through Roman IV.  And also discovered that... well I think this is not important... but described these four antigens. One of these antigens turned out to be H2. The II... I, II, III, IV... the II turned out to be what would later be called H2. So actually H2 was discovered in 1936, which is the year in which I was born. So it was written in my stars I guess to become involved in... with H2.

A year later he could show that indeed this antigen II was responsible for the graft rejection. He could show it by genetic experiments where he crossed the strains and followed which segregating individuals would reject the tumor and which not. And at the same time he typed them for antigen II and he found the perfect correlation. In addition he realized that the mice that rejected the tumor had antibodies in their blood and the antibodies was against the antigen II. So it was clear that the same antigen has two faces. One, it induces antibodies, which then detect it on the red blood cells and it induces immune response by whatever mechanism... that was not known, how the tumor is rejected. But by whatever mechanism destroys the tumor so the antigen must be present also on the tumor cells. The tumor cells were derived probably from the epithelial cells. So it was on the epithelium. Later it could be shown that it was practically everywhere on every cell.
In the meantime, then came war and he couldn't do much. He continued, but very little and he couldn't do much during the war. But renewed his effort after the war and in the meantime in Bar Harbor George Snell, who was originally geneticist by training started a series of experiments trying to find out what were these histocompatibility antigens... these antigens that stimulated the immune system for rejection. And it... there were indications already at that time. There were many of them. It was not one, but a large number. At least 15 or even more. The problem was how to distinguish them, how to separate one from the other because the only thing you knew is when there is a difference in one it's rejected. So you didn't know whether it was one, two or three or... so that... then he developed the idea of devising congenics or called congenic strains by genetic means would differ... would be identical with the exception of one of these histocompatibility antigens. He started and he found out that one of these antigens was very strong in the sense that it very rapidly rejected... caused rejection of the tumors. Then he... I think it was Gorer who contacted George Snell. I don't think it was the other way around, but it allowed that Gorer went to Bar Harbor. They put things together and they showed that what Gorer discovered and what Snell discovered was one and the same thing. So they decided to call it H2 because Snell in the meantime introduced the names H1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 for the individual histocompatibility antigens. So it became H2. And then Gorer continued with his work mainly serological. That means he was inducing antibodies and finding out in the different combination of strains and finding out how many different antigens there were and so on. And Snell continued his tumor... mainly tumor transplantation work and only later when Peter Demant joined his laboratory and Marianna Cherry joined him, he also became involved in H2 serology.

There were... the H2 had two faces. Before I forget Gorer died before he could get his Nobel prize and I think he would have gotten it if he lived long enough. George Snell got the prize and I think it was one of the most deserved prizes that the committee in Stockholm awarded. I might say later why I think so. Anyway so they went little bit different ways, but eventually they again came together.
But in the meantime several other of us became interested. So I mentioned already Jack Stimpfling. Jack Stimpfling worked with Snell for a while and then became independent and continued the H2 work. Then there was Bernard Amos who worked with Gorer for a time and published some important papers on H2 with him. And Hecker worked with both Gorer and Snell. So these were the people who were at the very beginning of the H2 and then there was so called Prague School of Immunogenetics.
As I said before when I came to the institute there was... there were two directions in the institute... Hašek's institute. One was immunological... purely immunological... and the other was tumor biology... viral tumor biology. Pavol was fiddling with the blood groups in rabbits, but eventually he gave it up and I began to work on the H2. Then a few others joined us. Pavol became interested in H2 and so that we form a group that in the west was for a time referred to the Prague school of immunogenetics. Ivan Hilgert was trying heroically, I would say, to chemically isolate and identify the H2 antigens and didn't get unfortunately to the right goal. It turned out to be very difficult because they were part of the membrane so it was easy to... difficult to get them out of the membrane. Then there was Alena Lengerová and a few others... Peter Demant joined Pavol Ivanyi a little bit later.  But there was a group of us who were in some way concentrated in their interest on the H2, primarily. But each of us a little bit different angle and each of us in some... with different approaches to the H2.

Then I, of course, left the country and was for some time with Shreffler and we worked together on H2. And Shreffler got... became another one of the major players in the H2 game. He got into... interested in H2 for totally different reasons. He did his post doctoral with Ray Owen in California and there he isolated or identified a protein in the serum of mice, which was present in high concentration in some strains and low concentration in others. He called it serum serological (Ss) protein. Not very attractive name, but he was happy with that. And it turned out that this... that the gene coding for this was very tightly linked to H2 and then he became interested in H2.
So I came to H2 through the tumor variance, Snell through histocompatibility genes, Gorer through blood group antigens, Stimpfling, I guess, through Snell, and Amos through Gorer. But suddenly we were all together in one group that came to be referred to as the H2 Club. It was H2 Club, you know, club... exclusive things that only the members know what's going on in them and the people outside are kept outside. Well we didn't keep anybody outside. We welcomed anybody who was interested in it, but there were not too many people interested in it because it was so complicated. It was... the serology alone was... well, we were involved in constructing so called H2 chart where... which we would have a list of strains going this way and list of antigens going this way. So there were some 30, over 30, I think the last... well no, later on there were 40. So let's say 50... 50 different antigens and there were very large number of strains. And here you have the distribution of the individual antigens in each strain and the combination of each of these antigens was characteristic of the strain. And we could communicate with each other because we remembered the combinations. We had the H2 chart in our brains. You know, you work with it daily and you are interested this antigen, what happens? Is it going to be a new... are you expecting some result where it's different? So you remember that it was like that and you...  it engraved into your mind. So... but nobody else outside bothered to even familiarise superficially with the H2 chart. So we were exclusive in the sense that we... it was hard to communicate with other people.

I became a member of this exclusive Club and the interest in membership in the Club was there. But it was... there were not many people who would be willing to go through the details and spend the time studying the system to learn it. So we were more or less alone. But then almost overnight I would... that's an exaggeration, but it's not too strong exaggeration. The situation has changed dramatically. Suddenly it seemed like the whole world was interested in H2. For me the breakpoint, the overnight, came at one meeting, which was in Asilomar in California in the West Coast. A very nice place. Big Sur is very close to it, and one of the loveliest part of California. But there I gave a talk and I expected the same thing would happen basically as before, but suddenly I mean the discussion wouldn't stop. It was... they were just... I mean you could see it on their faces. They were waiting for every word and then there were questions, interruptions, and didn't end the discussion for long into the break. So it was really very dramatic.

I remember that the people were... not that they were not that they were not interested, because in the mean time H2 became something more than just some set of blood group antigens because of the second phase of the histocompatibility. And during that time it was discovered that similar systems were in other species including humans. The HLA that I already mentioned was obviously a homologue of the H2. In the 1950s the surgeons basically solved the technical problems that prevented organ transplantation before. They were all ready to practically transplant any organ that... as you wished. The problem was that the organs were rejected. Just like the tumors and any other tissue, they were attacked by the immune system of the host and they were rejected. So... and the main... as Snell showed... the main agent responsible for the rejection was the H2. The H2 stimulated the strongest response in the mouse and HLA in humans. The strongest response that led to the rejection of the organ transplant.
So in... both immunologists and other people outside of... the surgeons and other people were interested in what is this HLA? What... the H2 and how could we find a way to avoid the rejection of the grafts? So they were interested, but the... both the HLA system with these tremendous charts and the complexity of the whole serology and the H2 system with the H2 chart were Spanish villages, let's say, to any outsiders. And so I remember people would invite me because they wanted to hear... to learn what is this H2. And I would go and give a seminar and you know I'm very sensitive to how the audience reacts. I give good talks when the audience is responsive, and when it's not then I just wish I would be somewhere else that I would want to be.
Incidentally I remember once giving a talk in Japan, which after I left... since it was the place where I crossed the line... became well, kind of, nostalgic place or I had some special feeling for Tokyo and for Japan. So I went back many times. Once I was asked to give a talk... an immunologically oriented talk to a group of dental surgeons or dentists, Dental Association or something like that. It was a huge hall filled with people. I gave a talk in English. It turned out I don't think that anybody understood English there. I anticipated that, but... so I made one [unclear]... one of my post docs make the slides in Japanese. So they could have followed what I was talking about.  But I will never forget that. It was like talking to a hall full of dead bodies. They were not sleeping you know. They were too polite for that. They... it looked like they were very attentively following what I was saying, but absolutely you could see they had absolutely no idea.
Well anyway it wasn't that bad with the... I will tell you maybe sometimes later just the opposite case when I think I had the lecture where I had the best attention. But with the immunologists or geneticists... were also interested in the system because it allowed to be complex and then, of course, wonderful model for studying a gene complex. So they were interested. They would invite me. I would talk to them. It was not a good experience. The questions, if nothing else, revealed the level of what... of how the message got through. And I think I was trying pretty well to simplify the system and present it in a simplistic manner. It still was not getting through to them.

So what has happened that changed the situation? I have to now go back to Stanford to make the point. So when I got there, as I said, I realized that Len Herzenberg is not interested in H2 at all. But there was fortunately somebody with whom I could talk about H2 to my heart's content and that was Hugh McDevitt. He arrived recently to Stanford with a very interesting discovery. He realized that if he immunises mice with artificial antigen... antigen that was a protein consisting of only four types of amino acids, that was called TGAL for the abbreviations of the amino acids, that some mice made antibodies very high titre... very high level of antibodies, others very low. And he did crosses and he realized that what decides whether it's high or low is controlled by a single gene. There was one gene that decided this strain will make... that has the gene... will make high level of antibodies and another gene... an allele that would practically make no antibodies against the antigen.
So that was very interesting, but even more interesting was already the result that he was getting while I was still there. He already knew... he had already indications of this. It was not published yet, but he had indications of this. Or it might have been published at the end of my stay. I don't really remember. But that he... where the gene maps, and by now you would guess where it was. It mapped to the H2. It was very tightly associated with the H2. This was very interesting. So our question was, okay where? What... does it have any relationship to H2 or is it there by chance this linkage or something? The fact was both were somehow involved in immune response. So maybe there is a relationship or not. So in the meantime we were... the H2 Club... and we were making the system more and more complex. But we were also mapping the system... we were using the recombinants that I mentioned before to find out where this... can we divide this system into units? Well, we could. In the end there were about eight different segments that we thought we mapped in a particular order from the K to the D. Those were the extremes and in between were the Shreffler's protein, which mapped actually inside of the H2. And before I forget to mention it, it turned out to be a complement component four. So the mysterious protein for a long time turned out to be identical with something that was known already to exist. But there were all those regions.
So you know to relate now the gene that Hugh McDevitt discovered to these regions and map it all became the priority that we were... Hugh primarily was involved in. Incidentally he called the gene Immune Response Gene 1. So IR1, so it was an IR1 locus. So since... and we talked and I told him we had some recombinants and he got some recombinants from Stimpfling and Snell and Shreffler. And so he was involved now in mapping the IR1 in relationship to all these regions in the H2.

It was very difficult because of this complexity of the region. But in the meantime I was getting suspicious about the... what the real complexity of the system was because I remembered that when I did the somatics studies, the tumor variant studies, that I always got two regions. I didn't get eight regions or six or whatever. The antigens were grouping into two groups. I didn't test all of these antigens, but those that I tested seemed to be on two molecules. Nothing more. So that would mean two genes would be the simplest interpretation. So was this complexity that the recombinants seemed to be showing the many regions, was this real? Or could it be some artefact? Well then we realized, when we continued, we realized that some of the antigens seemed to map into different places depending on which recombinants you tested. That sometimes it was at one end and the same antigen in another recombinant would be mapping to the other end. Now, you can think of some explanations how this could be... could happen even if you keep those eight regions. But I thought that the simplest, the most parsimonious explanation would be the one that the tumor variants suggested there were only two regions, not counting the Ss. This was always considered to be very clearly separate, and the IR was a question mark. But the serologically detectable regions... six serologically detectable regions could be just an artefact. Just an illusion.
We discussed it with Don Shreffler with whom I was working at that time. Many times... Don was very conservative. I was anything but conservative, I guess. And... but primarily because of my experience with the somatic cells I was pushing for simplifying the interpretation and explaining the apparent mapping into different regions by saying it's a cross reactivity. The antigens are shared between the two different molecules at the different end on the H2 complex. So that in different... in some recombinants, in some H2 types you get a reaction with one at this end and another at this end, and this is the reason why the ambiguity arose in the test. So in the end he was invited to write the review, which he was very slow to always to write anything. And I was eager to get that review and he... well he told me we will write it together. So I wrote actually the paper and I brought it to him. And I remember to this day he just looked at it, and had... take a look... took a look at it and said 'Oh, I see. You put the two-locus model into it'. Well, it was the case, yes. He went along and it was published, and this is what I presented at the meeting in Asilomar, the so called two-locus model. I said, the regions are artefact except the K and D. There are two M... H2 loci and the rest is non-existent... it's an artefact of cross-reactivity. Now, that the audience understood and they realized that... and I think simultaneously there was already a rumour or it was already coming out, that McDevitt with the help of all these recombinants of which two pairs were crucial and they were produced by Stimpfling, Shreffler and myself. And together when you put those pairs together they gave you... you could test... you got a combination where the ends were identical and the middle part was different. So you were testing for the middle part. And McDevitt was getting an idea that the IR gene might be in the middle part and using these recombinants he could map it there.
So here was a case. Two loci, which are the H2, K and D, and in the middle is the IR gene that controls an immune response in some basic way. So suddenly everything was simple. Everything was clear and people knew that something... they could smell that something important was hidden there. Because as soon as McDevitt published his data one laboratory after the other was reporting response to this antigen, to this antigen, to that antigen, all of these responses are controlled by an IR gene which is in the H2 complex. So suddenly there was a tremendous demand for all the recombinant strains and everybody wanted to map his favourite antigen and everybody was calling the three of us... send me, and when are you going to send me? And we were sending anything. We had often, I must say, often I wanted to do some experiments, but somebody was begging so I didn't have enough. I sent him the ones that I set aside for my own experiments, and people were mapping.

All three of us, Schreffler, Snell... well four of us in that case... Schreffler, Snell, Stimpfling and I who had all these recombinant strains, H2 recombinants and other strains, were freely distributing. Whoever asked, got it. Years later when the monoclonal antibodies were... the method of producing monoclonal antibodies was discovered, there were some laboratories who were producing also H2 monoclonal antibodies. And I... at the beginning I didn't want to get involved in producing my own... to set up and producing my own monoclonal antibodies. So I asked these people would you please send us some? We want to do this and this and this. 'No, I cannot send it. We are doing already this experiments'... it was not true, they were not. Or that, 'We need everything that we... and you can... but we are starting a company or... or that will be selling this and you can buy them from them'.
Now, that made me mad... very mad as you can imagine. And I wrote an essay that I published in Immunogenetics. Remind me Immunogenetics... I should say something about Immunogenetics. Stupidly I called it 'The New Shylocks'. But it was... I don't want to make a big story out of it. It was... well the reason I called it... you know Shylock for me was always a person from the literature. I never it associated it with anything. I was not even... that sounds incredible, but I was never interested in Semitism, anti-Semitism or this issue. I mean I considered this silly that if somebody is anti-Semitic or any racist is... I just, you know so he's stupid. But it was interpreted as being anti-Semitic and well there was a big uproar against it. And the message that I originally intended to pass through, which was, I mean, you got from us, you should return us the same favour, was lost. And well I got into a lot of trouble because of that. I don't want to go into any further details. But I think the reaction was... well it was shocking to me, unexpected, unaware of it, and it was not fair. I think it was an exaggerated response that was simply out of place.

I presented the H2 locus model at the Asilomar meeting. I should say that there were two other groups later that came to the same conclusion, one was Snell and Peter Demant and others, and another was Thorsby. We all agreed it was the right, correct interpretation and it was generally accepted so... very rapidly. So, at the Asilomar meeting there was... clear to everybody that there were some genes probably far apart which controlled antigens on erythrocytes and all kinds of other tissues. There were the classical H2 antigens and there, between them, was something unknown. One of them was the gene that controls some protein, which was of known function and the other was the IR gene, IR1 gene of McDevitt, and a number of other genes discovered by other... or genes... genes controlling other immune responses, mapping more or less into that same region. And that was what really electrocise... is that the right word?
[Q] Electrify. 
Electrify, it's correct, sorry, electrified the audience and the immunologists and everybody realized well, there is something very... terribly important in the middle between these two genes and the question was what was it, what was it doing, how to get it?

Now let me reiterate a little bit. In 1970 the H2 complex was reduced to two loci which was then called K and D or regions and in between these two loci were the IR1 gene of McDevitt and the Ss gene of Shreffler, and in the meantime a large number of other laboratories got involved in the H2 studies and their investigations of different responses to various antigens were defining other loci or other phenomena of immune response which were all mapping into the H2 complex and this was a period of birth... if not birth then at least expansion of a new research direction, which then... which is actually part of research branch immunogenetics. Immunogenetics was actually officially baptised in 1936 by Irwin in Wisconsin. Irwin was involved in studies of blood group antigens, primarily in birds, using genetic methods of mapping. The first blood group antigens, as I probably already mentioned before, were the human ABO antigens which were genetically investigated at the beginning of the 20th century. So genetics existed, immunogenetics that is, existed in... before 1970 but it became the focus of interest around 1970 after the Asilomar meeting... an indication of the interest in immunogenetics is the fact that at that time was born the first journal devoted to immunogenetics called Immunogenetics, of which I became an Editor-in-chief and retained that function for 20 years, or more than 20 years. But the idea of starting a separate journal on immunogenetics was actually Dietrich Götze's who was the son of the, if not... I'm not sure owner, but the head of the Springer Verlag in Germany. So he approached me at that Asilomar meeting whether I would be willing to be the organiser of the new journal, which I thought was a good idea, so I accepted that offer and then as I said, remained with the journal for more than 20 years.

So, there was a lot of interest after 1970 in the H2 complex but the main question was that, as I mentioned before... so there were the two loci at the ends of the complex, and there was... it seems from the recombination analysis there was a long segment in between these two loci and the question was what was in that segment, and primarily the main question was what were the IR1 and all the other immune response loci that seemed to be associated with H2 and that seemed to be mapping in that region? What was the product of the genes? They were defined only by a phenomenon, by a difference in immune response that can be... could be mapped into that region, but one would expect that there would be some product protein or some carbohydrate or who knows what, that would be the direct, let's say, molecule that IR1 gene specify. So what was it? And of course a number of laboratories were eager to find out so there was a race... who is going to be the first to determine what was going on in that region.
We of course became involved in it too, and the principle approach was to take the H2 recombinant strains, select such combinations which would be identical at the K and D... so to have a pair of strains that would be identical at the extreme ends of the H2 complex and immunise between them. So take spleen cells or some other tissues from one strain, inject them in the other and then look for antibodies. I should emphasise that all the work before on H2 was done... on the serology of H2...  was done with antibodies obtained from the serum that were tested on red blood cells. So they were, by definition, blood group antigens but... so the entire H2 chart was based on this assay 'agglutination of erythrocytes'. Well, the immunisation in the combinations that were identical in the K and D never produced any antibodies that would be reacting with red blood cells, so eventually we realized that we have to look somewhere else, that perhaps these antigens, if they really exist must be expressed on some other cells than erythrocytes, in contrast to the K and D region antigens. So the question was what method to use for the detection. An obvious candidate for the expression of these antigens were lymphocytes, and lymphocytes at that time were already known to be a crucial player in the immune response. So, if it was something that concerned the level of antibody production or other forms of immune response, the lymphocytes could be expected to be involved in some important way, so perhaps the genes could be expressed on the surface of the lymphocytes. There was no guarantee of course that they are on the surface, but that was the first place to look for them.

So, we had to switch to a different method and that was not as simple as it appears today. I should also perhaps say that for the people... young people who have no idea of history of science that the problem that we were facing seemed to be trivial. Of course today you would just take that region, clone it and see what genes are there and see what would be the best candidates for the IR1 genes. Of course at that time this approach was not available and for many years still remained unavailable, so we had to do with what was available and those were the various serological methods. So, besides agglutination, which was the most commonly used method, there were some others. One was recently developed method of cytotoxicity, lympho-cytotoxicity. That means instead of... so you still work with antisera, antibodies in sera, but the target now was lymphocyte and the readout of the test was killing of the lymphocytes by the antibodies, but antibodies themselves cannot kill a lymphocyte. The actual killing of cells is mediated by a very complex set of proteins that is referred to as complement, so there are many complement components and they together assemble on the antibody that has bound to the antigen and when that happens then the signal is sent through the interacting complex to punch holes in the membrane and thus lyse the cell and so kill it. And that can be visualised by, for instance, giving a dye in the... vital dye in the reaction mixture which the dead cells would pick up and then you can count blue cells against white cells and so determine the toxicity, whether... by cytotoxicity, whether the target cells have the antigens or not. So, that was one method.
The other method that became available was immunofluorescence where you labelled the antibodies with a dye that under a UV light gave up a different colour and you can again count stained cells in contrast to those that were negative. Both assays were not without problems. I'm not going to go in any of the details, but technically they were not as simple as it seems. I should also perhaps mention that later both of them were quantified and mechanised in a way that some devices can do actually the counting of the positive cells and that became more objective.  But at that stage, when we began, you had to spend hours peering into the microscope counting the live and dead cells in many different combinations.

So, we tried both tests but then in the end focused primarily on the immunofluorescence because my wife, Dagmar, had a lot of experience with this test and so she participated and Vera Hauptfeld who joined me from Croatia, born originally in Czechoslovakia, joined me in the laboratory and we together tried to find whether we can detect any antibodies there in the serum that we were producing. We were focusing primarily on the combination of the recombinants that I produced during my earlier studies because they gave, in combination with Jack Stimpfling's recombinant, what we needed... the identity of the K and D loci. Well, eventually... for a long time we couldn't find anything and in the retrospective it seems like... to an outsider it might seem like, how come? I mean, why? Later everybody was able to find out these antibodies... find these antibodies and why did it take so long for you to find them and other people as well? Well the problem was again really technical. In both assays we could see killing of cells but it was never 100%. We never... in all the other assays, especially in agglutination, all the cells become clumped together if you have a good antibody and with the cytotoxicity test with other antibodies, that was the same way. If you had a good antibody you got 100% killing, so that's what we were looking for.
It took a while for us to realize that perhaps there is in the lymphocytes only a small population of cells that bear this antigen and so we should not expect that all the cells will be killed and only some cells will be killed or stained in the immunofluorescence. But then still the problem was that if you used them for cytotoxicity or immunofluorescence you often had the so-called background. You often... you always have a background. Some cells are killed non-specifically, no matter... they are not killed by the antibodies that you are looking at... for, but by some other factors present in the serum, so you always have some cells killed or some cells stained, and the problem was to differentiate what was really the positive and differentiate it from the background. In the case of the complement components, not all the complements were of the same quality. Complement you got as a source of complement usually was used the rabbit, a normal rabbit serum, but you had to test... eventually we realized that you had to test 50 rabbits, sera from 50 rabbits, to find one which was suitable for this, because many of them killed unacceptably high number of the cells.
In the immunofluorescence the test was similar problem but of a different nature. The cells often stained other cells because again you were using a third component which was reacting with these cells non-specifically. So, the problem was to differentiate the background from specific reactivity. Well, eventually... it took us a while to convince ourselves that we have such a difference and that it was reproducible and that you can really distinguish certain... if you had, especially if you a low non-specific background... some specific staining or killing. So, there were antibodies present and further testing revealed that they are indeed specific for antigen that is controlled by the middle portion of the H2 complex and that it was mapping with the help of other recombinants, it could be mapped to what then became to be called the IR region, or IR region of the H2 complex.

By that time, we started the work when I was still in Shreffler's laboratory but during that time I moved... had my own laboratory at the Dental School in Ann Arbor as I mentioned earlier I think, and there... and originally we worked together. Still we exchanged, we knew that both groups were searching for these antigens but we were not obviously competing. But after the separation, it's very hard for me to understand what actually happened. It's... what... 35 years ago or something like that, but in the end we stopped communicating and we started competing. Somewhere mistrust developed that one group is not telling everything that the other knew, something of that kind led to a rift between the two laboratories and so we were competing.
In the end we convinced ourselves that we had indeed specific antibodies against something on lymphocyte that was expressed on only a small portion of lymphocytes and that this antigen was controlled by the IR1 region. So we wrote it up for publication and it was published in Science in July 1973. Vera Hauptfeld, Dagmar Klein and myself were the authors. We called the antigen IR1. It was my insistence on being most parsimonious. There was no evidence to separate it from IR1 as defined by McDevitt, so until such evidence could be shown, my idea was well, let's assume that it is the same locus and if not then there's always time to rename it, but we called it IR1. In the paper we described several antigens defined by this antiserum, I call them IR1, 2, 3, 4.

Two months later in September 1973, Chella David who was working with Shreffler... was the main person involved in the search for these antibodies. So Chella and Don and all the co-workers published a paper in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, United States [of America], describing in a different combination the antigens that were also controlled by the origin and they called them LNA for Lymph Node-associated Antigens. So, within a span of two months the product of the IR region was identified by our two groups and then a few months later one paper after the other was beginning to appear when other groups were identifying also similar products. It just illustrates how hot the area was, that everybody jumped immediately on the bandwagon and the whole bandwagon began to roll and it would not stop until the whole area is exhausted.

Eventually... so there were two nomenclatures and eventually an agreement was reached to... so we called it IR1 and they called it LNA and some other people introduced some other names. The agreement was reached to call the antigens altogether IA for I region was Associated. So it was in a way a compromise and then... Shreffler on the one hand and his co-workers and we on the other hand were continuing characterisation of the region that we identified. Shreffler and Chella David concentrated on the serological side of the problem and began to build what would be an analogue of the H2 chart identifying one antigen after the other and it turned out to be as complex as the K and D antigens, so they began to construct an IA chart of the same type, that means the distribution of the individual antigens among the different inbred strains.
We took a little bit different direction. I was tired of serology because of the experience that we had with the K D. In the end it turned out that all that was... looked so diversified [unclear] was part of the same molecule or two molecules and the individual antigens then became of little use except for a few that were very specific for the particular allele. The H2 from the beginning had always two faces, as Gorer discovered. One was the detection with antibodies, with the help of antibodies, something on the surface of the cells that would be the serological side of the studies, and the other was the graft rejection, in the case of Gorer, a tumor graft rejection.  But later it could be shown that any graft, as I think I also mentioned before, any graft would be rejected if there is a discrepancy between the donor and the host in the H2 antigens. So the second side... so there was serology on the one hand and the other hand was on the graft rejection method which Snell called histogenetic method, and so serelogical and histogenetic. So we concentrated on the histogenetic method, originally based on graft rejection but in the meantime several other assays became available which measured different sides, faces, sub faces of the so-called allograft reaction, that is the reaction against foreign cells... immune reaction against foreign cells. There was in the first place the graft... so-called the graft versus host reaction, which was discovered by Morten Simonsen, in which case normally you have a donor, you take tissue from a donor, you transplant it on the recipient and the recipient rejects it. That's the classical histogenetic test. Simonsen realized... discovered that when you take cells that contain a lot of lymphocytes, that is the cells that were involved in immune response and inject them into the mouse or chicken or some other animal, then these cells actually react against the host antigens, so a graft in this case is reacting against the host tissue rather than the host tissue reacting against the graft.  And you can measure this for instance by enlargement of spleen, which was where the injected lymphocyte usually homed... that they located themselves there, and we began to divide, expand and enlarged the lymph node... the spleen. The reaction is much more simpler... much more complex than this simple explanation, but in principle this is what causes the enlargement  of the spleen. So by this assay you could measure histocompatability differences.

Then another... or two other assays became available that were done in vitro and you transfer the whole interaction between immune cells into a tissue culture. One was the so-called mixed lymphocyte reaction where you... as the name says, you mixed donor and recipient... well, lymphocytes of two strains actually that differ in the H2 complex and if you kept them in culture for a while then the lymphocytes began to proliferate... divide and you can count the number of... the increase in the number of cells and thus measure the histocompatability. Again, it had to be modified because originally both cells... they were both lymphocytes though one reacted against the other and the other reacted against the first so you got... you could not distinguish which direction the reaction was going.  But eventually the one cell was irradiated so it could not... or chemically inactivated... so it could not react and then it became a one-way mixed lymphocyte reaction. That was the second assay.  And the third was actually an expansion of the mixed lymphocyte reaction where people realized that the cells, after they have divided, some of the cells become killer cells. That means if you then use them on a target... particular target cells, then they would kill these cells and methods were developed how you can count the killed cells.
So there were these three assays and we began... we were interested whether any of these, or whether there is a difference between the K D on the one hand and the IA antigens on the other in any of these assays so that would tell us something whether they are like the K and D, the classical H2 antigens, or whether they are different... something very different. Of course other people were... it was very hard at that time to come up with anything that somebody else wouldn't have the same idea and would not be doing it, others were doing many of the same things, and so there was again very strong competition.  But not only that, there was also controversy. Different people were finding different results... somewhat different results. In our tests we could find some difference, but between K D and IA... but it seemed like it was merely a quantitative difference that both types of antigens were able to mount the response but it was... there was some difference in the quantity of the reaction. Other people claimed that there was principle difference. That means the claim was in the end... I'm simplifying quite a bit now... in the end the claim was that K and D will not stimulate mixed lymphocyte reaction and graft versus host reaction but will... sorry, yes, right, sorry. So once again, K and D will not stimulate the mixed lymphocyte reaction graft versus host reaction and IA will very strongly. In contrast, K and D are good targets of CML, or the cell mediated cytotoxicity, while the IA doesn't give any cytotoxicity, and that was very strongly and widely spread opinion of many people.

I remember very clearly at one meeting at Cold Spring Harbor where I presented the data and came to the conclusion that the IA or I region very clearly generated also lymphocytotoxicity that some people stood up and said this is all artefact, this is not true and in our hands it just doesn't work that way. It's only K and D that gives a good target for killing. I antigens cannot be killed. Now, no need to go in further details. In the end the issue was resolved and it turned out that we were right, that both the K and D and the IA region antigens behaved in a similar way although there was a quantitative difference, but eventually other people got killing I antigens and so on.
I'm dwelling on this point a little bit in more detail just to illustrate how in the process two different concepts of this complex were evolving. On the one hand were people like Fritz Bach and others who were saying that there was an essential difference between the K and D antigens and the IA antigens, and Fritz liked to call them... call the I class, the K D antigens lymphocyte defined and the I region antigen... sorry... take back... he called the K D antigens serologically defined because serology was the way that they were described and the IA region antigen as lymphocyte defined, and that became rather popular. Everybody was suddenly talking about SD and LD antigens and I was not happy with that at all because I thought this is all wrong.  There is no principle difference between them. So, to somehow produce a counterpart of this new fashion I suggested to call the two types of antigens class I and class II. So class I would be K and D and what Fritz called serologically defined, and class II would be the lymphocyte defined antigens.

So sometimes in 1973 there were... '74... there were two concepts of the H2, two nomenclatures of the H2, one was the SD-LD and the other was the class I concept... class I and class II concept that I proposed. It seems like nomenclature squabble, but at issue was something more important, and that was how to... how these two are related to each other. My insistence was that class I and class II are of the same type, that's why the use of a neutral designation of class... class of a something... of a basic similar structure was on the unity of these two, whereas the other concept, the LD-SD emphasised the difference between them so that it appeared that there is something basically different about the class II antigens, the IA antigens. Well, in the end the controversy lasted until the genes were... the products of the genes were isolated and sequenced and to some degree until the genes were cloned, but in the end it turned out to be that I was right.  That the two classes were different in the sense that they were encoded by somewhat differently structured genes but they were both members of the same principle kind. So, the class I and class II nomenclature eventually prevailed and I think the LD-SD is now completely forgotten.

My insistence, as I said, on the class I and class II was more than just coming up with something different than the others.  But in my view it was always... the H2 was complex but which had a certain unifying principle, and the class I class II was supposed to reflect that. Since similar complexes were then discovered in other animals and including humans, the question was... and they were named by different names in each of these animals, HLA in humans, B in the chicken and many different names in other animals... there was a need for a name that would include all these different systems in different animals, and the name major histocompatability complex then came to be used by most people and is used to this day and got into textbooks so this is what I am going to use from now on, MHC, major histocompatability complex.
So, for me the MHC was class I and class II and the question was still not answered however, what were IR1 genes? So in my opinion we detected IA were IR1 genes product. Not everybody agreed with that. Just on the side, it turned out to be actually correct, this was the IR gene product, but one could argue that they are two closely linked loci. One is the IR1 and I is the other and they have otherwise nothing to do with each other. We could not rule out that possibility. It just seemed to us simpler to assume that they are single locus and circumstantial evidence could be used to argue that way. Namely, they were both involved in immune response, it was just different forms of immune response. But nevertheless, it was not clear what the IR... why do they and how do these IA antigens, class II antigens, determine whether there is a low or high response to let's say TGALs and synthetic polypeptides or some other antigens. So how do these antigens actually determine that? Nobody had really any good suggestion. It was very difficult to come up with an idea that would really explain all the phenomena and all the data that had been accumulated, until in 1974 Rolf Zinkernagel and Peter Doherty published a paper in Nature, which to me came really like lightening out of the blue, and I think to many others, in which they showed that the response against viruses... so if you infect a mouse with a virus, the immune system reacts against the virus and virally infected cells, and that reaction is against the antigen of the virus but at the same time it is against the H2. So, there is a dual recognition. The immune system recognises two things. One was the foreign antigen and one was the H2... its own H2.

It applied to class I antigen.  There was no evidence that it would also be somehow functioning with the class II antigens but the obvious possibility was there that somehow the class II antigens also are, in fact, participants in some form of dual recognition against the different kind of antigens. The response against the viruses was via the cytotoxicity and they were killing the lymphocytes or the active cells were killing the target cells infected by the virus. In the case of the class II associated... or the IR1 associated immune responses, the response was antibody response, which is of a different kind.  And this concept of two kinds of responses has in the meantime emerged in the... in immunology, so there was one going through... one response going through killing of target cells by cells, by activated immune cells, and the other going through the humeral response, that is the antibodies in a serum primarily, with the help of complement and the help of many other factors. So because of this dichotomy of the immune response, one could argue the response against the viruses... viral antigens, is channelled through the class I antigens serving as dual element... second element in the dual recognition of the immune response, and that somehow, it was still not clear how, but somehow the humoral arm of immunity, the response mediated through antibodies was generated by recognition of some other type of antigens than the viral antigens in association with the class II antigens... the class II molecules on the cells, and that was what I favoured... this interpretation.

Perhaps it is of some interest that although we parted in the interpretation of the data, many of the data were generated together with Fritz Bach.  And Fritz Bach was an expert... was one of the persons who discovered the MLC reaction, the mixed lymphocyte reaction. And so he was very interested in applying it to the H2 complex and he approached me and we collaborated on many of the projects and then we published several papers together and we remained during that entire period friends.  And so it was a controversy, purely scientific, as I think there should be and that didn't affect the relationship between the people. Later I lost track of Fritz because he went into different areas, but at that period of time, he was then at Wisconsin, it was a busy interaction between the two groups. I was still in Ann Arbor, Michigan and he was, as I said, in Wisconsin so we frequently visited each other and of course we were shipping mice to him all the time. It was a good collaboration actually.

[Q] Were Zinkernagel and Doherty the first to look at a possible function for this very peculiar system that decided a tissue rejection in principle and tumor rejection... were they the... did the question never arise, what does this system do, what's its function?
Oh, of course we... from the beginning after the function of the MHC, it was on the minds of all of us that we realized that it's not there to make difficulties to the transplant surgeons, but that it must be doing something completely different.  Transplantation is a very unnatural situation and here was a system that by some weird side effect must be responsible for that but in reality it must be doing something else... but we... and so we were asking that question, so what is that something else? And nobody had any idea. We all knew that it was related to the immune response. There were some studies by Frank Lilly and others before that also viral immune response was affected by the H2. He could show that some viruses grew in some inbred strains better than in others and that the reason why that was so was a gene which was closely linked to MHC... to H2. So, it was in the air that all kinds of different responses would be associated with the H2.
[Q] It's just that you described Zinkernagel and Doherty as a bolt out of the blue... lightening out of the blue and so on.... 
Because the idea that there would be a dual recognition has not occurred to anybody.
[Q] Right. 
And it was not that Doherty and Zinkernagel had the idea of going to dual recognition... testing dual recognition, but they were testing something completely different, and this result... the result they got forced them to the interpretation of dual recognition. There were other possibilities but one of the possibilities that they considered was this dual recognition type, so... phenomenon rather than type. So it was serendipity that it was discovered, and again, to what degree it was by chance or because of rumours, I don't know, but Zinkernagel and Doherty's discovery was followed very quickly by other people's reports of a similar phenomenon with different antigens, so-called minor histocompatability antigens or modified... chemically modified antigens and so all turned out to be showing the same phenomenon. But that was in... the interpretation at least was then influenced by Zinkernagel and Doherty's finding, but their own study was motivated by completely different reasons. They were not studying the function of the MHC, they were studying immune response against viruses and got a result which appeared weird and came up with the interpretation that the best way to explain it is this. So it was because nobody was thinking of... specifically of the dual recognition type of explanation that it was... it appeared suddenly as the bolt out of the blue.

But not many people actually even put it together, even at that time. For several years afterwards most people still thought that the IR1 controlled immune response is something unrelated to it. Okay, this was an explanation for K and D, but they always thought that the class II was something completely different and that it was functioning on a different principle.
[Q] Right, right.
But to me it looked like this is the apparent explanation, and since I was always favouring the similarity of the class I and class II, the principle similarity, then it seemed like it could be applied also in some way to the class II antigens, but how to specifically apply or how it could be explained with the class I and class II antigens was not clear to anybody, and for years still it would not be clear and was a lot elucidated then much later because many elements of the puzzle were still missing. It was not realized that there is a principle difference between the immune response channelled through class I antigens and class II antigens.
[Q] Of course...
This realisation came only later with... I mean it was the principle immunological question, what... how does the immune response function? And it came through studies which I originally thought were artefacts, I must admit, and studies that claimed there is so-called antigen processing. That means that macrophages or similar cells take up the antigen and destroy it into... chop it down into small pieces and that only these pieces are then used to mount the immune response.

I opposed this for two reasons, one was that the evidence that certainly was provided was not at all convincing, so it seemed to me that it was an over-interpretation but the other was that in my own laboratory, or rather Zoltan Nagy laboratory, we had data which seemed to indicate absence of immune response in the absence of antigen processing. So, there was controversy between the proponents of the processing and our group that there is no processing. I must say they were right, there was processing and then the processing was one of the clues that led to the realisation of the difference between the class I and class II. But that took a while... some time, and ironically the best evidence that, of course, processing was functioning, not only that but that it was a way of explaining the immune response channelled through the class II antigens and the best evidence came from a laboratory which was part of our institute. That was Hans-Georg Rammensee and his collaborators provided an explanation, which was by then already considered but provided evidence actually that the peptides that are produced through antigen processing actually bound to the MHC molecules and that this is what the immune response recognises, the peptide as a foreign particle or antigen and the MHC as its own. So the dual recognition was there and that the difference between class I and class II was in that class I, which used... which was used in response to viral antigens for example was of that kind because the viral antigens infect the cells and the antigen is associating inside of the cell already... the antigen is inside of the cell, whereas for the class II  antigen was taken up from the outside and process so that turned out to be the whole difference between the class I and class II channelled immune responses. So Rammensee made a very important contribution to the elucidation of the dual processing... dual processing of immune response.

By that time it became clear that MHC is very important player in the immune response and that, of course, stimulated a lot of interest in the system. It seemed to me like suddenly the whole immunology was moving into the field and it was a period of excitement when all these findings were emerging one after the other. But also it was a period of great confusion and confusion that eventually led me to abandon immunology and find some other area which was more quiet than the overcrowded field that I was until then working in.
Actually I got into immunology without me wanting it. I was never terribly interested in medically oriented fields. I was a naturalist and I wanted to study basic questions of biology rather than seek solutions to medical problems to which immunology very clearly relates. One of the reasons why I moved into immunology was of course the H2 system brought me there. It was unavoidable to ignore the clinical aspect of the studies. There was first the transplantation and when... if not the transplantation, it seemed like H2 is somehow basically involved in the immune response, at least one form of the immune response, that it plays a major role in how immune response takes place. So, by this fact I had to pay attention to what was happening in immunology and since I really didn't know much about immunology at that time, I decided to learn immunology by writing a textbook.  And when I wrote that textbook I stated that in the introduction and the preface, and one of the reviewers said well, this is hard to believe that I didn't know immunology and that's why I wrote a book. But it is true and I did that in fact many times afterwards. I wrote several books and every time I wrote a book because I wanted to really learn very thoroughly the field into I was moving.
So my first book actually was in Czech and it was at the time when the molecular genetics was just emerging and I studied it and everything. I found that whenever I put it all together and I thought the best way to put things together and organise them in my own mind is to write a book about it, so I wrote a book in Czech. It was actually my best selling book ever because there was absolutely no book at the time. This was at the end of Lysenkoist era, the literature was not available, so here was one book. It was meant to be a popular book actually for people who not only... maybe scientists but in other fields than genetics, and it was sold out in one or two days.

But, of course you have to understand the situation in Czechoslovakia that I knew. A lot of books were published and the system was such that the new books appeared on a certain day and that was always on Thursday, I remember, and so on Thursday if you wanted a new book and it was something worthwhile, you better go to the bookstore and stand in the line to get the book because they were publishing a lot of books but they were books that nobody wanted to read like the classics in Marxism, Leninism, the collected works of Stalin and the collected works of Lenin and then the Czech classics like the collected works of Hašek. It was... those were okay but people didn't want to buy these kind of books, they wanted The Old Man and the Sea, which was talked about but we could not read it before because you could not get it in English, of course.  And many other of the books that were bestsellers were translations from English or other languages. And so people really stood lines on Thursday to get the book and often before you got to the cashier or into the store, the book was already sold out because also the booksellers put many copies under the... they were trading them, you know, for other things that were not easily available.
So anyway, that explains how in a few days a book, even a scientific book or popular books, can be... can disappear... be sold out. So then I wrote a book on H2, which again I summarised because I had to learn everything about H2 and the next one was on immunology and so on. So every time I wrote a book it really was because I was getting into a new field... new area, and I wanted to learn everything that there was and so it came natural that I would write a book about it.

So coming back to immunology.  By that time I moved to... it must have been in 1978 or '79... I moved to Tübingen in Germany and because of the circumstances that I explained, I had to pay attention to what was happening in immunology in general. By that time I met Zoltan Nagy who was a trained immunologist and he expressed interest in joining my group, so he did and he was then primarily responsible for the immunological work and through him I got directly involved in immunology as well, so that explains some of the studies that came later.  And as I mentioned before, Hans-Georg Rammensee, who was my student originally, after finishing his post doctoral training in La Jolla and in Basel in the immunology institute came back to my institute and it was there that he started to work on the antigen presentation... the peptide elution from the MHC molecules and so on.
But it was, as I said, not only a period of excitement but also a period of confusion and I think the historians will have once... sometime in the future, a very interesting time to go through all the claims that have been put forward, and I'm not talking about just speculations and hypothesis, they were fantastic... truly fantastic hypothesis from when you look back in the retrospect, bizarre. But those were okay still because people can fantasise if they want to until the data appear, but what was not okay was that many of the data that were presented, many of the results could not be reproduced, that there were claims made on the data, on the basis of data that could not have been true. The results just could not have been correct. So it will be for the future historians to find out what was actually going on, but in that time of course we did not know that the data would not be reproducible or that you should ignore certain part of what was appearing and presented for believing and it's very difficult to decide what to believe and what not. So the whole area of so-called enhancing and suppressing factors, the anti-idiotypic big networks, that is the so-called J-locus, and many other similar claims, turned out to be... they just collapsed.  And when it was at the end and it became clear what the actual emergency function is and everything was understood, these results could not have been true. So it was really a period of a great confusion and it was at that time that I decided that I had had enough of immunology and I don't want to try to decide or check always in my own laboratory what is true or what is not true... made things very difficult in the way of thinking where you should go if you don't know whether a certain claim is true or not and to test every of the claims was just not possible. The laboratory was too small for that. So that's when I began to think that I should start something new and that's what I did.

Part of the confusion was directly affecting the interpretation of the H2 system because on the basis of irreproducible data, the H2 was becoming again complex. As I explained at the beginning, there was a serological complexity which was real but the interpretation was incorrect and it had to be reduced by the two locus model to its right proportions. But after the reduction the H2 began to expand again that people were mapping IR genes and were placing different IR genes into different regions and they were discovering other phenomena, which were controlled by the H2, mapping them and again generating new regions. So it appeared that in addition to the K D I S regions, there were suddenly other regions like one region was called B, another was called J and so on.
And my function seemed to be to puncture all these bubbles that were appearing and to remove these regions. I sometimes felt like Mephistopheles in  Goethe's Faust where he said, when Faust asks him... when he first appears, he asks him, 'Who are you actually?  And he says, 'Ich bin der Geist, der stets verneint!' ('I'm the spirit which always negates'). So that was the function I seem to have assumed, regions appeared and we did experiments to show that it's not so. The B region could be explained as an artefact of interaction. The J region... there was supposed to be an antibody against J and it was supposed to be involved in the suppressor cells... suppressor cell function.  Well we never succeeded in producing... reproducing the antibody and neither did any other people. The whole actually... the whole area of the suppressor cells turned out to be irreproducible. So in those times one of our contributions was to keep the H2 system... the MHC of the mouse in a believable state and that was the state which eventually was confirmed by the cloning of the genes and the biochemical works. Of course it turned out to be that there were other genes in the MHC and that brought me... but for these I always had the opinion that they were not related to the MHC function and I might come back to that question later.

Before I leave this part of my narration, I would like to make one point that seemed to be... seems to me to be important. Eventually it turned out that the H2 molecule... the MHC was one of three most essential molecules in immunology, the others being immunoglobulins and the T cell receptor. The T cell receptor at that time was still a very open question. There were claims that it is an immunoglobulin, another kind of contributing factors in the whole confusion because papers were published where it was demonstrated it was an immunoglobulin. Obviously all wrong, not true.
So there was still one player left out, but MHC was now clearly in and was very important. It would seem that such an important molecule... that the research on such an important molecule would open... would be publishable in the best journals, let's say Nature, Science, Proceedings, National Academy later Cell and so on.  Well, it's interesting to see where the papers on H2 were published. So, let's take Gorer. Gorer published his papers, and I think Gorer... well, Snell got a Nobel Prize eventually, Gorer unfortunately died, but if he lived, I think he would have been a Nobel Prize winner as well. So where did Gorer publish the H2 works? It was in Journal of Genetics, British Journal of Experimental Pathology, Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology, Journal of... that's the same one, Cancer Research, British Journal of Cancer, and so on.

Where did Snell publish his papers? Including papers that were then cited for the reason why he was awarded the Nobel Prize, so he published in Journal of Genetics, Journal of National Cancer Institute, Cancer Research, Folia Biologica... probably most people don't know the journal but that was the journal of the Institute of Experimental Biology and Genetics in Prague... Transplantation Proceedings and so on and so on. No Nature, no Science.
Why was that? Did they not want to publish it there or was these journals not interested? Actually if you... I once compiled a list of 100 papers most important in immunology when I wrote the book, the textbook of immunology. I compiled that list and there were only very few that were published in these journals and in Science or Nature or PNAS. Most of the others were published in specialised journals... in journals that are not highly cited or highly recognised, so why was that? I think the whole area... I think that Science and Nature do not publish the most important papers, they publish the most fashionable papers. When H2 was in a period when it was not fashionable, all the important work was published somewhere else than in these two journals. Only when it became fashionable you could publish in these two or other highly, so-called highly cited journals, and I think that these journals actually generate the fashion. So they are not... so they are pretending that they are publishing the most exciting, most important papers that are there, but in fact they are just publishing most fashionable papers in a particular area. So the people... and the people who are in Science and Nature cannot actually recognise what is important and not. They recognise easily what is fashionable because they can just look around and there is a bandwagon effect and they can... everybody is... so, what is new and everybody is expecting a result already on something and then they get hold of it and they can publish it, but that's too late already. The important work is... the footwork is done in the early stages and the important work in H2 was done by Gorer and Snell and these people at Nature and Science would not recognise as being important, and that's not true just in this particular case, that's true in every area of research. If you just take let's say the genome research... the important papers that Nature now publishes, the genome sequences of this species and other species and so on, that's what they consider important. The important papers were those that led to the possibility of sequencing a genome.  The whole area of genomic research had its beginning... and molecular biology had its beginning with the restriction enzymes and all the individual ingredients that were necessary for the development of the area. These papers were not published in Science and Nature.

So I think by creating this fashion or this fashionable science, I think the editors of these journals are doing disservice of science. They are misleading the general public what is and what is not important in research, and that has directly or indirectly an effect on how research is being funded and on many, many other factors. It's affecting how people are getting positions because some stupid administrators take as an indication of one's contribution how many times... how many papers a person has published in Nature or Science or Cell or in other journals.  It's totally irrelevant. It's important to know what a person had done... has done, and not where he has published it. Either it's an important work and then it can be published anywhere and an indication it was published in Science is not an indication that the paper is important. So it's a bad system and I just hope that in the near future the electronic publishing will take really over and that disposes of... actually of these journals that are run not by scientists but by journalists and that are after sensations rather than after actual progress in science. So maybe, hopefully that if electronic publishing allows probably rapid distribution of new work, then it will take over all this... and that this... I don't think that fashions in science will ever disappear, they have been now created and some of it will always exist, but some of the bad effects that it has now will be removed and science will return to its function of really looking for important results rather than for fashionable results.

As I said, I decided to switch from one area of research to another and the natural bridge to the area that I decided on was provided by my interest in one particular aspect of the MHC and that was its polymorphism... its the remarkable property of the H2 and HLA system, of the existence of multiple alleles... different forms of the genes in the populations in appreciable frequencies, which is usually more than 1%. It is a striking feature of the MHC that it makes it rather unique because there are very few genes or perhaps it's the most polymorphic gene that exists at least in higher vertebrates.
So early in my interest in the H2 I started population studies of H2 in mice that were trapped in the wild. Most of the work, well, actually almost all the work that was done on MHC before was done on H2... was done on inbred strains of mice, but I wanted to expand it to see what the real polymorphism of the MHC is in the inbred strains... number of alleles or so-called haplotypes combinations of alleles were defined, but there was no study on mice caught in the wild. And so I started in Michigan by trapping mice, going to the farms and setting up traps. Every morning I would go and collect the mice that overnight were trapped in the different farms. You might think it's nothing easier than to catch a mouse, but in fact it's not that easy because you have to first find places where there are mice, you have to learn what is a sign of presence of mice in a barn or on a farm. Most farmers would claim they have no mice so it's... of course because it's... they consider it a bad thing to have mice in their barns, so they would not admit that there are mice. So you cannot ask the farmers, you have to find out for yourself. Eventually I did realize and my experience from my childhood helped me in that regard and so I located a number of farms where there was... that turned out to be very good trapping places. And then you have to have the right traps and you have to know where to put the traps and so on, you have to take care that the mice don't freeze in the traps because at night it gets cold and if it's a metal trap then it gets freezing cold in the trap so you had to provide some nesting material in which they could hide, and so on and so on.
Well, I was very successful in that part and every morning I was bringing back mice, which I decided to breed. Well, that also is easier said than done because while mice are proverbial in their reproductive ability, when you bring them from the wild their sexual urges somehow diminish. Not the males, the females have a problem and you have to set up a certain kind of condition for the mice that they... that the females feel like having sex, so that too I had to learn and eventually I was able to breed them.

Why I wanted to breed them is very simple. I expected that the serology which I was using at the time would be very difficult on wild mice. On the inbred mice it was facilitated by the fact that you had many individuals of the same kind so you could sort out the complexities, but in the wild... mice, they are all heterozygotes. That means they have four different genes instead of two in the H2 complex, so it was much more complex... expected to be and turned out to be that way. But eventually all these problems were managed and I was typing on wild mice.
The first thing I discovered is that the antigens could be sorted out into two categories. Some were very restricted in their distribution among the individuals while others were wildly shared between individuals, and I called the former the private antigens and the latter the public antigens. That turned out to be very helpful then in the formulation of the two-locus model because on the basis of the two-locus model it turned out that the private antigens are specific for an allele and that each inbred strain had only two private antigens, which was another evidence that there were only two loci. And it helped in the interpretation of the H2 and the polymorphism in the wild mice, so we discovered that polymorphism was indeed tremendous and were able to find out many things about the nature of the polymorphism and also about the wild mice themselves... how they lived, what social organisation they had and so on and so on. I'm not going to go into that... I would like to just mention to what these discoveries led, because at least for me then it became quite important.

Through the analysis we realized that some of the private antigens were shared between very distant populations in the first place, but we were also able to type different subspecies and even species of the mouse, and it turned out that these subspecies had antigens that we could not distinguish. They were... they seemed to be identical. So by that time I was in Germany. In Germany there are in... well, yes in Germany and in Europe there are two different species of a mouse. One is called domesticus and the other musculus.. or musculus, and they have very distinct areas where they live. Across Europe, across Germany, down from the Baltic down to the Mediterranean Sea runs a line which the mice respect. On one... well, it's a line that's almost political because at that time it divided... it ran across Germany and separated Eastern and Western Germany, by chance, totally by chance, and on the one... so on the one side is the western form of the wild mice, on the other side is the eastern form. The line runs near Munich, which was not too far for us, so we could collect mice on both sides.  And it is a line, it's a hybrid zone which means that the mice that meet there can occasionally breed.  The western and the eastern mice didn't mind breeding together, but studies showed that the number of progeny of these mice is reduced, dramatically reduced, so that there is some barrier... reproductive barrier emerging between the two forms of mice, the Eastern and the Western. So they were evolving if they were not already two different species.
By comparing the Western and the Eastern H2 type, we found that the same type appears to be present... in the same alleles by this definition... present in both forms. Now as far as it's known, the species have separated from each other about one to two million years ago, so this indicated that unless they exchanged these genes, that the genes were separated for one and two million years, and yet they appeared to be very similar. So that was strange because on the one hand there was tremendous variability in the H2 antigens in the mice, a very high number of different alleles, and on the other hand some of the alleles appeared to be constant for a long period of time.

Now if you think of polymorphism, as it was understood at that time, and for many people it is still understood that way, polymorphism is a variation within a species. That actually used to be a definition... intra-specific variation. So you have two variants, but the two variants occur in the same species and are not supposed to occur in another species. Well, here was a hint that this might not be so, that the same variant might occur in different species. By that time there was already increasing poly... increasing interest in polymorphism and everybody assumed that the polymorphism is intra-specific and that it arose... that means it arose after the species arose... so within like the mice, it has separated two million years ago... the polymorphism within the Western form, the Eastern form... let's say the Western form arose within those two million years.  But that to me seemed to be very strange because if that were so you should expect... well, at first it would require a very high rate of mutation, they would have to be changing very rapidly and if they were changing rapidly then we should not find those alleles in different forms. But we were finding them, or at least appeared. That was serology, so we could not be sure. So to find out whether they are really the same or not... then Bernhard Arden, who was a doctoral student at that time in my laboratory, and I studied them biochemically. We isolated the molecules... by that time it was possible, the methods were finally available, there was still no gene cloning, or at least for us it was not available yet in the form that we could easily adapt it for our needs so we couldn't isolate the genes.  But we could isolate the proteins, which the H2 turned out to be, and Bernhard was able to do so-called peptide mapping. That means he digested the protein with an enzyme, trypsin in this case, and then separated them chromatographically... the peptides. So, you got different spots and the spots were characteristic of each allele. So, you could distinguish alleles by the pattern of the spots, so if they were very similar, most of the spots were the same, but where they differed in a single peptide, you could find a different spot. So he did that and what he got was identity, that the serologically-identical alleles of the Western mice and the Eastern mice were also biochemically identical.

This was the first indication that there is sharing... real sharing of alleles between two different species. Now, that presented a problem and I struggled with that problem for a long time... not a long time but several years I would say. Well, that's a long time. Normally everybody would argue, and everybody did argue as it turned out... would argue that this must be so-called convergence.  That these alleles arose independently in the two strains, or two species. I had difficulty with that explanation and I was not willing to accept it but I was thinking what could be the other, the alternative... what better explanation? It now... the solution now seems very logical and obvious, but it's a good example of what difficulties you face. The blocks in your mind that prevented you to see the obvious solution, and I remember waking up one morning very precisely and suddenly it came to me, you are stupid, this is very simple. In my mind was polymorphism always associated with the species. There was no way of sharing polymorphism between species but it occurred to me well, what if that is not true and actually the alleles arose before the species separated and they just remained in both species. That's why they have the same alleles so that polymorphism could be much older than the conventional wisdom that all geneticists were willing to... never doubt, was actually not true. So the conventions are often a very big hindrance in finding the right explanation, which in this case was certainly so.

I published this explanation in 1980. But, of course nobody believed it. They said oh, it's gene conversion, how could you know, and so on, and they are not identical. Peptide mapping cannot resolve the various minor differences. Well, we showed that it can, but you could argue in this. But in the meantime the genome... the molecular genetics got to the stage where even we could adapt the methods so we finally had them working in our laboratory as well and we could clone the genes. So Felipe Figueroa, I and in collaboration with Eberhard Günther from Göttingen, got together and decided to test the hypothesis on the genetic level... at the genome level, so we decided to look at the... to compare mice and rats. A mouse and a rat... very different genera... have diverged, according to some people, 20 million years, and some people think it's even more than 20 million years ago. So, very different branches... evolutionary branches.  And we decided to compare the alleles of rat and mouse, where serology no longer indicated that there was a relationship.
So we cloned and sequenced a number of alleles of the two species and then compared them by methods that are now generally used... phylogenetic analysis... trees and indeed we found that... we found the following. If you... if the polymorphism is intra-specific, as generally was assumed, you would expect that when you make the tree that the alleles of the mouse would make one branch together, one class together, and the alleles of the rat would make a separate cluster. Now, if there was sharing of polymorphism or if the branches of the alleles diverged before the speciation or before this group became totally separated, then you would expect that you would not see this mouse branch and separate rat branch, but that the alleles would be mixed, that the allele tree would not match the species tree. So we did this and indeed it turned out to be the latter possibility, that some mouse alleles were more related to a rat allele than they were to other mouse alleles. So, to us it was a clear evidence that there is indeed, what I called then the trans-species polymorphism, that polymorphism is not just intra-specific. That's true for... maybe for many genes, but it was not true for the MHC genes.

At the same time we also did a similar study and that was Werner Mayer who did the study in collaboration with people in Amsterdam on human... on the HLA system, and again it turned out to be the same situation that some of the human... the HLA alleles were more related to chimpanzee alleles... chimpanzee and humans diverged about six million years ago, than they were to other HLA alleles and the same for the chimpanzee. There were... some of them were more related to human alleles than the chimpanzee alleles. So, a clear case.
A little bit later several other groups reported similar findings, so it was turning out that the trans-species hypothesis that I formulated in 1980 was being supported by all the evidence that was coming from different directions, originally from serology than from biochemical analysis and later from genetic analysis. People still didn't like it. I remember... yes, it's very funny today, but at that time I remember when I presented this to... at the meeting... where was it? New Orleans, I think. It was a meeting of the HLA Society basically and then I presented there, and then it was just before the presentation just before the break and it was just, when I finished, it was just like a group of wasps was attacking me. The discussion was suddenly... everybody wanted to know this and this and all kinds of objections. This cannot be true. Well, some of the people who were very, very sceptical at that time later published papers where they got the same... basically the same result.
It's not that we were claiming that every polymorphic difference that one finds between alleles in different species or in the species must be of origin before the speciation, but certainly a good proportion was, and this had several important implications in several areas... for myself and for areas of research of other people, and it led to some of the studies that I will mention shortly, but, for me it was a demonstration that the MHC genes are not special in the sense that they are evolving very fast, as many people were assuming, and perhaps some even assume to this day, but that what was special was that the alleles remained... that the polymorphism remained within the population, regardless of speciation, even if they underwent splitting into new species. The polymorphism was transferred from the original ancestral species into the new species and that to me had very important implications on the nature of polymorphism, and these are the areas that I would like to now discuss.  But before I do I should say I would like to say something about the Max Planck Society before... which I became a member of one of its institute in 1978, because it had an important effect on my research that then followed.

The Max Planck Institutes in Germany are as close to an ideal research institution as I can think of. They are... the society is an organisation which has institutes all over Germany devoted to different areas and there are three institutes in south... south part of Germany in Tübingen.  One of them was the Institute of Biology, which I became a director of. The advantages of being a Max Planck director are, first of all you are generously supported in your research, the number of positions is usually fixed... cannot be increased, but if you get outside sources you can get positions generated in this way, but you have a complete freedom of what you are doing. You don't have to write any grant applications, you don't have to justify what you are doing, it's devoted primarily to basic science research, and the administration that is associated with such a position is, if you choose so, relatively minor.
In my case I had a very good administrator, a certain Mr Schoss, who was very reasonable in every respect and who helped me to solve any problems that arose... administrative problems. I think this was the only time I encountered such an administrator. Usually in universities or other institutions, administrators create problems rather than help to solve them. Herr Schoss was of very different mind and I owe him very much. It was because of this freedom you also don't have to attend meetings if you choose so and because of this freedom I chose not to attend any meetings of the society or only when it concerned our institute, so I didn't waste my time on things that other researchers are often willingly or unwillingly made to participate in.
The freedom also allowed me to change my direction of research if I decided so, and at one point, as I said, when I got tired of immunology, and because of many other complicating factors, I decided to change the direction of research in which I was involved. And the decision was based on my liking of evolutionary studies that I had for a very long time and immunology, as I said, was for me just a sideline from my main direction, which was genetics, and eventually toward evolutionary biology.

So at one point I decided I would change to become evolutionary biologist instead of immunogeneticist. In practical terms it meant that the fantastic mouse house that I had in Tübingen, which I think was at that time the best in Europe and certainly in terms of the number of different genetic variants that we were carrying and also in terms of the size, which helped I think a lot of other institutions in Europe because we were able to supply them with the variants that they needed... so at one point it was decided that it would be turned into a fish house because fish was one of the chosen animals that we decided immunology... evolutionary biology could be studied. So this... although it involved considerable expense was done within a very short time and in a very short time it functioned as a fish house again stuffed with a large number of variants that we were needing.
The evolutionary biology I had in mind was... it started from the H2 actually, from the study of the polymorphism and the trans-species evolution of the polymorphism... led me naturally to questions which concerned how species arise... speciation... one of the very basic questions in evolutionary biology many people think, or the lay people usually think that has been solved by Darwin, but in fact it is still... it was still not known very little about the mechanics of speciations. There were many speculations, many theories, but hard facts were quite limited at that time, and I'll explain how the H2 system... the MHC system in this case... led us to these studies. But in addition to speciation, I also decided to follow the evolution of the MHC, which was very natural and by extension also the evolution of the immune system in general.
The MHC was studied until then in mice and humans and a few other mammals, but almost nothing was known about other vertebrate groups.  But slowly other people got interested in it too and so soon were fish MHC cloned and MHC of other vertebrate classes. The question was how does the MHC look like in non-mammals or even in other mammals because I think we were very biased in our views of the MHC from the mouse and humans, although there already were some differences so it could be expected that there will be even major other differences in other groups. But the main question was how did it originate, the MHC, were did it come from, and how did its organisation change during the evolution?

So we spent considerable time on studying different MHCs in different vertebrate classes, specially in the mouse... in the fish, and it became clear that the MHC could be easily... relatively easily followed, all the way to sharks, which were the one class that was considered to be most primitive of the jawed vertebrates... vertebrates that had jaws. But there was another group which was more primitive and those were vertebrates without jaws which were represented by hagfish and lamprey, and the question was do these groups... do these animals have also MHC and by extension the immune system that was based on MHC?
We spent a lot of time on that question trying to first detect the MHC by a variety of means and when the gene technology became available to look for the genes themselves in these animals, but we couldn't find any. Of course finding or not finding something... if you are not finding something it doesn't mean that it's not there because unless the whole genomic sequence became available, this could not be decided. But we could not afford to do... to sequence the genome of the lamprey, so we took the next step available and we, in this case, was primarily Werner Mayer and Tania Uinuk-Ool... Tatiana Uinuk-Ool... I'll say that again because I don't want that I say it wrong... Tatiana Uinuk-Ool, who collaborated with Max Cooper in Birmingham. Actually, the collaboration started when Max was on a site visit in our institute... one of the member of the committee that evaluated the work of our institute and we presented our efforts to study the lamprey immune system and he suggested well, why don't you isolate the lymphocytes or something that looks like lymphocytes and then look at them? Well, we didn't have a means of doing that but he had an excellent equipment that... very specialised and highly evolved, who... which could be used for that purpose. So we agreed to collaborate on that and indeed the collaboration proved to be very fruitful.
So the idea was to isolate using this machine cells that would have the properties of mammalian lymphocytes. The equipment could be set up in such a way that it would isolate from blood or from tissue cells that have... appear to have the properties... physical chemical properties of the lymphocyte, and then use this to isolate RNA or messenger RNA which codes for genes that are expressed in these lymphocytes. So this was done and then the genes were cloned, or well, some of these genes were cloned and sequenced and we looked for MHC or any other sign of the immune system that is based on the MHC. Well, to make a long story short, we didn't find it and I think after an extensive search, at least I am convinced that it is not there, that the jawless vertebrates do not have an immune system of the kind that other vertebrates have. So that would mean that the immune system evolved in vertebrates but not from the beginning, that at a certain stage when the vertebrates acquired a jaw the immune system evolves at the same time.  And I think there are a number of other findings that support this finding... that it extended to other groups of jawless vertebrates was then shown by other people in particular, Masanori Kasahara and his group.

It seems that the MHC arose at a certain stage of vertebrate evolution and what then happened afterwards? So the fish studies indicated that the MHC of the fish... of the vertebrates doesn’t have to be always of the mammalian type. In the mammalian species it’s quite common that there are the class I genes and in between the class II genes located... and the whole region is then populated by a group of other... of other loci. They are sometimes called the class III loci genes, and they are like the complement components. They perform a variety of different functions. Some of them are... actually quite a number of them are involved in immunity but not always in the same type of immunity that the H2 is, or MHC is involved. The general interpretation of the mammalian MHC was that the class III genes are actually part of the MHC complex. If not evolutionarily then at least functionally.  That they somehow are needed for the function of the MHC. Well, I didn’t like that idea from the beginning because there was simply no reason why that should be. Again, the most parsimonious interpretation was that they are there by chance, that they happen to be included when there is rearrangements in the genome taking place, they were included and enclosed in the MHC complex and remained there for genetic reasons, not functional reasons. I didn’t find any evidence for the generally widespread hypothesis that somehow these genes have evolved with the class I and class II genes and that it is necessary for the co-evolution that they be together in a single segment.

Well, the studies on the MHC in the fish and particularly the zebra fish showed very clearly and convincingly that the MHC doesn't have to be of the type as is present in mammals and it can be on a completely... organised completely differently. In particular the work of Jasna Bingulac-Popovic in my group demonstrated that the class I and class II genes do not need to be together. That in the zebra fish they can be class I in one chromosome and class II in other chromosomes, and that the same was true for the so-called class III loci, which then Holger...
[Q] Sültmann
Holger Sültmann demonstrated were scattered all over the genome. So these studies indicated that there is no need for the genes to be together and that is not the reason why they are together in mammals, again supporting the view that this situation in mammals arose by chance and had, as far as could be said, no functional significance. These studies then led us to the questions of how the immune system in general evolved. The original opinion was that there are two kinds of immune system. One requires the participation of the MHC that is a receptor and the immunoglobulins and they were the basic molecules and that came to be referred to by various names, but most often as an adaptive immune system, and it was originally believed that this adaptive immune system is present in all animals practically. That MHC and the immunoglobulins will be found in other non-vertebrate species. Well, again there was... that was a belief that was not based on any specific data... on data that actually turned out to be not correct in some cases, and so I proposed that actually the system is not general for the entire animal kingdom but it's... that it arose with vertebrates, that the adaptive immune system is restricted to vertebrates. At that time we didn't know whether it would be all vertebrates or just a group of vertebrates, but my argument was that it would not be found in non-vertebrates.

That proved to be true when the genomes were... of some non-vertebrates... were cloned, no such genes were found there, so I think it's now generally accepted that the adaptive immune system arose in one step or arose late in the evolution of the animal phyla, and the question then was at which stage, and the data on the MHC indicated that it would be with the origin of the jawed vertebrates. So when jaw arose, that presumably this form of immune system also emerged. Why it was so late, why... what was the stimulus for the origin, why other animals can do well without antibodies and without MHC and T-cell receptors remains an open question that still awaits... that somebody finds a way of answering it. One can speculate now about many possibilities but there are no hard facts to use to decide between the various possibilities.
But the MHC would lead us not only into the evolution of the MHC itself but also into the evolution in general, and as I said before, one of the question was how the species arise?  Why did we come to that question? Well, of course it was because it interested me and... interested me in general, but a direct lead was the following. When we found that the polymorphism is trans-specific, that a number of different forms of genes or alleles had to be transferred from ancestral species into the daughter species, then it occurred to me that this fact could be used to determine... to say something about the size of the founding population of the species. The very widespread belief, especially among lay people, but also among scientists and also among evolutionary biologists is that species arise from very limited number of founding individuals.  That... in the case of birds for instance they are... there is a couple of birds that strays off into a remote island and from this couple then arise a population which, because of its isolation from the original population begins to diversify and begins to evolve in a totally different direction and ultimately they are so different that they no longer could breed with the other... the original species if they would come together.  So there would be only a couple or a few individuals from when a new species would arise. That seemed to me to be, let's say not supported by the observation of the trans-species polymorphism but a direct study was needed to show that this is indeed the case, and we carried out such studies on three different models. One was human, the other was birds, and the third model was fish. So let's talk first about the humans.

At that time there was a hypothesis put forward that all humans originated from the so-called Eve... molecular Eve or mitochondrial Eve. Mitochondrial because it was... originally the study was on mitochondrial DNA. I don't know whether the authors of the original studies really meant literally what the hypothesis... or how the hypothesis was interpreted, but certainly when the paper was published in Nature, the editorial made clearly that impression that this... there was a single female from whom all humanity was derived. Well, we already knew something about the MHC polymorphism and we knew that a great deal of the polymorphism arose certainly before the divergence of humans' and chimpanzees' ancestors and other studies indicated that the divergence occurred much longer time before this divergence, and that meant that a large number of different alleles had to be transferred from ancestors of human to modern humans. Large numbers because one individual can transfer maximally only two alleles for each gene and there are a number of genes so the number of combinations is also large and if you look at this combination it appeared that these combinations too were transferred, so, it seemed inconsistent with this hypothesis.
Well, the hypothesis was obviously wrong in the literal sense that it was understood by general public, by the media, and as appears also by some of the writers of editorials in scientific journals. It was wrong because... or it was misunderstood because without going into much details, it said only one thing that the variants of the mitochondrial DNA that are now present in human population can be traced back to a single founding mitochondrial DNA. It said nothing about the individuals, that there was only one individual... that there was one mother from whom we are all derived, from one Eve, that referred to a single molecule.  And there are 30,000 or more of genes in the human genome and every one could be derived in this way from some founding molecule. It's in the nature of the process that the diversification of the molecule occurs that if you do an analysis in your mind, then you can come back always to a single molecule and a single molecule is different of course for each of the genes, but also is not derived or did not come to the same individual. That could come from different individuals at different times. So all this was inconsistent and the whole hypothesis or the extension of the hypothesis seemed a nonsense to me.

We did some studies then in collaboration with Naoyuki Takahata in Japan, and Yoko Satta at Hayama in Japan in which we calculated what number of individuals would be needed and we came to the conclusion that the number would be at least 10,000 individuals, so not a single, not a few individuals from whom the human species arose, but at least 10,000 individuals, so a very sizeable population. So the founding population of the human species would be a large population, not a small population that everybody seemed to believe at that time. We then extended these studies... or before I go to this extension, perhaps I should say... and it would be an illustration what is happening in science to this day, people still refer and in the press and in the media particularly, they talk about mitochondrial Eve, they talk about Eve and they talk about daughters of Eve.  There have been books written by scientists about daughters of Eve and they all make the impression... the wrong impression that there was a tremendous reduction in the population size in the origin of the human species which led then to the rise of modern humans. This is all nonsense. This is simply not true and it's either deliberate or ignorant misunderstanding of how the hypothesis of diversification... emergence... the diversification of the different molecules in the human genome.

This was for humans, so what about other species? We took one example, which is perhaps the best known example of species where one could assume that indeed the species might have arisen from a very small number of individuals. These are the famous Darwin's finches. They are finches that... birds that live on the various Galapagos Islands that are... that appear to be related to one another and appear, or were postulated, to have originated from a finch that flew to the islands, which are thousands of kilometres... a thousand... hundred of kilometres distant from South America. That they originated actually in South America, perhaps in Ecuador, and got to the islands and then started a population from which the different species... of which there are several now, originated. So Akie Sato and I and with the help of Colm O'hUigin and several other colleagues in our institute, and in collaboration with Rosemary and Peter Grant in the United States, we looked at the MHC polymorphism in this species. The specific project on the number of founding individuals was originally started by Vladimir Vincek who was in... started with me in Tübingen but then I set up a laboratory in Miami also and he then continued the project in the United States, and we did the same thing. We identified the MHC in these birds and determined their polymorphism and compared different species of the Galapagos finches and from that we then calculated the number of individuals that might have been in the ancestral population.
It turned out that it was not a single finch, it was not a pair of finches, it was a flock of finches that must have flown from... all the way from South America to the Galapagos Islands and founded all the different species that are now there. So again, the evidence was very clearly not supporting the common view of speciation that a pair of finches or a pregnant female can fly and then start a new species on an island... remote island. Extending these studies from the MHC to other genes, in particular mitochondrial DNA, was then taken up by Akie Sato. The main question that then remained was whether the species were really originating from a single species or whether there were several different contributors to the founding population that got to the Islands at different times. So she characterised their DNA... mitochondrial DNA, and was able to establish a tree, again with the help of Colm O'hUigin to show that the finches were on Galapagos Islands, were indeed as the molecular biologists, phylogeneticists say were of monophyletic origin. That means they all fell into a single cluster on a tree if you studied finches, not only from Galapagos but from other birds in that case, they formed a single cluster, so it seemed that indeed there was perhaps only one founding event, and from this the species then arose. Akie Sato then continued with the project and was able to actually identify the closest relative of the Darwin finches in South America in Ecuador and... so to show that they indeed came from that region and that the ancestor of the species came from that region.

The third classical model of speciation are the fishes in Lake Victoria in East Africa. The model has been around for some time. Many species have been identified in the so-called haplochromine group. It's just one group of perch-like species that live in that lake. What makes them very interesting is that the lake apparently originated, according to the geologists, about 10,000.... 12,000 years ago, so it's rather recent, and the original molecular studies on the fishes from the lake indicated that all of them were derived from a common ancestor, from perhaps a single group of fishes that reached the lake and then diversified. That would mean that within 10,000 years or so, a large number of species would arise. The estimate of the species, the exact number is not known, but the estimate of how many there are in the lake ranges from 200 to 800 or so... a large number of species. A number of them have been isolated, identified, described and named, even placed in different genera, which is a higher order of classification and which would reflect considerable morphological divergence among the species.
So this is one case where one would be interested in how large were the founding populations and what actually has occurred in the lake within those 10,000 years. We originally looked at the MHC polymorphism in the species and it indicated that it's completely shared between species.  We could not differentiate the species by the composition of the alleles that the individual species carries, and the alleles were simply shared throughout the entire lake. No indication of differentiation. So then we turned out to some other loci, some other genes, and the result was the same. We could not find anything that would differentiate the species. I repeat, the species have been identified morphologically. That means they look at them, they have different colour, they have different body shape, they have certain organs, especially the head is shaped differently, the fins and some other characteristics, all that was used to define... describe the different species in this... in this lake. But the genes that we chose to study did not show any difference.
That led us to take a larger scale look at the variation in... genetic variation in this species and by taking a large number of genes identifying the variants and then choose several species and compare them with one another, but also compare different populations of the same species as they were morphologically described, from different localities, from different places in the lake. It's a huge lake and some of the places that we... where we collected fishes were a hundred kilometres apart, so very, very far apart. The fishes were collected by my colleague, Herbert Tichy, as were many other species of birds, mammals, in different parts of the world. He was very willing always to travel to these exotic areas and was very successful in bringing what... exactly what was needed to carry out the particular research. So we had the samples from different places in the lake, samples of the same species and at the same time different species and the idea was to compare the variation of the number of genes to find out what could be said about how the speciation is occurring.

The comparison showed that there were no differences.  That we could not distinguish the species, we could not distinguish the populations. The differences... the amount of difference between the populations of the same species from different localities was the same as the difference between species. Now, one can argue the sample was not sufficient and that the collection of gene was not sufficient and so on. I am out of this kind of research so I will not be able to expand it, but from the data that we had and which were largely produced by Irene Samonte a PhD student at that time in my institute, and were then analysed by Naoyuki Takahata and especially Yoko Satta, the analysis of the data shows that there are indeed no differences between them.  And that is surprising and to me it indicates only one thing, that the so-called species are exchanging genes, that they are still interbreeding, that they are not isolated as one would expect from a true species.

These results indicate that the fish, the so-called different species, are still exchanging genes. Now, if that's true, if they are interbreeding, which is what inter-exchange of genes required, are they then real species because the biological definition of species at least, and actually most of the other definitions that have been put forward assumes that the species are reproductively isolated or if they are not reproductively isolated at least they are not mating together. But the interpretation that follows from the data that we produced indicates that they are in fact still mating. So that raises the question are they real species or is it just morphologically differentiated variants that have arisen in the lake.

Now if that's so, that sheds a completely different light on the process of speciation. It indicates that the speciation is not a short-term event that consists of real separation and immediate divergence of the species, but rather is a recurrent event that species... that the forms... the populations might diverge but come together and interbreed for a while, diverge again and it might be going on for say 10,000 years. I think a similar process is also occurring, or it is indicated that it is occurring, in the Darwin finches on the Galapagos Islands where especially the groups of so-called ground finches cannot really be differentiated molecularly and it's very hard to diverge... distinguish morphologically by just looking at them and there is perhaps only one or two persons who can do that. And it has been observed that the traits by which they are distinguished, say the shape of the beak, vary within the same species... assumed to be the same species, depending on the climate in the particular season and according to what seeds grow in that particular period. Now if that's so, is it right to call them a different species? But this could be all semantic questions. The real question is how does the divergence of the species occur and the indications from our studies are that it's not a one shot event but something that continues for perhaps even a very long time, and that by chance or by some larger event eventually the going back and forth of the interbreeding or not interbreeding between populations is so drastically changed that then you get a real divergence and eventually you get reproductive isolation.
So I think this indicates a direction in which the further research in this area can go, and perhaps a reinterpretation of the real situation in... on the Galapagos Islands and in the Lake Victoria and probably many other models that have been studied over the years for the speciation.

I would like to return to the point at which I started with the Smoking/Non Smoking [sic] metaphor. In my life, there have been numerous occasions on which the metaphor could be applied. Some were very obvious, some less and some probably I was not even aware of, but the obvious ones were whether I would stay alive or not. There were several occasions when it could have gone into the 'not' direction, whether I would study or not study, whether I would become a teacher or not a teacher, whether I would be a botanist or some other scientist, whether I would defect or return to my home country, whether I would study H2 and non-H2, not H2, et cetera, et cetera. This session is in fact... is indeed the result of an incredible series of improbabilities, but I don't think it's anything... excuse me... I don't think it's anything unusual. Everybody's life is probably like that, and this is just that... I think that this is just one example of what many others have experienced. It is an example of a lottery that we are always playing the whole life and actually before we even become anything resembling human beings, the largest lottery actually occurs when one egg is selected to encounter another sperm... one sperm, and from that moment on until another lottery, the final lottery, our death, it ends the series of Smoking/Non Smoking [sic] events in our life.

I think I would consider myself a very lucky person, because of many reasons. I was lucky in that in all these events where there was a crossroad I could go one way or the other. From the retrospect it seems I went the right way. Of course the retrospect is from the point that I am here, but... so to this improbable event at the end, I seem to have went the right way. I was... I am a lucky person in my private life that I married a woman, Dagmar, my wife, who had much understanding for the way I live, the way I work, and also my sons, Norman, Daniel and Paul who also showed understanding for the very little time that I had for them. I was lucky that I have teachers, especially Karel Kousal who I mentioned at the beginning, who guided me and who helped me in many ways. I had brothers and sisters who were supportive at the time when I went to studies and at other occasions and I was very lucky in the selection of students who joined my group... students, post docs, collaborators. They came from all different ethnic groups and the most wonderful experience was to have this international community, a little island, living in one building and interacting in many different ways beside scientific, especially large group, some 20 post docs came from Japan, a country which, as I already mentioned, was so decisive in my career, and then another large group came from Croatia. There were Czechs, there were Germans, there were students from the United States and so on, and I enjoyed working with all of them and they tremendously enriched my life and contributed to the success of the work that we were doing all together.
And I was also lucky in that I became a scientist. I think every scientist is a lucky person, because basically if we really love science, the way I did, I do still, we are... we don't have an occupation, we have a hobby. We work on a hobby. We devoted to our... all our time, but we enjoy what we are doing as we would enjoy any other major hobby, and it's a hobby for which we are paid. I think this is tremendous, this is fantastic. We... as a scientist I met very... many very interesting people, interacted with people. I visited many different places, I think most of the continents and in most of the major cities and areas, but above all I felt lucky to be a scientist because of the intellectual excitement that I was part of. It was a unique opportunity to create something that would hopefully become part of the major adventure that the human species is involved in, the creation of a culture, and thus be in a sense part of evolution... the cultural evolution which runs in parallel in our species with the biological evolution.

I would like to make one final comment. When I look back on my life, perhaps I can be considered a moderately successful scientist. I think I would like to emphasise that I achieved the success without many things that other scientists might consider essential. I have been often told you have to go to meetings because there is something called visibility. You have to show people that you are around and you have to advertise yourself and you have to just let them know that you are doing important work and so on. Well, I never agreed with that and I totally disregarded this. This doesn't mean I didn't go to meetings. I went to meetings when it was... I felt it was important for me and I would gain something from it or I admit sometimes because it was in a nice place where I hadn't been before. So, it is possible to do it without visibility.
Many scientists play politics, not the politics in general politics, but science politics, that means positions, membership in different societies, lobbying for awards and honours and so on and so on. I never did that either and maybe I was punished... I'm being punished for not doing it, but that doesn't matter. I think we... my... we means I and my colleagues over the years have, I think, delivered a good chunk of scientific work and that is satisfaction enough. I was also often not being diplomatic in many ways. I would say I always called a spade, a spade. If I was in disagreement with something I would say it openly and sometimes perhaps not too nicely and some people might have been upset by what I said, but this is my conviction that people in science should be critical of each other to the extreme because science is based on criticism, on disagreement. If you would simply always agree with everything, there would be no science because then it would become religion or something of that sort, but science must absolutely be based on criticism.
I also always played with open cards. I never understood hiding results from... or playing games with results or copying somebody's results and quickly doing experiments as many times has been reported about on many occasions about some scientists doing. I think this is dishonest and I always didn't play along in this way.
So through all these factors which might have had some adverse effect perhaps on my career, I still achieved being a moderately successful scientist and so I would urge young people not to believe in these common practices, but go their own way.  If they are really enthusiastic and they really are willing to work hard and if they have a little bit of luck, I think they can all become successful scientists as well.

[Q] You mentioned earlier that you felt that George Snell particularly deserved his Nobel Prize and you said you might elaborate on it. I wonder, would you care to do so? 
I believe that he did because I consider him a scientist the way a scientist should be. First he went after an interesting question not thinking about getting a prize.  I know scientists and you know scientists as well who investigated a particular problem with the idea to get a Nobel Prize. They put every effort only to this goal to get a Nobel Prize. I think that's absolutely the wrong... the worst way to do science, and Snell was just the opposite. I also know that whenever I go to a meeting and somebody comes to talk... let's talk and we sit down to a table and we start discussing something and then almost immediately the guy says, 'Oh let me tell you what we are doing' and then the rest of the, supposed to be, discussion or exchange of ideas tends to be an advertisement of what he is doing. He finishes and he leaves. I think that's also absolutely the wrong way of doing science. Snell again was just the opposite. We could sit down and we could talk endlessly about various problems that concerned us both and third that comes immediately to mind... to my mind is Snell was a person who pursued a project which he believed was, as I said before, interesting regardless of what award would be coming or not coming or whether it would be recognised or not recognised. That's my ideal of a scientist and I applaud the Nobel Committee that it didn't... that it recognises this fact, that he contributed a lot, although he did not advertise himself, although he did not lobby, which is not always the case. Many cases I know scientists actively lobby for being nominated for the Nobel Prize and visit often Stockholm to influence the Nobel Prize Committee. Snell would never think of doing something like that and yet he got the Nobel Prize. It's wonderful that he got. Incidentally I was the one who nominated him also.

[Q] Much of the fashion in biology today is for big science... genomics and proteomics have their big centres. How do you see biology developing?
I don't have a crystal ball to tell you how it will be developing, for one thing, and for second, you know, old people are always expected to say well, you are... I am old so it should be the way it was in my youth. But I don't feel that it should be like that and whether it's a mistake or not that it's going so big, I don't know, but I always have been against big science. I think it's mostly a waste of money and all the history of science shows us that it never leads to the attempted goal. For example cancer research... there was a time when a lot of money was put in cancer research with the goal cancer will be solved. Well, there was a lot of money put in it but it didn't solve the cancer. It brought some minor successes, but that would have come regardless or probably they came on the side of it... a lot of money was wasted. The same thing is happening with AIDS, with the HIV virus investigation. A lot of money is wasted on it because it's too big and it's just an umbrella for mediocre science and the competition is reduced in such cases. You just write a grant application for HIV... used to be, I don't think it's any more like that because the money is perhaps even not there, but... and you would have a higher chance of getting support if it was this goal. All scientists practically write at the end of their application, maybe these results will be applicable to the solution of cancer or to the solution of AIDS and so on. It's the wrong way. History teaches us this is not the way to do science. So big science today, the genomics and so on is big and again, it's a lot of waste. I come to meetings, and most recently at a meeting on genomics there are presentations that I don't understand why the people do this kind of study and they don't define any goal or anything. They just take a set of data and let's see what can we do with these data, let's compare this with this and nobody did that before so I will compare that. What is it for? I thought we are supposed to start with the question and then try to answer the question. With these genomic centres and genomics in general, okay, let's sequence, we are powerful, we can decide, we can sequence a rat, we can sequence this or that species, let's see what the comparisons show. There is no basic design in anything and I just hope that it's temporary, that it will not last too long. I think that still... and with genomic research it leads to a lot of theoretical analysis and I think in biology we still have to do experiments. Primarily it has to be experiment based and experiments can be done in small groups better than in a large group. I don't know how a consortium or how a large group is going to do jointly an experiment, so I am very sceptical about where it's going to lead. It's just that a few powerful people are promoting this idea and they are getting money for it and part of it, of course, is that they are playing in the hands of businessmen, that they are doing the job which eventually might have some economical... economical profits at the end, but the profits will be of the companies that will...  that if they want to have this kind of research, they should do it. So I'm sceptical.

[Q] You've expressed a love of natural diversity. What do you think the future holds? 
The future looks bleak, I must say. That's a very sad part to realize at the end of your life that the situation is going to the worse and that stupidity prevails. I can only say I went back home and I could not find just a few percent of perhaps of the species I liked... I thought should be there. They are just disappearing. The creek I mentioned is dead, there is practically no fish in it, with it all the birds that lived around... the species one after the other, that were so common, they are gone. So it's getting worse and I think it will continue getting worse unfortunately until we find... until people realize something that... and I think... and I think here I am... many people think this is bizarre thinking, but this is my thinking anyway... I think the problem is that humans believe that they are special. They are unique, but every species is unique, but humans biologically are not unique. If you believe in uniqueness of the species, then you can justify all what is happening in the world. Well, then we can end up that we are the only species on this planet and we can artificially produce everything that we want. If there are people who want that, as I said during the narrative, then they should go somewhere else because it's not necessary. But there are people like me who need that... who cannot live without the diversity, without nature and we cannot go to another planet because it's not there, so we should fight. But I think the problem is really to convince people that we are not unique species... excuse me, that we are not special species. Special... the argument is usually either religious because we are created by God, or it's because we are at the top of the evolutionary process. Both arguments are wrong so we should look at things scientifically. There is no evidence biologically that we are anything better than exists on this earth. I think on the contrary the biology... the evolution teaches us that we are very stupid and that we are heading toward our own extinction. If species biologically... we look successful in that we are everywhere and we can do things that no other species can do, but is that success? I think evolutionarily, it is not.

Evolutionary success is in terms of persistence of a species, but we are doing the best to eliminate ourselves. We are cutting the branch on which we are sitting and unless we realize that, then I don't know how much worse it can get to... for people to come to reason.  But we have to try to convince them and show them biologically what we really are. That sure we have good brains and we have culture and we have everything else, but if we don't use those things for our better survival of the species, not for momentarily successes but for long-term survival, then we are in trouble.  And we are not smart, we are very stupid. So this lesson should be shown to people and for the religious it's unfortunate but we have to show them that yes, humans have evolved, are product of an evolution and not the product of a creation and therefore one should look at the human species in the context of everything else that's in nature and not as we are told by God that we can be the masters of nature and do with nature what we can... whatever we wish.

[Q] Do you have ideas about what belief systems should guide scientist then, regarding ethical issues? 
Well, that's a very broad question and would take a long time to argue the various aspects of this issue, but one aspect would be then perhaps what ethics should guide a scientist and here I think I see one major problem with the way science is going today, in terms of ethics. Science, in my time, has changed dramatically, not so much in the progress that it has made... and progress has been logarithmic since a long time... since the industrial revolution when modern science began... but in terms of being tied to commerce... has become commercial, very much so, and the unfortunate thing is that the ethics of businessmen is penetrating into science, it's taking over. We had an ideal of a scientist. Every historian will tell you that not the scientists... that scientists were not approaching always the ideal, but still at least this was what we were striving to achieve, but that has changed. So here we have a situation where profit... economical profit is becoming the major goal of doing science, and that again I see as the wrong direction. It would mean that basic science would diminish because there is no immediate profit.  And the other result is the big science that you already mentioned and other adverse effects, and this is, in my opinion, again, quite wrong, and we should go back to the old ideal of science, even if we are not angels, we are not that, we are just human, we have all kinds of drawbacks and all kinds of things we are doing that we should not be doing, but at least we should try and we should make people who go to science have a Hippocratic oath of a kind that they will be honest, that they will not be pursuing personal gains and they will not be... I don't know... and so on and so on. Of course the physicians don't stick to that oath either but at least we can show that we are interested in that and not that we are interested to become businessmen. Businessmen are cheating, are liars, are doing everything, false advertising and so on and so on, just to make profit. If we will do science like this, that will be the end of science.
