jeremy.bernstein

Born in 1929, Jeremy Bernstein is an American physicist, educator and writer known for the clarity of his writing for the lay reader on the major issues of modern physics. After graduating from Harvard University, Bernstein worked at Harvard and at the Institute of Advanced Studies at Princeton. In 1962 he became an Associate Professor of Physics at New York University, and later a Professor of Physics at Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, a position he continues to hold. He was also on the staff of The New Yorker magazine.

Well, I was born in Rochester, New York. That's a moderate-sized town in upstate New York, a prosperous town which has… had at that time industries like Eastman Kodak, the Gleason Works and so on, a university.
On my father's side, they were Eastern European Jews. They came to the United States probably around the turn of the century, separately.  I'm not quite sure how they met but my grandfather was a pedlar, basically, and he was peddling in eastern New York or western New York, and that's how he met my grandmother. They got married and my father was the eldest child.
According to him… I know they were poor... according to him, he got the best nutrition and everything, because they thought that if he could go to university and so on, he might bring all of them out of poverty. So he got his head up. He had two brothers. Now all three of them are dead.

My father was a rabbi. He met my mother, I believe, at a summer camp. She was a very, very beautiful young woman. She was quite young  -  she was about 17 or 18 - and he proposed and was accepted, but he had a fellowship to study abroad so he said, 'Wait for me until I come back and I would prefer you don't see anybody else while I'm away.' My mother said, 'I love you very much, but of course I'm going to see somebody while you're away.' So that persuaded him to marry her and the two of them went off together on the trip.
And they made a fantastic trip to Russia and then Palestine and so on. Then he came back and did his rabbinical duties and I was their firstborn. I'm told it was a happy event and I was born on New Year's Eve, 1929.

My early childhood is kind of unmemorable. I think I was cute. I was called Snookie in those days, for some reason. And I did the sort of normal things that kids of that period did. I had a bicycle and I tried skiing at one point, and the usual. A lot of outdoor things, a lot of sports and so on. I had no idea whether or not I was smart. It didn't seem relevant to anything. Unlike some people, I think especially of Freeman Dyson, my early mathematical memories are very slight. Dyson told me that when he was young enough to be put down for naps, he invented the notion of the convergent infinite series. He added a half, a quarter and so on one, and noticed it was converging to two. I suppose he was five or six when he made this observation. I do remember solving a special problem. In other words, special to me, but it's not a special problem, in which you were supposed to find a primitive racetrack which had two straight edges of known length and two semi-circular endpoints with a known radius, and you were supposed to find the length of the track, and I did that. So I must have known what pi was. I don't know how I knew it.

Then the war came.
I want to mention one thing about anti-Semitism, because that's something that Jews in this time have pretty much forgotten about. There was a lot of anti-Semitism in the United States when I was growing up. There was a priest called Father Coughlin who, on the radio every week, preached anti-Semitic sermons. It was pretty scary. It didn't mean much to me, but it was disturbing, certainly. But I do remember that once we wanted to go on a little weekend trip to the Finger Lakes near Rochester. My father went in first, and he said he didn't want to hide the fact he was Jewish, so he told the proprietor that he was a rabbi and so on. The proprietor said, 'Well, we don't take Jews here'. My father came out, he was ashen. We drove back to Rochester and that was the end of our trip. Of course, now that kind of thing is inconceivable, at least in this country.

The War Department decided that chaplaincy programmes should be directed by civilians. So my father was tapped to be the director of the Jewish chaplain's programme for the armed services. And as such, he went to New York, and after a bit of time, we followed to New York. I think the only time I ever saw my mother cry was when my father said that we were going to New York. I think she was… although it's curious, because she was born in New York, grew up in New York, but she just hated the idea of leaving her house and her garden and all the rest.  We went to New York, and it was a very strange experience, because we then lived in an apartment. It was a perfectly nice apartment on Central Park West. At that time, it was known as the Golden Ghetto because the wealthier Jews lived on Central Park West.

My parents decided that public schools were dangerous. I think it was an absurd notion, but they had decided that, so I should go to a private school. Curiously, the smartest people I knew when I was at Harvard were from New York public schools, so that was really a strange... strange conclusion. So we chose Columbia Grammar School. It was not connected to Columbia University, but it was a… I don't know how that was chosen, but that was chosen. And I went there, and we went out to the park the first day, and I was beaten up by a couple of my classmates, which just shows the danger of private schools. Well, my father, who was a fighter, said, 'Well, you've got to learn boxing'. So we had a shop teacher who also could teach some boxing. I took private lessons in boxing from this teacher. I think I actually beat up a bully once in front of the school by boxing.

I got very interested in sports. I was on teams. I swam competitively. I played football, but I was terrible at it. And I did something in the spring, I don't know what I did, tennis or something.
So I was actually captain of the swimming team, although I was certainly not one of the better swimmers. And our team, in our category, we were national champions, and the highlight was the time we went up to swim against the Yale freshmen. Yale had the best swimming team in the world then, and we tied the Yale freshmen. I got a point in the 220 freestyle because there were only three swimmers, rather than four, so I had to get a point.

I was interested in writing, although I didn't exactly… I wouldn't have put it that way, but I was interested in writing. And I was interested in celebrated people. It's always been, I think, a part of my character. I think it's a character defect. I think it comes from sort of wanting to be somebody else. I think I've always wanted to be somebody else. I'm not quite sure who but somebody. So I was interested in celebrated people and I wrote a column in our high school newspaper called Seeing Stars, in which I interviewed a number of the celebrated people of the day. I interviewed Duke Ellington, Tommy Dorsey, the band leader, Henry Morgan, who was a comedian. I interviewed him in his hotel room, and a woman came out of the room, and he said, 'I want to introduce you to my cousin.' So I said, 'Yes, glad to meet you.' And then he had a table on which he had a lot of intellectually serious books. And I said, seriously, I wasn't trying to be funny, I said, 'Do you actually read these books?' And he said, 'No I don't, but the table is filled with helium, and I don't have the books on it, it flies up and sticks to the ceiling'. And I also interviewed Edgar Bergen and a number of celebrated people of the day. And the strange thing about it is that when… I don't have too many of these columns, but the few that I have left are very much in The New Yorker style Talk of The Town. And I don't know where I got it from, because I'm sure I wasn't reading The New Yorker, but it was absolutely in that style: yesterday we, yesterday we did, the whole editorial we… that the Talk of The Town used to use. So when later on, I began writing for The New Yorker and I started writing Talk of The Town, it was just natural for me. It was my… it was an obvious voice, because I had done it when I was in high school.

I was good at mathematics but I had no interest. I didn't think it was a serious subject. I couldn't imagine anybody would do it for a career or there was any creativity in it. I had a very poor physics course. I don't blame the man. I wrote an autobiographical sketch which appeared in The New Yorker many years later and I said that he had been a displayer in some sort of store and so on, and I didn't say it too nicely. And he wrote me a letter. I was terribly embarrassed by it. I felt that I really had hurt his feelings and I shouldn't have done. I felt badly. But it was not a good course, and I did not like physics at all.

Murray Gell-Mann was a contemporary of mine in school, although he was three years ahead. He went to Yale at age 15, but he was around. And we had a maths teacher in common, a Mr Reynolds, a sulphurous man who would say the wonderful people he had in previous courses. Of course, Murray was a wonderful person from a previous course. And then afterwards, he would say, 'In Tarrytown, we bury our dead.' And that showed us exactly what we were. But you had to do these things, because there was a New York State Regents Exam, and you had to pass the Regents Exam, which I did. And then there was a college entrance exam, which I took. I don't know how I did. And at some point, there was a psychologist who came and did IQ tests. And the only thing that she told me about my IQ was that, of the three of us - my sister and brother were also at the school then - my sister had the highest IQ, my brother the second-highest, and I the third. But she didn't say what our IQs were and I've never known mine. I've not the slightest idea, nor any interest in what it is.

I was playing the trumpet at this time, and I was interested in jazz, especially Duke Ellington, and I got to know Duke Ellington. I got to know people in the orchestra. And one of them, Cat Anderson, gave me a few little trumpet lessons. And a great moment in my high school day was when I sat in for a note or two with the Ellington Orchestra in the Hurricane Club in Manhattan. It was kind of marvellous to sit there. I think I blew a note or two, but there it was.

I mean, it was inconceivable that I would not go to college. I mean… it was just... in our family, everybody went to college. And there were PhDs and, you know, it was just… there wasn't… it wasn't even an issue. I mean, if I said I didn't want to go to college, I mean, I probably would have been locked up somewhere. So the only question was where should I go to college. And my father was a graduate of the University of Syracuse, so I went to visit the University of Syracuse and actually was signed up as a future member of the Jewish fraternity where my father used to sell apples and oranges to pay his way through college when he went there. So I was signed up to go to there. Didn't particularly want to go to Syracuse, for various reasons. I'd had enough of upstate New York. I heard about a programme at Swarthmore, which had a very good fellowship that you would get, which would pay your way for all the years, which would have been a help to my family, so I applied for it, I became a finalist, I went up there and was interviewed. One of the questions that was asked me was what sort of person would be helpful to philanthropy. And I said rich people. They thought that was very funny. I didn't think it was that funny. And then I went to a track meet and a Swarthmore person won some event and women came out of the stands and crowned him with laurel wreaths. Oh God, I don't want to go here. This...this... as Ellington would have put it, it was much too kissy for me. So I applied to Harvard, and my father's youngest brother had done graduate work at Harvard. He said, 'Well, don't go to Harvard, because there's a lot of anti-Semitism there and you won't be very comfortable. You won't enjoy it at all.' But I applied, as did my best friend in high school. And maybe other people in the high school, I don't know. He was first in the class, I was somewhere in the class. I had a lot of extracurricular activities, obviously.

My father, after the war, was given the job of advising the army on Jewish displaced persons in Germany. So he went back to Germany. He went to Germany to do this job, and my brother and sister went with him. My brother had the first bar mitzvah in... in Europe after the war. His bar mitzvah was a big event, a very important event. All these displaced people, Jewish displaced people, came through and some concentration victims and so on. It was a powerful thing.
But my parents decided I had a year to go in high school, it would be better if I did not disrupt my high school work, so I stayed living with relatives in a brownstone house near my school. I was pretty much on my own, and I suppose I could have gotten into a lot of trouble, but I had things to do. I mean I was playing the trumpet and I was writing my things and playing my sports and I really had lots of things to do and I didn't really feel like getting into trouble. And I wasn't… and I could have got into trouble, I'm sure, but didn't.

So I applied to Harvard. My father wrote this wonderful letter to the Dean of Admissions, saying that… explaining my situation: I'd been on my own, I'd been doing this, that and the other thing. And the two of us got in, my best friend and I. We roomed together our freshman year. He went on to become a professor at the Harvard Law School. I see him occasionally. Successful lawyer, professor of the Harvard Law School.  And I went to Harvard, and I had absolutely no clue as to what I was going to do, except I knew what I was not going to do. I was not going to become a scientist or anything. I had no interest at all and had no idea of doing anything like that whatsoever.
But Harvard had then created a general education programme for non-science majors because Conant, Jim Conant the chemist, who had a lot to do with the nuclear weapons during the war, had decided that these scientific things that were coming up, such as nuclear weapons and their disposal, were too serious to be left to the scientist, and the public needed general education. Harvard undergraduates who might go on to something or other, should have a scientific education of a minimum kind, so I signed up… well, I looked in the Harvard Confidential Guide to find out the easiest of the Natural Science courses, which was Natural Sciences III, taught by I Bernard Cohen. I Bernard was an historian of science and he had a very flowing voice, very stentorian, flowing voice, and a marvellous handwriting, fantastic handwriting.

We started with the Greeks. Archimedes, Archimedes we started with, and then we did Galileo and Kepler. And we did Newton. And it was pretty straightforward and I did well at it, and I was pretty good at the math we needed, which was just like trigonometry and algebra. No problems with that. And then we came to the theory of relativity, and Cohen said… I'm sure he said this, 'There are only three people in the world who understand the theory of relativity.' And I went, God, three people in the world understand the theory of relativity. Jesus, that's amazing. Maybe I could become the fourth.
So I went to the library to look for books on relativity. And I got Einstein's book, The Meaning of Relativity, which is his Princeton lectures he gave in the 20s because I figured, well, Einstein must be one of the three.  And actually, Cohen had taken this remark from a colloquy with the British astronomer, Eddington. Eddington was asked, 'Is it true that there are only three people in the world who understand the theory of relativity?' And Eddington answered, 'Who is the third?' And so I sort of… that's where Cohen had gotten it, I realised much later.
So I went to the library and got out this book, and it was both a fortunate and unfortunate choice. It was unfortunate, because I had no chance of understanding anything about this book. I understood about one paragraph, and then it leapt into mathematics and I was just absolutely lost. But it was fortunate, because I thought, well… I got interested. I thought, well, you know, maybe I… there's some way I can understand this. Because, you know, Cohen wasn't teaching me very much about it. I'm not sure whether he was one of the people who understood it, either. So I went to see Cohen, and I explained my dilemma, and he made one of those things that change your life. He said, 'This is the fall semester'. Well, he said, 'In the spring semester, Philipp Frank, who was a friend of Einstein, a biographer, is teaching a course at about the same level as mine, dealing with modern physics. You can take that course and mine at the same time.' So I took that course.

There was a lecture once a week in the afternoon, in the Jefferson Hall, and I remember wondering what would Phillipp Frank look like actually. And his appearance was better than any expectation I could possibly have had of him. He was short and he had a limp, because it turned out he'd had an encounter with a streetcar in Vienna when he was young. He had an accent, which was unplaceable. His mother tongue, I believe, was Austrian, or German Viennese, whatever. But he knew enormous numbers of languages and I always said that his languages were like the buried cities of Troy. You'd dig down and some language would pop up unexpectedly. And he used to try to do imitations of people. I don't know how successful they were, but he would tell stories about Einstein. He did these things like Einstein and Phillipp Frank were on a bridge in Vienna and Phillipp Frank would say, 'Und dere was I und auch there was Einstein auch. Und den dere was I und also dere was Einstein dere. I am quite certain it was Einstein dere and I auch. Und den we looked a book, and den I looked again, and dere was Einstein once again dere. Und Einstein said to me, “Phillipp, I do not like people”.' So I remember him telling stories of this kind. And I'd loved that course. I'd loved it. I had no idea I would probably be a physicist, but I just loved this course. And so I took a sequel to it, and then eventually I came to grade papers for Professor Frank, got to know him pretty well. He was an extraordinary person. So I realised that… because in his lectures, he would say, 'Well, now I'm going to make a sudden interval.' And there'd be an interval, and then after the interval, you could ask questions. But he would… people would go away, there'd be very few people left after the interval. And then he would say, 'well, for those of you who know a little mathematics'… and then he would do a little mathematical derivation. I knew nothing of any mathematics, calculus, I knew nothing of any of this. But I realised that if I was going to understand anything, I had to learn more mathematics. It was just evident to me that, you know, it's… I kind of had to do it.

I enquired of some people about the calculus and I remember a guy telling me… I think it was a South African named Norman Posner, who went on to have some career in physics in Israel, I believe. I think it was Posner who said to me that calculus is extremely hard. Very few people can get the notion of infinitesimals. And so... it’s a very, very hard thing to learn, and not many people can learn it. Oh my God. So I actually went to the Freshman Dean. I think his name was Skiddy von Stade, and I went to him and I said, ‘Dean von’ whatever, 'I’m thinking of taking the calculus next year. Can you tell me whether I’m smart enough to take the calculus?' So he looked at all my stuff, and he said, 'Yes, yes, you’re smart enough. You can take the calculus.' So I took the calculus and I was able to understand infinitesimals. And I decided well, I should also take a physics course. So I took freshman physics as a sophomore, and I was a disaster. It was absolutely terrible. I hated that course. We had an experimental part of it and this was the day of the slide rule. I was myopic, I couldn’t see my slide rule. I had no idea. I really hated the course completely. And it didn’t do any interesting physics. It did pulleys and, I don’t know, incline planes and God knows, just tedious sort of stuff. God. But I liked mathematics, so I started taking math courses. I went in the summers and I took math courses. And in the winters, I took math courses. I took lots of math courses and ended up taking my undergraduate degree in mathematics and writing an Honours thesis in mathematics. And.. I mean, it was a good subject, but my thesis was kind of terrible. I had lots of sloppiness in it. So we had to take an exam and I remember one thing in the exam was, prove thus and so and thus and so, and it was something that I had claimed… it was a theorem in my thesis. I looked at it and said, no, no, that’s false. I said, no, you cannot prove this, because this theorem is false.
So anyway, I got my Honors degree, and then if you had sufficiently high Honors, you were allowed to continue in graduate school at Harvard, otherwise they sent you away somewhere.a

So I continued in mathematics in graduate school but I was drifting toward physics at that time and I hadn't taken any physics but I was drifting in that direction.
So I took my first course in quantum mechanics from Schwinger. And it was an extraordinary course, though I didn't appreciate it really at the time, because I just didn't know anything but I certainly appreciate it now. I mean it was fine, the first part, where he talked about the reasons for there being a quantum theory, but then he had his own development. He was in rivalry with Feynman. Feynman had a quantum theory, Schwinger had a quantum theory and so Schwinger's personal quantum theory was abstract and, I think powerful and abstract, and completely the wrong thing to teach to students.
So we used to go down to MIT and listen to [Victor] Weisskopf lecture on quantum theory. Weisskopf was completely different. I remember the first lecture I heard of Weisskopf. He came in and there was a big class, all men, and he said, 'Boys, I had a wonderful night last night.' And everybody said, 'Yay, Vicky, bravo, bravo.' He said, 'No, no, it's not what you think. I finally understood the Born approximation.' Then he explained the Born approximation

I got a Master's degree in mathematics, and then Gerhard Berkhoff, whom I always referred to as a permanently rotating chairman of the Mathematic Department, called me in, said, 'You're taking too many physics courses. You've got to decide, what are you? A physicist or a mathematician?'
Well, by this time I knew mathematicians. I knew my tutor, George Mackey, and I knew some students who were mathematicians, and I knew that I was not a mathematician. I could… I was a good math student, I got A's in my courses, but I knew I couldn't create the stuff. I just somehow knew that. And also, I knew that my understanding was not an understanding… I remember there was an Indian, Abhyankar.
I lived in a graduate dorm, and I came in one day and there was an Indian sitting on my bed. And he said, 'I'm Abhyankar.' I said, 'I'm Bernstein, get off my bed.'
Then he said, 'You are taking complex variables.' I said, 'yes'. He said, 'I don't go to class, because it's in the day.' [I said] 'I know'. He said, 'But I hear you take very good notes.' [I said] 'No, I don't take very good notes, I just take some notes'. He said, 'I want to look at your notes'. [I said] 'Alright'.
He looks at my notes, and then he starts saying, 'Oh yes, I see. We go around…' (we were doing compass integration). 'Oh, we go around… oh yes, we go around that plane there. Oh. But look, that's very dangerous, because the singularity, you've got to be very careful.' And I could see that he had a completely different way of seeing these things than I did. I… you know. I knew there was a singularity, but I didn't see any planes or anything, and so I just knew it was a difficult thing. And then my friend Zemach, that was another lesson.
I guess I must have been about a junior, then. I'd heard of Zemach. He'd come from Stuyvesant High School in New York. When he got to Harvard, he knew all the graduate and undergraduate curricula in physics and mathematics. And he was being privately looked after. They thought this guy was another Oppenheimer, and, you know…
So I met him and I asked him, 'Would you like to play chess?' [He said] 'Yes, let's play chess.' Well, before we play chess, I heard of a problem somewhere. The problem was the problem of 12 balls. You have 12 identical balls, one of which is heavier or lighter, and you have a scale balance. And you have to find a method in three ways to tell which is the guilty ball that's heavier or lighter. And I stayed up all night and solved that problem. I was very, very pleased with myself. So we were sitting there, and I said to Zemach, 'By the way, have you ever heard of the problem of the 12 balls?' 'No, no [sic]'. I told him the problem of 12 balls. So we're setting up the thing and Zemach said, 'Oh yes, I see how to do that. And also how to do that with n balls and m ways. So I knew that this was someone who was in another league here. Another league.
But the thing you learn is that if you're stubborn and work, you can… even though you're not that smart, you can do stuff, get stuff done.

Berkhoff said, 'Well, you've got to make this choice.' And I knew I didn't… I knew I was not going to be able to be a creative mathematician. I didn't want to be a math teacher, I didn't know what I was going to be. So I said, well, I guess I'll go into physics. I walked into the Physics Department and said, 'Well, I want to transfer to physics'.
And I had essentially no physics courses. I mean, look at my record, and you've got a C in sophomore physics or something and I'd taken Schwinger's course and I had a B or something or maybe some A or A minus or something. And I really didn't know any real physics. I knew some of the mathematics of physics. With George Mackey, I had studied Hilbert space and one thing and another. So they said, 'Well, yes, you… we'll accept you. But you have to take an exam in experimental physics or something'. I said, 'Oh'. They said, 'In order to train for this exam, we want you to work for a summer at the Harvard Cyclotron Lab, and you can learn how experiments are done'. I said, 'Oh, all right.' Well, actually, unless you're actually doing the experiment, the assistants do the donkey work. You pile lead bricks, you cut down bits of Styrofoam for targets. You don't learn any physics. I didn't learn any physics at all. I learned how to pile lead bricks.

And then I did some studying on my own and I must have taken some courses or other, and then I came to this exam and flunked it. But I flunked it in an interesting way. I flunked in an interesting way in that I was able to answer some of the questions, but not in the way a physicist would answer them, just in some mathematics way, and so on. So they said, 'Well, you know, we don't know exactly what to do with you, but you have to take this course in experimental physics with RV Pound.' I said, 'Oh, all right.'
Meanwhile I was actually writing my thesis in physics, because there was a young guy called Abe Klein was an instructor who had no students, and so I was… he was willing to take me. So I was starting my thesis with him, and then I took this course in experimental physics. Pound recently died. He was a wonderful guy, really marvellous. And I think he sort of understood what was going on and he was very tolerant. And I had a very good lab partner, who was very, very helpful. So I managed to pass that thing.

 I had a very good time in graduate school. A lot of people had a miserable grad, I had a great time in graduate school and wrote my thesis. It was a terrible thesis. It was… I mean, unjustified approximations, it was just an awful thesis. Really no purpose to this thesis. But I once met… I wrote my thesis on the deuteron, and I told Zemach, 'I'm writing my thesis on the deuteron, I'm calling it Deuteronomy.' He said, 'Well, I'm calling mine Exodus.' And that's what I should have called mine, was Exodus, because, you know, it got me out.
And then I, of course, had no job. I had a vague offer, which thank God I didn't take, to go to the University of Virginia and work on centrifuges. Boy, I'm lucky I didn't do that.

Gerald Holton would become a good friend. He and I were both disciples of Phillip Frank, Uncle Phillip as we called him. He said, 'I think there may be a job at the Harvard Cyclotron, because the guy who was the house theorist is leaving. There may be an opening there'. I said, 'Gee, that would be wonderful, well, what do you have to do?' He said, 'Well, you don't have to do anything, just do your work.' Okay.
So Gerry must have put in a good word for me, because I got that job, and that was the thing that completely transformed my life. I had two years there, in which I had no responsibility except my work. I just did what I wanted to do. I audited courses and I became very interested in the experiments that were being done at Stanford on electron scattering from targets. I became quite expert in that, wrote some papers on that. And so I'd written some papers, I'd given some little talks and stuff, and loved living in Cambridge. I was just… I had a great time in Cambridge. Then, of course, the two years was up. There was a question of what, then, to do.

I don't remember how I got to Los Alamos. I didn't have a car, I'm sure but I don't remember how I got there. I don't remember. Maybe I took the train.
And in 1957, Los Alamos… it was the Cold War, and Los Alamos was very tightly shut. I think security was greater in '57 than it was during the war. You couldn't get anywhere near the place without clearance.
So I lived in the bachelor dormitory and I'm sure it was the same dormitory that was during the war, the conditions were the same. And we worked in the Theory Division Building, which had another level of security, and I had nothing to do. You know, nobody asked me to work on any nuclear weapons and I didn't know anything about nuclear weapons. And nuclear weapons were being worked on, but not where I was. But a friend of mine from Harvard was there and I came with a problem, with an interesting question, and I didn't have enough mathematical power to solve it, but he did. So the two of us spent the summer working on this problem in elementary particle physics, a very pretty problem.
And I met a lot of very distinguished guys who were there consulting, became very good friends with Francis Low of MIT, Marv Goldberger. I think Gell-Mann may have come through a few times, Ken Watson. And they were consulting on stuff.

So I wanted to go to the Institute of Advanced Study and I knew it would be hard to get in because there was a lot of competition. It was a pretty plush thing to do. I went to [Julian] Schwinger and I said, 'Could you write me a letter of recommendation to the Institute?' And he made a face. I mean, because I was probably the 35th person that day who had asked for a letter of recommendation. And I said, 'Well, I'll do the same for you some day.' Then he thought that was pretty funny, so he wrote me a letter.
Then Vicky Weisskopf wrote me a letter, and I had a collection of papers by that time. I'd written about a half a dozen papers, all sort of on the same kind of subject. They were all pretty practical nuclear physics, elementary particle subjects. And I have no idea why they took me. I must ask Dyson sometime why they took me, but they did.

This was 1957 and Oppenheimer had already had his problems, lost his security clearance. But the previous spring, a recruiter had come around to Harvard from Los Alamos and said they were looking for people to spend the summer at Los Alamos, and my name came up. And they asked whether I'd like to spend the summer at Los Alamos. I said yes, I'd like that. Sure, that'd be great.
So the first thing was I had to get a Q clearance. And this is a serious business, a Q clearance. I think I had the form that I filled out in the day, in which I put down practically every residence I ever had for the last… practically all my life. And the FBI came, and they interviewed neighbours and so on and so on. Years later, I thought I'd write something for The New Yorker on the process of getting a Q clearance, and I was going to call it Friends and Neighbours, because I thought all of my friends and neighbours had probably ratted on me. And so I used the Freedom of Information Act to get my FBI files, and nothing came and nothing came.
By that time, I had seen Senator Moynihan a couple of times, and one time I told him the problem, and he said, 'Well, I'll look into it'. Then the files came and they were all redacted. Anything that was of any interest had a huge black line through it, so I have no idea what anybody said.
 I was mainly worried about my Aunt May. She was, in the day, a very intelligent communist, and she was… I just don't remember the party, but she subscribed to the Daily Worker and she was always talking about the bosses. But she was a very intelligent woman, and when Russia went bad, invaded things, one thing, she dropped out of that. So I thought, well, they're going to find Aunt May and they'll find that she had a subscription to the Daily Worker, and there will go my Q clearance.
And either they didn't find Aunt May or they didn't care. Whichever. I got my Q clearance.

I don’t remember how I got to Los Alamos. I didn’t have a car, I’m sure but I don’t remember how I got there. I don’t remember. Maybe I took the train.
 And in 1957, Los Alamos… it was the Cold War, and Los Alamos was very tightly shut. I think security was greater in ‘57 than it was during the war. You couldn’t get anywhere near the place without clearance.
So I lived in the bachelor dormitory and I’m sure it was the same dormitory that was during the war, the conditions were the same. And we worked in the Theory Division Building, which had another level of security, and I had nothing to do. You know, nobody asked me to work on any nuclear weapons and I didn’t know anything about nuclear weapons. And nuclear weapons were being worked on, but not where I was. But a friend of mine from Harvard was there and I came with a problem, with an interesting question, and I didn’t have enough mathematical power to solve it, but he did. So the two of us spent the summer working on this problem in elementary particle physics, a very pretty problem.
And I met a lot of very distinguished guys who were there consulting, became very good friends with Francis Low of MIT, Marv Goldberger. I think Gell-Mann may have come through a few times, Ken Watson. And they were consulting on stuff.

I played a lot of tennis with Francis. We played in a tournament, actually, Francis, in a doubles tournament, and were beaten by Rusty Ball and his son. Rusty Ball was a tennis player from.... somewhere in New Mexico, and they beat us pretty bad.
And toward the end of the summer, Francis said, 'Well, I can’t play with you next week.' I said, 'Oh, that’s too bad.' He said, 'Yes, I’m going to Nevada to watch nuclear weapons test.' I said, 'I didn’t know you were working on nuclear weapons.' He said, 'No I’m not, but I was interested and I asked Carson Mark and Carson Mark asked me if I’d like to go, and I said yes, I was curious.' I said, 'Geez, could I go?' He said, 'Well, you have to ask Carson.'
So I went and asked Carson, and Carson liked what I’d done in the summer, that I’d worked on this pure physics problem, which I was going to publish, the two of us were going to publish from Los Alamos. He thought it was good, because Los Alamos had the reputation as a bomb factory and here are these guys working on this nice physics problem. So he said, 'Yes, you can come, but the only thing is you have to pay your own way, and the airfare.' I said, 'That’s fine, I’ll do that.'

I think 30th August 1957, we left Los Alamos in a small plane. We flew to Albuquerque and took a commercial plane to Las Vegas. I had decided that... I was not going to ask any questions. My Q clearance came with a need to know and I had no need to know. And I was not going to ask any questions because I didn’t have a need to know. I’m sure I would run up against a blank wall and Carson would probably get angry with me and I’d be sent home or something so I didn’t ask any questions.

The plane lands, we get off and there’s a government car to pick up Carson and myself and Francis. We were driven immediately to a casino. I said, 'Well...gee'. Now it turned out that some mathematician in the army had produced a method by which you could beat the house in blackjack. And they had published it in a math journal, and had come to Los Alamos, because everybody who was going to bomb tests spent their time in the casinos (when they weren’t testing bombs) playing blackjack.
So the new big machine, called The Maniac, in Los Alamos, had run off a few hundred thousand games to see if the system worked, and then they had printed out little cards, a little card which said, well, if the dealer does this, we do that. We all had little cards, I had my little card and we went there, played blackjack. I don’t think I won much of anything. And then the casino had a blue light, which went on indicating that the test was on for the following morning, so we all got in the car and went up to Mercury for the test. And that was about… by the time we got there, it was about two or three in the morning. The test was going to be started at 5:30, which was just at the beginning of the sunrise, and I got a little bit of sleep, and then we got woken up.
And Carson was a big wheel; he was, you know, in charge of the Theory Division at Los Alamos, so he took Francis and I first to see the meteorologist. There was a meteorologist, and he was studying the wind and he said, 'Yes, it looks good, the wind looks good, and that’s all right.'
And then we went to kind of a concrete place, which was probably 10 miles away from ground zero. And you could see the tower was… this was a tower thing. This was Operation Plumbbob, a series called Plumbbob.

Ten seconds before the thing, the countdown was at ten… we’d been given dark glasses to cover our eyes and were told to turn away from the explosion, and so at the count of ten I turned away and there was no sound. There was no sound. When I turned around, the whole horizon was illuminated with this.... grotesque display of flame and colour and things, and God, it was unbelievable, an unbelievable sight. Behind the tower, there was a hill on which there were these Joshua trees, a familiar kind of shrubbery in the Southwest, and the whole hill, the trees were all on fire. It was just sort of an obscene thing.

Then first there came the... click in your ears from the wave, and then the sound. So it was a series: the light, the click and the sound. And years later, I learned that in the first test in Nevada, there was a pool journalist called WL or WO Lawrence from the New York Times. And Oppenheimer had assigned Feynman to look after Lawrence. And there was the light, the click, and then the sound, and when the sound came Lawrence said to Feynman, ‘What was that?’ And everybody always held that up as an illustration of how ignorant Lawrence was but actually, it was a good question, because the fact that there is a sequence is not a trivial matter.
 

We went back and we got a little sleep, and then there were some helicopters, and I said, 'God, they’re flying.' And Carson said, 'Yes, they’re flying and flying,' but didn’t give any explanation for that, either.
Then we got up, and then Carson gave us a tour of the Mercury thing and where there had been tests, the ground was sort of converted to glass. It looked like the surface of the moon, with this glass.

We went to a tower where the test for the next day was being prepared and we went up in a lift outside the tower. The lift was not enclosed, so you looked down several hundred feet below. Then you had to climb a ladder to where the actual device was. I thought, God, this is really scary. And what was scary was climbing up this ladder. You know, this nuclear device was on the thing but that didn’t bother me. What bothered me was climbing up the ladder. Strange. And on the platform was this device and there were technicians from Los Alamos working it over and screwing stuff onto it and so on, and Carson was asking questions. We went down the ladder and down the elevator and went to a bunkhouse, concrete bunkhouse. No explanation from Carson whatsoever. I mean, I didn’t ask any questions because, you know, need to know. We walk into this bunkhouse and I took one look and recoiled because on the shelves were the pits of, I don’t know, 30 nuclear weapons. And God, I recoiled, and Francis said to me, 'Look, if any of them go up, going back a few feet is not going to help much!' Then there was a guy sitting there at a bench, gluing on the high explosives to the external part of the metallic spheres. He was gluing them on and filing and next to him was a woman knitting. Oh my God, this is the way the world ends. I mean, just too unbelievable. So Carson thought I was a little… being a little… I mean, I didn’t say anything but obviously I was being a little distressed by all this so Carson casually picked up a pit, plutonium pit and gave it to me to hold, this pit.
[Q] A pit?
A pit. That’s the centre of the bomb. It’s called a pit. Made of uranium… plutonium in this case. It’s the working part of the bomb, the pit. To hold. And it was about the size and weight of a bowling ball. It was warm to the touch because plutonium is radioactive, it was giving off alpha particles and blah blah blah. I held this pit, and then I... went back. And I tell you…
                   And then the next day, we saw this one go up. And then we went back.

The whole experience at the time made me extremely foolish. I came to the conclusion for no reason at all, except that I felt empowered, because I held this pit, had seen this explosion, that somehow this testing was a useful thing. I don't know how I got this impression. And I had a girlfriend in Lake Forest, Illnois. Francis… we drove back. Francis, I drove back... sorry dropped me at her place in Lake Forest. Her mother said, 'You know, tomorrow; we're going to go somewhere where Adlai Stevenson [II] is, an old friend. We're going to see Adlai Stevenson.' I said 'Oh gee', because Adlai Stevenson was running against Eisenhower on the proposition that nuclear tests should be stopped. And.....I thought well you know...I had this... I thought they shouldn't be stopped. I don't know why I had this idea, this very, very stupid idea. I went over and... I was introduced to Adlai Stevenson. 'This is Jeremy Bernstein, he spent the summer at Los Alamos. He saw these tests, he thinks the testing is a good thing'. Stevenson took one look at me and turned around and walked away. He had no interest in talking about anything with me and he was right. He lost, I voted for him. Anyway... that was the summer of '57.

As I said, it was about the size and weight of a bowling ball. Now, I was so ignorant; I sort of knew it was plutonium. I think I knew, maybe I didn't know but it was something like that. I was so ignorant that I did not ask the obvious question, which was why was it so light. A solid sphere, like a bowling ball of plutonium, would have weighed hundreds of pounds and I couldn't possibly have lifted it, but I could lift it and hold it in my hand. So the obvious question was, why was it so light? And if I had asked that question, I either would have been thrown out or certainly not given an answer. The answer was obviously that it was hollow, it was a hollow sphere of plutonium, and the next question was, why was it hollow? Well, it was hollow because they were testing one of those boosted weapons, which light hydrogen isotypes and the like are inserted in one form or another in the interior of the weapons, and when the pit is imploded and the fission begins then fusion is induced.
So you have… it's a mixture of a fission and a boosted device, in which there is fusion. It's not a proper hydrogen bomb, but it uses the same principle. And then this fusion produces a blast of energetic neutrons, which enhances the fission. So... it's a fusion-boosted device. That's what was being tested. Of course, I would not have been told that, I would have probably been sent away, but I didn't ask the question because I didn't know that was the question to ask.

Getting back to the spring of '57, Oppenheimer by that time had lost his clearance and… but Harvard had invited him to give a series of lectures. By that time, I had been admitted to the Institute [for Advanced Study], and of course I wanted to hear the lectures, in the first place, but I also thought, well, I might introduce myself to the man and say, well, you know, 'I'm coming to your place next year.' 'Hi', and you know, 'Hello'. So I knew the lectures were going to be crowded. They were in the biggest auditorium in Harvard. They were jammed. We came early and there were some wonderful Boston womenA sitting in front of me. Violet hair and obviously first families or whatever. And at some point, Oppenheimer wrote down a bit of mathematics and these women clutched each other in terror. I don't know if they thought this mathematics was going to explode or something and I wanted to tell them that, you know, 'Don't worry, Oppenheimer's just showing off, just forget it, it's harmless'.
Anyway, the lecture was over, Oppenheimer was still on stage. I went up and he fixed me with what his students used to call the blue glaze, blue stare. He had extraordinary blue eyes and if he fixed them on you, you shrivelled up like a melted piece of ice. So he fixed these eyes on me in a very hostile way because he… I didn't know what to do. Should I continue? Should I advance or retreat? I thought, well God, if I retreat, I'll look like a complete idiot. So I advanced and I said, 'Dr Oppenheimer, I'm Jeremy Bernstein. I've been accepted to the Institute. I'll be there next fall'.
At this point, he changed completely. He turned and he radiated like the sun. He was so warm and so friendly, he radiated. And he said to me, he said, told me who was going to be there, he said, 'Lear's going to be there and Yang is going to be there, and they're going to tell us about peridotite conservation and we're going to have a ball.' That's what he said to me.
At that point, I realised why we had an atom bomb. If that guy was your lab director, you would jump through fire for the guy. I mean, he was… he was a genius. I would have… at that point, if he said, 'We're going to bomb… and now you've got to jump through that flaming hoop', I would've said, 'Yes, thanks, I will do that for you'. I mean, he was really, really wonderful.

I did mention that it was called the Plumbbob Series and these were tests which… on alternate explosions. They were either Livermore or Los Alamos. Both of them had devices they were testing.
The Livermore devices were named after mountains and the Los Alamos devices were named after scientists, which I thought was typical of the two institutions. The first explosion that I saw was called Smoky. That was named after the Smoky Mountains and this is the picture that I saw. This is what I saw when I turned around after looking away for 10 seconds. This is what I saw and this picture doesn't really give an idea of the scale. I would suppose that it was.... certainly several football fields in length and the mushroom cloud was just beginning to form, the fireball and so on. It was unbelievably impressive.
Then I mentioned that, after we saw the explosions, which were very early in the morning, we went back to get a little sleep and in the course of this, I heard the sound of these helicopters. And Carson Mark, who was the director of the Theoretical Division who had authorised me to come, was a very droll Canadian. And I said, 'They're flying'. And Carson said, 'They're flying and flying'. Without offering any explanation to who was flying or why they were flying. And I was very much under the stricture of the need to know and I felt that there was nothing that I needed to know and I didn't ask any questions.
But after a while, after years went by; the Plumbbob Series, like the rest of the tests, were kind of unclassified, or partially declassified, so you could learn that in the course of the Plumbbob Series, there were several thousand soldiers who witnessed the test, and they were marched to ground zero. And the helicopters had to do with the manoeuvres of these soldiers, as I learned later.
Some of them got leukaemia, presumably attributable to the exposure to radiation. We didn't get any radiation. I was… we were all something like 10n miles away. But I mentioned last time that the shockwave was certainly noticeable. It was a very, rather unpleasant click in the ear. And as one knows, one of the main sources of damage in Hiroshima was the shockwave, which produced winds that were stronger than any cyclone wind, and knocked over the cooking fires that the Japanese were using, and caused a lot of fire damage in Hiroshima.a

Then I mentioned I was on my way to the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. I stopped off to see my parents and pick up my ancient Morris Minor convertible, which I drove from Rochester to Princeton. And the top of the convertible was not entirely secure, so it let in a lot of road dust and things. I got to Princeton at maybe 2:00 or 3:00 in the afternoon and I... all I wanted to do was to get the key to my condo and go there and have a bath. That was my object. But the key to the condo was in the administrative offices. So I went in there and I said who I was, and a secretary said, 'Yes, Dr Oppenheimer wants to speak to you'. And I thought, there's no chance on this Earth that Dr Oppenheimer wants to speak to me. I don't want to speak to him, because I'm covered in road dirt and I just want to… So I said, 'Well, there must be some error, because there's no reason he wants to speak to me'. [She said] 'Oh yes, yes, he wants to speak to you'. So I walked into Oppenheimer's office and he was beautifully dressed. His clothes were all specially tailored by the only bespoke tailor in Princeton at Lime Rock, Mr Decker. Mr Decker was very pleased to be the bespoke tailor for Oppenheimer and he had fabricated, among other things, a special green Loden coat, which Oppenheimer wore in the winter so he was extremely well-dressed. He was rather wealthy and he sort of liked having money, I believe. So the first thing that he said to me was, 'What is new and firm in physics?' And this question completely threw me because I thought I might say what was new, but I wasn't sure what was firm. I could say what was firm. I had done some work that summer. It was firm but it... wasn't really new or very interesting. So I was absolutely… I didn't have any idea what to answer to this. And the phone rang. So I thought, oh God, this is… I can get out of here because, you know, he doesn't want to answer the phone when I'm here.  So he picked up the phone and began talking, and I said, 'Well, excuse, I…' And he said, 'No, no, please stay,' he said. And I stayed and then he was talking and it was clear he was talking to his wife, Kitty she was called. Katherine, Kitty. So he hung up the phone and then he said to me, 'It's Kitty and she's been drinking again'. And I was absolutely appalled. I was absolutely appalled. I didn't know what to say or what to do. And years later, Robert Silvers, the editor of the New York Review of Books, told me that Oppenheimer did the same thing to him with Kitty. Absolutely appalling. So I was mute and then he said, 'We have some pictures at our house you might like to see.' And I said, 'Yes, well thank you very much'. I had no idea what he was talking about.
Later on, in the Fall, I did go to his house for a party and I realised that among the pictures were, you know, one or two van Gogh's and he had a collection which had been assembled by his father. A small but superb collection of pictures. One of the father's pictures, I think it belonged to his brother Frank, and was now in the Metropolitan, it's actually one of my favourite van Gogh's. So that was my first introduction to Oppenheimer.

I had been warned before I went by people who had been at the Institute. They said, 'After a certain while, there's going to be a confessional, and you'll have to go into Oppenheimer and confess to what you've been doing and so forth during the year'. And then he said, 'If you haven't been doing anything, it's better to say that than to say something which is either trivial or wrong because he will just eat you alive'., So I had that in mind. And then a Fellow from Harvard had gone and went slightly berserk and left the Institute and became a monk. So that was not a terribly good precedent.

I was very used to working independently so the fact that nobody was going to give me any guidance didn't especially bother me. Nobody had given me any guidance while I was the house theorist at the cyclotron at Harvard. So that was fine. But it was also clear to me that I had to retool because I had been working at Harvard on this electron scattering from particles… experiments done by Hofstadter at Stanford, and what was of interest now were the weak interactions -  the beta decays and things - because of some work that had been done by Lee and Yang having to do with the non-conservation of parity. And that was the… that was the subject matter that was of interest.
There was also a small group there very, very high-powered people who, as far as I could see, were trying to kill quantum field theory by forcing it to be rigorous, which it wasn't. Marvellous people. I met… [unclear] Res Jost, who was a Swiss physicist. A very funny character, we became good friends. And I was once coming out of the cafeteria and Jost and Lehmann, who were two of the people… they were called the [sic], the Field Union and they were trying to kill quantum field theory. And they were laughing and laughing, and I said to Jost, 'You're laughing,' Jost said, 'We are laughing, but inside we are very sad,' said Jost to me. I was very fond of Jost.
So I retooled, and I learned... learned about the weak interactions and parity non-conservation, and Lee and Yang were there. They won the Nobel Prize that Fall. We very junior people were not invited to the Nobel Prize celebration. That bothered me slightly but it bothered my office mate terribly. He was an Italian named Morpurgo and he was very upset that he wasn't invited, and he kept saying to me, 'I can feast the Nobel Prize.' But he was not allowed to feast the Nobel Prize.

Something happened, which had its origins in my Harvard days. Vicky Weisskopf, whom I became quite friendly with, fixed me up with an Austrian physicist named Walter Thirring or Dear Walter as we called him. And Walter Thirring had written a book on quantum electrodynamics in German and it was being translated into English, and Vicky said, 'You should help Walter in this translation.' So I said, 'Well, that’s fine.' I thought I might learn something from doing that. And I did that. I helped Walter with the translation of his book. And he gave me a reprint of a paper he’d written and I took it with me to the Institute, I hadn’t really looked at it, and somehow or other, toward the Spring, I decided I would look at it. And it made an interesting point about what’s called a hyperfine structure. Now the problem was I knew it was an interesting point, but I didn’t know what the hyperfine structure was. But I thought if I ever knew what it was, it would be an interesting point that he made about it. We didn’t have Google in those days. If we had Google, I would have googled the hyperfine structure and learned what the heck it was.
Anyway, Lee and Yang had written a paper, apparently on a train back from somewhere and I noticed that they had not considered the hyperfine structure so they had not considered Thirring’s point. I was in a... I would say, in a rather weak position because I didn’t know what it was except I knew they hadn’t considered it. So it was a Saturday, I think, a Saturday or Sunday morning and I was going to New York that day to go to a party. And I’d gone to my office at the Institute and I noticed TD Lee walking across the lawn. I didn’t know him at all. He’d just won the Nobel Prize so he was obviously a very significant figure, but I thought well, you know, what the heck. I’ll ask him if he’d taken into account the hyperfine structure. So I went to see him, and I said, 'Well, have you taken into account the hyperfine structure?' And he said, 'No, no, it’s not important. Not important'. I said, 'Well, could you explain it to me?' I thought, well, that way, I might learn what it was. So, we went to the office and he started calculating to explain this. Not important, flipper this, flipper, don’t flipper. And he was calculating away, and the more he was calculating away and the more he as calculating, the more important the effect became. And so he was, really calculating in a furious way up there and I don’t think I watched because I had to go into New York, this party. And I said, 'Well, gee, thank you very, very much for this explanation' and I went off to New York.
I came back a couple of days later. In my mailbox was the draft of a paper, Lee and Yang and me. I was a first author in this paper. And... a note saying, 'Please check this over.' So I looked at it and I said, 'God, this is really amazing. I mean, you know, I feel like a pregnant virgin. I haven’t done anything and I’ve got my name on this paper'. I did ask the question, though. I mean, but they would have been entitled, actually under the circumstances, to write their paper and to thank me for having asked the question. Instead of that, they put my name on the paper. It was an act of incredible generosity, just unbelievably generous of them to do that. And I was very, very proud of that.

I took the paper to New York because I wanted to show it to Telegdi. Telegdi was a very cynical and funny Hungarian, a very brilliant physicist, who was known as Mr Mu Meson. And our paper had to do with the Mu Mesons. I thought I'll see Telegdi and so I showed Telegdi the paper He took one look and he said to me, 'You are a nice boy, but Lee and Yang are crooks'. I said, 'Well, God, what are you talking about?' He said, 'They have stolen this from Primakoff'. Primakoff? I didn't know Primakoff.
So I went back, and I'm not going to tell Lee and Yang that Telegdi thinks you're crooks. I mean, you know, I'm not going to tell that to Lee and Yang. So I went into see Lee and I said, 'I saw Telegdi and he thinks that something like this has been done by Primakoff'. So they checked everything and they couldn't find any reference to anything like this. Again, they did something which they didn't have to do under the circumstances. They called Primakoff, which they did not have to do. Primakoff, who actually had been born in Odessa but had an American Southern accent for some reason. Marvellous fellow, also. I got to know him and was very, very fond of him. Once he got tangled up in a microphone when he was giving a talk and he said, 'I do not belong in this century,' said he in a vague way.
Well, he had done work. He'd done a lot of work. Not quite what we did. Well, what they did. He had not really realised how to test this in an experiment, which Lee and Yang did, that was really the point, but he had certainly on the theory. And he sent us about a hundred page manuscript, handwritten with all the symbols and so on, and so the paper became known as BLYP: Bernstein, Lee, Yang and Primakoff. And the experiments to test BLYP were done by Telegdi and they were quite interesting. It was quite an interesting effect.
And it made me locally famous, because nobody but Chinese physicists had collaborated with Lee and Yang, except me. I had collaborated. So I was kind of locally famous. And... I guess I don't think that I was… I don't think I had the confessional, but Bohr came to the institute, Niels Bohr, and everybody was trotted out to speak to Bohr and I represented BLYP. I was the representative of BLYP. And I gave, I think… I was given five minutes and I think I took two. And Bohr said, 'Oh, that's very interesting', which means he thought it was, of course, not interesting at all.
So that was my confessional. But I got a second year at the Institute out of it. I was asked if I'd like to stay another year, I said, 'Oh, yes, great, I'd love to'.

So I stayed a second year and in the second year, I'd been… I'd worked hard. That was the… the summer between the first and the second year was the summer I'd gone out to work with Dyson on the Orion, I think. We had discussed that previously. But I was… I worked hard and... I was tired of it. I mean, I was… you know, I wasn't going to give up physics but I was just tired of working on it so I decided I would read Proust.
I had never read Proust because people I didn't like liked Proust. I thought, 'Well, they liked Proust, I'm not going to read Proust because of them.' But I read Proust and I got absolutely mesmerised. I got lost in Proust for about several weeks… nothing but Proust, and during this period, I was called for my confessional with Oppenheimer. So I walked in. He said, 'Dr Bernstein, what have you been doing?' And I said, well, I'm not going to lie to him. I thought, the hell with it, I'm not going to lie to him. I said, 'Well, I've been reading Proust'. So he looked at me very kindly and said, 'When I was your age, I took a bicycle trip around Corsica and at night I read Proust by flashlight, of course in the original French'. So he certainly had me there, topped me there. And then I was dismissed very, very, very kindly. I don't think he said, 'Keep up with it', but you know...
Years later, I got my revenge because he was giving a talk in New York, which I think was called 'The Something the More'… I don't know. The Fathoms… it was Biblical. I don't know. It will come to me. But whatever it was, the More. And he'd gone up to Columbia and… Cubit, 'One Cubit the More.' That's what it was called. Cubit the More. And he'd gone up to Columbia and he'd asked all the physicists up there whether they knew where it was from, Cubit the More. Of course, nobody knew, obviously, where it was. But a Columbia physicist called me and said, 'Oppenheimer's been here and he's asking about the Cubit the More' and he said, 'Do you know where it's from?' I said, 'I don't know where it comes from.' So I thought I would find out where it comes from. And I called… God, this....polymath, whose son won the Nobel Prize in Economics. Oh God. Anyway… it'll come to me, the name will come to me sometime after you've left, I'm sure. And I called him, and he told me immediately that it was from the New Testament, he gave me the chapter and verse. I said, 'Well, that's good, thank you'. And that afternoon, I went to meet some people at the Algonquin Hotel in New York, because I was then writing for The New Yorker. How that happened, I'll tell you in a minute or two. And I was passing the elevator, the elevator door opened and out walked Oppenheimer and Kitty. And, oh God, he saw me and he said… this is what he said to me, he said: 'Your father is a rabbi, therefore you should know what this verse is'. Of course, the verse is from the New Testament, so it's the wrong testament and there's no reason I should know it, but it happened I did know it. So instantly, I gave chapter and verse. Instantly, without any hesitation. He looked at me very, very puzzled. And I never explained. I never explained how I knew what this was, but I felt very pleased with myself.

I had a second year at the Institute, then I won this National Science Foundation fellowship, which gave me two years anywhere I wanted to go and where I wanted to go was to Paris because I had never been to Paris. And I discovered that Gell-Mann was going to Paris, Murray, and he was the hottest thing in the field. We'd been to school together, although he was three years ahead of me at that time. And he came to the Institute and… because I'd done some work on stuff that he had done so he was interested in that. And he came and he talked and he said, 'Well, what are you doing next year?' I said, 'Well I'm going to Paris on my NSF'. And he said, 'Well, I'm going to be in Paris'. I said, 'Oh, that's good'. Then he said, 'Stick with me kid, I'll put you on Broadway', is what he said.

I worked with Murray and also Louis Michel in Paris for about a year. We went to Israel, actually but not together. I went because my father said, 'You know, I'll treat you to a trip to Israel, you should really go to Israel'. I said, 'All right, I'll go to Israel'.
And so I learned that Murray had been talking about Israel. He kept referring to it as Occupied Palestine. So I thought there was not much chance that he was going there and then he suddenly shocked me because he was going to Israel. So we went and we went and did some things together. One of the most interesting things we did together was to go down to the Negev Desert with Peter Hillman, who was a fellow I knew from Harvard, a physicist, and Renana Ben-Gurion, who was Ben-Gurion daughter. We went into the desert and went to where her father was at Sde Boker. They were trying to recruit Gell-Mann to stay in Israel, which there was… I would say a fat chance. And they tried to do that and Ben-Gurion made a big pitch. He was a short man with sort of hair flying out. And at one point, he turned to Gell-Mann and he said, 'You see these trees on that hill?' And we looked at the hill, the hill was completely, completely void of anything, no vegetation whatever. And Murray said, 'No, I don't see any trees'. He said, 'In 10 years, there will be trees up there'. And it was probably true, but that didn't persuade Gell-Mann.

In the night, we… the three of us drove back to Tel Aviv and Hillman got lost. It’s not a good idea to get lost in Israel because everything is, like, 6 miles from the border. So we get lost and we come to this barbed wire fence and there’s these lights and things and guards and stuff. And I look up and it says Dimona. I didn’t know what that meant, but Hillman knew what it meant and we turned around and beat it. Of course, Dimona was where they were making the nuclear weapon and that was not a good place for us to be.

I had at the time also a job offer from Brookhaven National Lab and I made a deal with them that I would go to do my National Science Foundation and then I would... I would come to Brookhaven for 6 months and then I'd go back to Europe for another 6 months and then come back to Brookhaven. That's the arrangement that I made with them. So after my wonderful year in France and Switzerland, I went to Brookhaven for my 6 months and I was pretty unhappy. I found it very isolated. The science was good, but I thought the life was really very, very unhappiness-making.

So I thought I would write… I had, the previous summer, taught summer school on the Isle of Corsica. The French had just started a summer school in Corsica and I’d gone. And I loved the place. I just thought Corsica was absolutely… it was beautiful. I liked the people. I thought it was absolutely terrific. So I wrote something. I wrote a letter from Corsica. I just wrote it. And I showed it to a couple of people at Brookhaven and they said, 'Well, you should send this to The New Yorker'. So I said, 'Well, all right'. And I put it in an envelope, and I knew nobody at The New Yorker, and I think I sent it to the editors at The New Yorker, and I said, 'I wrote this, I sent this to you' on Brookhaven stationery. I sent it off. And it was, like, sort of putting a message in a bottle and putting it out in the Atlantic Ocean because nothing happened. No acknowledgement, nothing. If you send something to one of the scientific journals like The Physical Review, you get an instantaneous letter acknowledging the receipt of this thing. There was absolutely nothing.
So, sort of, like February I think, I was going back to Europe. I thought, well, I’ll just call The New Yorker and see if they ever even got it. So I called The New Yorker and explained what I wanted, and I was transferred and I said to the guy who answered, I wish I knew who that was in retrospect. I said… I explained what I had done and he said, 'Well, we lose a lot of manuscripts around here', which didn’t make me feel too great. And he said, 'Well, what was your manuscript about?' I said, 'It was about Corsica'. He said, 'No, no,' he said, 'they put you into Fiction, you belong in Fact'. Then I was switched and another voice came on, a very sophisticated female voice, and I gave my name and she said, 'Oh Mr Bernstein, you must be back from Corsica'. Now, I had not mentioned Corsica so I felt something was happening here. Something must have happened here. And she said, 'Mr Shawn (who was the editor) would like to talk to you. Can he call you?' I said, 'Oh yes, certainly he can call'. I’d never heard of him. Of course he can call me. Why not? So in due course, the phone rang and Shawn got on the phone. He had a very tentative voice. He was very, very tough and very sure and very nice, but a tentative voice. And he said, 'Oh, Mr Bernstein, this is William Shawn'. I said, 'Oh yes, thank you.' He said, 'We (it always was we) we have been reading your piece on Corsica and we would… if you don’t mind, we would like to publish it'. I said, 'God, I don’t mind, no. I certainly don’t mind. No, please publish it'. So he said, 'Are you ever in New York because I would like to talk to you?' So I was going to say, 'Well, I can be in New York in about two hours', but I said, 'Yes, yes'. So we made a date.

I went up to The New Yorker offices, which were not at all what I expected them to be. They looked like a sort of seedy office of a.... newspaper. They were kind of crowded and, you know, not at all what one would expect from The New Yorker. So anyway, I went to see him and talked for about… I bet we talked for about an hour, maybe longer. Just talked. He didn’t say much of anything, but he was listening intently while I was talking. And then, at the end of this, he said, 'I think there’s something you can do for us'. I said, 'Yes.' He said, 'You can write about science as a form of experience'. I said, 'Oh yes'. [He said,] 'Your experience'. I said, 'Well, alright, I can do that, yes'.
Then I went back to Brookhaven and I thought, my God, what does that mean? I mean, you know, I’d been asked to write for The New Yorker about science as a form of experience. I don’t have a clue as to what this means.

Well, the first thing I wrote for The New Yorker was actually a Talk Of The Town piece about tennis, which had nothing to do with science, but it got my foot into it. And I did it in the style that I’d been doing it in high school, you know, we did, we did. Still had no idea how to do this, but I was going back to CERN in Geneva for the summers. Now about a year had gone by and I hadn’t come up with anything. But life works in strange ways. I had played a lot of tennis and I had sprained an ankle and I lived in a building in which TD Lee and his wife lived. And they took sympathy on me and they… TD and I drove back and forth with him. I drove back and forth with him to CERN every day from where we were living and I talked to him and I got to know him. And I thought, you know, I think I know what I can do here is I can write a profile, Lee and Yang, a dual profile, Lee and Yang. So I said, 'Well, you know, can I do this?' And he was not enthusiastic, but he was not totally negative so I went back and I wrote a dual profile of Lee and Yang, and Shawn edited it, actually.

I was called in one day to see him and I was surprised because my piece was on the floor, and he'd cut things out and he was moving them around physically. And then he gave me a three-page thing, which I have with questions. And those three pages were the only writing course I ever had and they were extraordinary, about what we wanted and we don't use indirection and all these questions and so on, which really were a terrific writing lesson.

I forget exactly how I had done it. When I referred to things, I think I may have called them Lee and Yang… I don't know. Anyway, there...was a strange thing, because the… when the thing came back, Lee and Yang were changed occasionally to Yang and Lee. It was kind of odd. So Shawn called me and said, 'You know, they've changed it from Lee and Yang to Yang and Lee in various places. Do you have any idea why?' I said 'No, I don't know why'. Well, it turned out that they had a terminal fight and broke up, and some people blamed me but you know, I didn't do anything. I think Dyson blamed me, but I certainly… I just wrote this profile. I didn't do anything.
And then the next summer, I had to talk with TD about it. He was very disturbed. But I think what had happened is what happens often in these collaborations, is that when the collaboration started, Lee was younger and the junior person, Yang was older and of a different social class in China. And in the course of things, I think that Lee began getting most of the ideas and Yang was getting most of the credit, and I think that was the source of their tension. And I've seen this before. I saw this with Gell-Man and Peiss and it's a canonical thing that happens in these collaboration. So I felt very, very badly about it and I felt that I just really felt very badly that this had happened and I had some responsibility for it. And Lee left the Institute and went back to Columbia, which was good for them. I got a note from Dyson saying, 'Once we'll forgive you but twice, we won't', which was very disturbing.
And then I tried to do a profile of Dirac. I had one day of interview, but I think Oppenheimer got a hold of him and told him not to do it so he… Dirac said no, which was a pity because I could have done a very nice profile of Dirac. But I did New Yorker profiles. I did one of Einstein and the only objection was from his estate, which gave me a lot of trouble, but he was not around. And I did profiles of Rabi and of Bethe. I did a long profile of Bethe and Marvin Minsky and Lewis Thomas and some other people.

After I wrote the profile of Lee and Yang, Shawn asked me if I’d like to be on the staff of the magazine, and I said, you know, 'What does that mean?' He said, 'Well, it just means we can pay you more'. I said, 'Well, that’s fine'. It also meant that I got the medical insurance, which has turned out to be extraordinarily important in my life to have done that. And I was on the staff for 35 years until Tina Brown fired a bunch of us, including me. But we managed to hang on to the medical thing, which has been very, very important in my life. And she succeeded in getting fired herself, which I was very pleased about. I never met her, I don’t think she ever read a word of anything I ever wrote. I have no idea why I was picked out. I wasn’t the only one picked out, but she kind of fired a whole group of people who had… she fired Yvette Mader and Henry Cooper and a lot of people that were quite important writers in The New Yorker during that period. And why she did it, I have no idea. I’m sure she has no regrets and I wish her nothing but ill.

I went back to teaching and research. Well actually, the year… that was 1995, I’d retired from Stevens [Institute of Technology] then, I then went to live half the year in Aspen, where we have a physics centre. I think I met you out there once.
And... my life has otherwise been pretty routine. There’s one thing I should mention that actually came out of The New Yorker and also out of working at CERN in the summer in Geneva. I got interested in mountain climbing and so I spent 20 seasons climbing with a guide or guides in Chamonix. And I wrote a profile for The New Yorker of him, Claude Jaccoux, and described the profession of guiding, which Shawn called Ascent, actually, the profile. It became a book. And Shawn loved my profile of Jaccoux. He thought it was… he really loved it. I got a wonderful letter from him about it. He just loved the profile. And I thought, well, maybe I can parlay this into something else. And I thought, well, maybe he’ll let us take… he can send us to the Himalayas, now that we’ve done the Alps. So I persuaded him to send us to the Himalayas and he, Jaccoux and I and Jaccoux’s wife, 1967, went to Nepal. I, for several months, Jaccoux for a couple of months. We trekked to the Everest basecamp and we trekked around the Annapurna region. And I wrote a profile of Nepal called The Wildest Dreams of Kew, which was the first, I believe, English language modern profile of the country. So that was very satisfying.
And then I wrote also later about Bhutan and about Tibet and took various trips to those places. So that was another part of my life which was made possible by The New Yorker so I’m very grateful to The New Yorker for all of that.

One thing, which The New Yorker also led to was my friendship with Stanley Kubrick. The way that happened is I had written a book review of Arthur Clarke's oeuvre. He wrote me from Sri Lanka and he said he's coming to New York and he said he wanted to meet me. And I was not enthusiastic about it because I thought, well, I don't have anything to say to this fellow, I don't think, and so on. But he came, and we met at the Algonquin again, and I said, 'Well, what are you doing here?' And he said, 'Well, I'm writing the Son Of Doctor Strangelove'. I said, 'Well, what's that?' He said, 'Well, it's a science fiction movie that I'm writing with Stanley Kubrick'. I had seen Doctor Strangelove. In fact, the only movie that I ever saw that I sat through twice, I liked it so much. So he said, 'Well, I'm doing this with Stanley Kubrick and he's a great man, and you should meet him'. I said, 'Well, that's wonderful, I'd love to meet him'. So a meeting was set up. Kubrick was living in New York, on Central Park West, near where I lived during the war in New York. I went to see him and the door opened. I had never met a movie mogul and I took one look and I said, 'God, I know this person'. He looks to me like every eccentric physicist I've known all my life. He is distracted, he's sort of unkempt, not interested in anything but what he's interested in, and I said, I mean, I know this guy. This is… this guy is absolutely my type.

We had a very nice conversation. I think, in that conversation, I suggested the subtitle of the film, A Space Odyssey. I believe that was my suggestion. Anyway, we got… we talked for a… we talked when Arthur was there, and we talked for about an hour and so on. And then I look at my watch, I said, 'Gee, I've got to go'. He said, 'Well, why?' And I thought that was typical Kubrick. I mean, why should you have to go when we're having this conversation? I mean, the fact that you have a life, I mean, that's of no relevance to anything. You know, why would you want to go? I mean, what is… you have to offer an explanation as to why it is you want to go. I mean, why do you have this life? I mean, you know, we're having this conversation. There's no reason to go. So I was very truthful. I said, 'Well, I'm playing chess for money in Washington Square Park and I have a date with this guy I'm playing chess with and I don't want to stand him up and I want to go'. So he said, 'Well, who are you playing?' I said, 'Well, I'm playing Duvall,' thinking that would mean nothing. Kubrick said, 'Duvall is a patzer.' Now there's nothing that's more insulting than to be… I mean, if Duvall's a patzer and I was just about breaking even, what am I? I must be the king of patzers. So I said, 'Well, I mean, have you played Duvall?' He said, 'Yes, when there was nobody any good around, I used to play Duvall,' he told me. So I said, 'Well, you know, I'm... sort of breaking even with Duvall'. I said, 'Well, we should play'. And he said, 'Yes, we should play some time'.

He went back to England and started filming 2001 and I was going to do this profile. I got the profile of him to do that and so we started playing chess. And the first game we played was in the Dorchester Hotel. The chessboard was set up. And he was a hustler. A real hustler. When you were trying to think, he would snap his fingers, look at his watch and all these hustler tricks. And one of his daughters came in and said, 'Why is Jeremy's face red?' she said. Kubrick said, 'Well, that's because he can't think of a decent move'. And so we played four games I lost, but the fifth game, I won. He said, 'Well, why did you win this game? You're a patzer. You can't win this game'. I said, 'Stanley, I was hustling you. I deliberately lost the first four games and won the fifth game'. He said, 'No, that's crazy, you're a patzer, you can't do anything'.
Then we played during the filming. Even when we didn't have a proper set, he would use coins. We'd set the thing up and about every fifth game… every fifth game, actually, I did something interesting, either won or drew or something. It was driving him crazy. Literally crazy. He said, 'I know you're no good, you're just this patzer'. So then we came to the 25th game. The 25th game will decide everything. And the 25th game we played in his house. He had a rented estate in, I think, Boreham Wood, and the windows were huge and were letting in the cold air and it was freezing. So to deal with this, he'd bought about 15 huge bathrobes. And so I think… either it was that time or another time when he said, 'Come out', he said, 'come out to the house for dinner'. So I said, 'All right, that's fine'. I thought, yes, and meet all these movie stars, that'd be great. That was another time. Come and have dinner, and movie stars, everything, wonderful. So on the way out, the chauffer… he sends in a car for me, the chauffer stops at a Tandoori chicken place and he picks up some chicken and puts it in a bag. I thought, God, this guy's having this nice dinner for himself. I come out there, Kubrick takes the bag of Tandoori chicken and gives it to me. That was the dinner. I said, 'Well, Jesus, this is dinner'. I said, 'God, is there any dessert or anything?' He said to the kid....he said to his daughter, he said, 'See if you can find Jeremy a dry cookie somewhere'. So anyway, we were in these bathrobes, playing this chess game. It was like something out of The Seventh Seal, you know, really weird. And I thought he'd made a blunder and without thinking about it, I started [sic]… and Kubrick said, 'Oh God, how could I do this? This is terrible, oh God.' And it was a trap and then he clobbered me. And he said, 'You see? You didn't know I could also act'. He was very pleased with himself.

We were pretty good friends. It kind of had… we kind of had… I don't know, not exactly a falling out, but a cooling off with Clockwork Orange. I went to see the preview of Clockwork Orange and I was terribly disturbed by it. It was the uncut preview, it...was really disturbing. So he said, 'Well, how'd you like the film?' I said, 'Jesus, Stanley, I mean, you know, you can't like that film. It's… you know, it's a terrible experience to see that film'. Then he got quite annoyed with me about that and then that was sort of the end of whatever friendship we had, I'm afraid. It's a pity. And I felt like when I heard Bertrand Russell.... I heard Betrand Russell talk at Harvard and he had a disagreement with [John Maynard] Keynes, and then he said, 'Shortly thereafter, Lord Keynes died'. And I thought, 'Well, that's what happened to me'. Kubrick died. He died.

One of the people that I got to know when I was an undergraduate at Harvard was Marvin Minsky and he... was, I think, in the same class that I was in, although he's a little older because he was in the Navy or in something. He was in something or other and he'd come back. When I went to Harvard in '47, there were a lot of returning veterans and that was a hard year to get in, making it all the more remarkable that two of us got in from our small high school, Columbia Grammar, in New York. And I'm not quite sure how I heard about Marvin, but there were just these… if you were in mathematics, there were just these smart people that you heard about and Marvin was known as a smart person. And then he got into artificial intelligence and he got a contract from the Navy to build a robot. And he had a pet hamster and the pet hamster sat on top of the machine and when he turned on the machine, which had lights and things, the hamster got excited and ran around its cage. So a Navy inspector came in because they were financing the thing and he looked at it, and the… Marvin turned on the machine and the hamster ran around, the Navy inspector stared at the hamster, and Marvin said, 'The next one we build will look like a bird'. Which I've always loved.
And the other thing he told me once. He had drawn a picture of a bird, which he showed me. He said, 'This looks like a bird, but no bird looks like this'. He's an extremely interesting guy. I haven't seen him… we email occasionally but I haven't seen him for a couple of years.

He invented a device. He went to work for Claude Shannon at Bell Labs, I think, one summer, who was another very smart guy. And as a present to Shannon, they made a device, which is a small box. And it opened and a hand came up, grabbed the top of the box and pulled the lid down again. And I always wondered, it would be a wonderful, wonderful gift. And Marvin said they made a couple, which they gave him. But it would be a wonderful sort of gift to give to somebody. I'd love to have it myself.

I did profile of him for The New Yorker, which I enjoyed very much and his home was, probably still is, filled with gadgets of all kinds because he was very, very interested in gadgets, electronics and things. And we went to the Artificial Intelligence Lab and he said, 'We have to be careful of that one, because it comes after people'. So it was one we had to be careful of. I think Marvin invented the word 'hacker' because he invented the notion of if you do a good thing, it's called a hack. I believe that's his word, 'hacker'. He's one of nature's originals.

I did a profile of Hans Bethe and that was complicated because Bethe was very interested, at the time, in the general energy question. He was a very, very serious man and an extraordinarily moral and upright man. And he was seriously interested in the general energy question and he thought that The New Yorker would be a vehicle for getting his ideas out on the general energy question. Now The New Yorker had a point of view about energy, which was absolutely diametrically opposite to Bethe's. They hated nuclear energy, they were very green and all this, and Bethe, of course, thought that nuclear energy was an important part of the mix. So... I explained that, you know, it was going to be hard to get this in and so on. And then I told him, I said, 'To simply have an article with your views of energy is not going to work. It's… we have to say who you are, we have to know who you are to make this work'. And I said, 'The only way this is going to work is if your views on energy become part of a profile. So we have to start from the beginning and then, when we establish who you are then we can, at the end, talk about energy'.

By that time, I was working with a tape recorder. Actually, it was Kubrick that introduced me to tape recorders. I didn't have one. But he had a reel-to-reel tape recorder and we recorded the interviews. They're now on a CD. They put it on a CD and they're available commercially, this particular set of interviews I did with Kubrick because I had them transferred onto a proper CD from the reel-to-reel.
But by the time I was doing Rabi and Bethe, I had a… we had real tape recorders, and it was easy to do. So I had the tape recorder and I interviewed Bethe. Some of the interviews were here and I went to Cornell once and for hours… I must have 15 or 20 tapes on which I interviewed Bethe. And then I wrote my profile. I did what I said I was going to do. The first part was about his early life in Germany and coming here and so on, and the second part was about the war and about making nuclear weapons and Oppenheimer and Teller and those things. And the third part, then, was about the general energy question. Now, as it happened, just at this time when I was finishing this, we had Three Mile Island.

Three Mile Island was a terrible blow to Bethe. I mean, it just... just went in the face of everything he'd been saying about nuclear energy. It's true that no one was injured in Three Mile Island but… and in the end, the safety measures worked reasonably well, but nonetheless it shouldn't have happened. And that it happened was a terrible, terrible blow to Bethe. One thing that he did was to produce and this is more… there's a German edition of my profile, the book with the profile and in that, he expanded a lot on what he said about Three Mile Island, but in my profile, there's things about Three Mile Island, also. The difficulty for me was that Shawn, who already hated nuclear energy, hated it even more.

Now what happened is that... the piece was scheduled to be published in January of whatever year it was and in three parts. It was a very long piece. Three parts is very long. It's a book. And two checkers had been assigned to it, an editor and two checkers, and we had worked very, very hard because there was a lot of things to be checked. A lot of technical things about energy and a lot of things that were… we worked very, very hard. And I had given up my Christmas vacation for this. I was going to go away and I had said this is more important than my vacation so I'm just going to dedicate myself to this. And it was on the schedule for January. And I came into The New Yorker office one day and you could see the schedules and my thing wasn't there. It was gone. So I asked the checkers, you know, 'When is it rescheduled?' They said, 'Well, it isn't rescheduled'. I went into Shawn's office and I had a tantrum.

All the years I worked for The New Yorker, I never complained about anything. I felt that… I accepted the fact that the new writers, which I was when I was a new writer, were treated like Inca princes. They had about a year in which they were given every comfort, every encouragement, everything. Then after the year was up, they were marched to the top of the pyramid and their hearts were cut out with an obsidian knife. And I knew this, and I'd seen it with other New Yorker writers. I knew it was going to happen to me, and it did because after a year or two, you became an older writer and the new writers came in and they got the space, the attention and whatever. And I never complained about this. I didn't. I never went in and said, you know, 'Why aren't you publishing my things?' But this was too much and I had a tantrum. Shawn was not there, but I scared the wits out of his secretary and she went and said, when he came, you know, 'Mr Bernstein has gone berserk', or whatever she said. And Shawn put it back in the magazine. I saved the publication of that piece. And it was a very, very good piece. It was a very significant piece and he had no right to do that, absolutely no right to do that. Well, he had a right because, you know, he… it's his magazine, he could do what he wanted, but it was really an immoral act to have done that in that way, and I salvaged the piece.

I respected Bethe a lot. I liked him very much. I… he had some curious traits. He was very marked by German inflation because he lived through the post-First World War German inflation where you couldn't… you didn't know the price of anything. And then the mark was worth nothing and things were… it bothered him all his life. So he was very, very disturbed that he'd have to relive that again. So he was very, very careful with money. He was always hedging. He had a very elaborate stamp collection because he thought stamps would be a good hedge against inflation. And he would… if he came to New York on whatever business and he had breakfast in the hotel, he would give me the bill, which I would pay. I never said anything. It was very odd. I have, still saved, some of the bills. Two scrambled eggs and coffee and toast, $3.86. And fine, I paid him $3.86. You know, I understood what his feelings were.

In my Institute days, the bachelor used to eat at night in the cafeteria and Dirac, who was visiting, was temporarily a bachelor and he came down, he ate with us occasionally. And I was talking with John Sakurai, who had come from Cornell, who knew Bethe. I said to John, 'Bethe must earn a lot of money, he's a consultant and so on and so on. I hear he lives very modestly (I didn't know him at that point). What does he do with his money?' And Sakurai said, 'Well, I think he invests it'. I said, 'Well, if he invests it, he makes more money, so what does he do with it?' Dirac had been listening to this in complete silence and then he suddenly piped up and he said, 'Maybe he loses it'. And I'm sure that Dirac was not trying to be funny. Dirac was never trying to be funny. It's just he was pointing out to us another logical possibility and that's all he was doing. And he was right, maybe he does. Maybe that is a possibility, he might lose it. I'm sure he didn't but that was a possibility.

Rabi was another character. He was… I also was on his wavelength. I knew him, knew his wavelength very well. He was very tough and... but I knew where he lived, I knew where he was from, I understood him. I understood his Jewishness, I understood... his notions. When we would say, for example… I mean, when he was doing his studying and so on and finally had to do something, said, 'Then it was time to go tacheles'. I knew exactly what he meant. Tacheles means beans. Then it's time to put out the hard currency, the beans, go tacheles. I knew just what he meant, to go tacheles. So I… it was very easy to interview Rabi. He was… I have all the tapes, there are some wonderful things there. I gave some to his daughter. And... so he was… that was a very good experience.

I did Felix Rohatyn, the financier. That was not a very good experience. I mean, it was a job of work and I did it and he was nice enough. But then he tried to hustle the magazine to get it into print. I never had that experience before. I understood why he was an operator. He called me one Sunday and he said, 'If this is not published in a week, I'm giving it away to somebody'. Of course, he couldn't give it away to anything. I mean, I wrote the product he was giving away. And I called Shawn and I said, 'This is what Rohatyn has said', and Shawn put it in, so Rohatyn got what he wanted, but whatever respect I had for Rohatyn was over

I did a profile of Lewis Thomas. It wasn't very good. I didn't know Lewis Thomas. It was suggested that I do it, that we would have things to say to each other but he didn't have much time and I felt I just did this job of work. It was not a labour of love particularly, though I admired him. I didn't think that that was one of my better enterprises.
I did a lot of Talk of The Town, a lot of it on the theatre. A lot of book reviews. I looked up, on The New Yorker site, I have signed or unsigned, I think about 150 things that I wrote over the 35 years. So it was a great thing. It was a great activity for me.

I know Jonathan Miller and Jonathan is the greatest conversationalist I know. If you ever talk to him, you know, he becomes every person that he talks about. And he's marvellous. With Jonathan all you want to do is to keep him talking. You're not interested in… you're not really just having a conversation, you're just interested in just saying enough so he'll keep talking because it's so marvellous to hear him talk.

I'm a member of the New York Academy of Sciences, and Oliver's a member and we became quite good friends. He's got this mannerism, which he speaks rather hesitatingly and he has… there's a lot of sounds that come out before he… oh, ah, erm. So I asked Oliver… you know, he's a neurologist. And I said, 'Oliver, have you ever actually cured anybody of anything?' Because he tells these wonderful stories, you know, that's what he does. He's an anthropologist of neurologists, people have said. And he said, 'Oh, ah, well, I was in a restaurant once and a man was choking and I gave him a tracheotomy with a steak knife', he told me. So I asked Jonathan if that story was true and Jonathan said, 'Of course it's not true. If you talk to Oliver, ask him if the story is true. If he gave somebody in a restaurant a tracheotomy with a steak knife'. I have no idea.

Dyson was a hero of mine because I couldn't understand Feynman because I didn't understand the go of it. I mean, I knew about the pictures. I knew there were these pictures and I didn't know why it worked. It just drove me crazy. I just... I couldn't use it because I didn't have to use it and I just… and Schwinger I could understand, but Schwinger's calculus was so complicated. Oppenheimer once said of Schwinger when Schwinger does a calculation… he said, 'When most people do a calculation, they want to show how a problem is to be done. When Schwinger does a calculation, he wants to show that only he can do the problem'. And then there came Dyson and Dyson was like a revelation. You could understand what Schwinger did, you could understand Feynman, it was marvellous. Marvellous. I loved those papers. That Dyson did not get a Nobel Prize for this, I think is just… is an obscenity. I mean, the list of people… you know, Bockhoff didn't get a Nobel prize either but… crazy. So Dyson came to Harvard to give a series of lectures and they were all marvellous. Dyson is a wonderful lecturer, absolutely wonderful. And then my thesis advisor, Klein, wanted to talk to him about something and Dyson… we went to the office which Dyson had temporarily and Dyson was on a couch in the office. I think he was pretending to be asleep. And Klein kept talking without noticing the fact that Dyson was either… was paying no attention. He was sort of asleep. I mean, Dyson didn't want to hear. I thought that was interesting.

I heard later a story… actually, I'm pretty sure it's true. When he was at Cornell, Dyson had an officemate. I think his name was something like Huff or something. And this guy, who was at Brookhaven, told me this story. He said, 'Dyson would come into the office about eleven in the morning, he'd read the New York Times. He'd go to lunch, he'd scribble for about a half an hour and then take a nap and then leave'. And so this guy said, 'You know, he's a pleasant guy but I mean he's obviously... not going to get anywhere with what he's doing'. And keeping this up after a few months, these set of papers on quantum electrodynamics came out. This guy said....this guy left theoretical physics. There was no point.

At the Institute, he kept pretty much to himself. He… I think he ate with us occasionally but he didn't say very much and kept pretty much to himself, and there was no reason… I didn't have anything to say to him, except, you know, 'I admire you very much' and so on and so forth and whatever, but then I'd been to New York or somewhere and I came back, and Dyson and I were on the same train and we found ourselves in the same odd… we were stuck in the same station outside of Princeton. And somehow, whether we had a car or took a taxi, or… anyway, we went back to his house. And we had some drinks. And we talked a lot. Now it turned out that he was in the process of getting a divorce.
So he was living by himself in this house and he was a little bit, I think, a little bit less… well, he was more open to this. So we talked and after that, we became pretty good friends. And of course we never worked together. I… we did work on the Orion together but I mean, I… I have nothing… I mean, I couldn't contribute anything to anything Dyson was doing. He is so fast and so incredibly smart.

The puzzle for him is why is everybody else so slow. He... he can't understand that other people are slow. He's very nice about it but just strikes him as curious. Ted Taylor, who as you know is (inaudible) once told me that he thinks that Dyson never has failed to understand anything that he wanted to understand. And he's never forgotten it, it seems all to be there. Recently... I... we exchange emails quite a bit – I gave a lecture on my climbing and stuff in the Himalayas and Freeman introduced me. It was very nice of him to do. And then he said that the last scientific paper he wrote we'd collaborated that... which is true, it's a paper we worked on from General Tomek and so on. Then we all had dinner together, it was a very nice occasion. I think that's the last time I actually saw him, but we communicated a lot and... I wrote a letter about quantum mechanics, which I kind of described in an informal way, what I think the dilemmas are and how various people are dealing with. And at the end I gave what I call a devinette that had to do with the Planck time. The Planck time is a very time... in the very early universe is composed of all the natural constants. If you take the gravitational constant, Planck's constant... the speed of light, the charge on the electron – you can combine these things together and produce a unique time, which is called the Planck time because Planck invented these so called natural units. There's a puzzle, which is that it's not a time. It has the dimensions of a time but it's clearly not a time because it's made out of all these universal constants, which are... they're all constant under the (inaudible) transformation. In relativity, time transforms, if you look at your clock in a moving system it slows down. But these things are all constants, they don't transform. So I posed this as a devinette, the end, and said here's a devinette, here's the Planck time... these constants. So Dyson produced a marvellous little proof that it's a time you can't measure with a clock. Because to measure it would require a clock that's more massive than a black hole and it would just implode. The Planck time cannot be measured. Beautiful... beautiful thing and he had a dozen lines of proof. Wonderful, I couldn't do this if the Gestapo were here and put... put lighted matches under my fingernails. I couldn't do this... I can't... I'm not capable of doing this But I certainly can understand and I certain;y can admire it. Wonderful, just wonderful.

People who don’t know him, say he’s not a physicist, he’s a mathematician. That’s complete nonsense, he’s a superb physicist. He’s also a superb mathematician. He invented this reactor, a safe reactor, the TRIGA, which is used. And he has tremendous culture. He knows many languages and is very widely read in these languages. He’s a treasure, that fellow. He’s the only person that I know that I don’t begrudge the Templeton Prize to. That he got the million bucks from Templeton I think is just fine. The other people who got the million bucks like Polkinghorne and those people, they should give it back because they don’t deserve any money. Nor d'Espagnat and those people. I mean, they’re nice people but they don’t deserve any prizes. But Dyson, yes. He should get the million bucks. He also should have gotten the Nobel Prize. I thought that was very, very ridiculous, that he didn’t share it with those people.

As for science and religion, you have to… and there are all these people who… well, I think that Polkinghorne believes in God but I think about half the people who got that prize have no interest in God whatsoever but they managed to get a million bucks out of it. I mean, I heard Polkinghorne on the radio the other day and I thought, God almighty.

And [Freeman Dyson] leads a good life. He… there's no excess in his life and he walks every day and he's got a terrific family life. He's got tons of grandchildren and this relatively young wife who came to La Hoya as an au pair and he then married her. So he's got… you know, he's got all the markers. And I… as far as I know, he's got no physical problems that I'm aware of. I mean, he's… I'm not sure of his age. He's about five or six years older than I am so he's probably 86 or 87, I would think. But he's, you know, he's much tougher than he looks. He looks very thin. Well, he used to be. But he was quite physically strong.
But yes. I remember when we were at La Hoya, we once had dinner at a Hawaiian restaurant. He hated it. Just hated everything about it. Hated it. Liked nothing about it. Didn't like the food, didn't like the atmosphere, he didn't like anything about it.

Well, I subscribe to something Woody Allen said, that he doesn't want to be there when it happens. Other than that, it's… about death. I'm concerned that I will leave a mess because I live alone and there's a lot of disorder and somebody's going to have to straighten it out. I mean, it's… you know, it's the sort of disorder that can be straightened out in a couple of mornings with a moving van but somebody's going to have to do it. I suppose maybe my sister will do it, if she wants, or perhaps her friends. And when people look around, they'll find things that I won't be around to explain. I won't be around to explain the books.

If you look at my books, you won't understand. I mean, nobody will understand because there's no… there's a logic to it. Well, there's a logic but the only logic to it is me. I become interested in something and then I have a book. I was interested in the history of French. You'll find a history of French and you'll find a Tibetan dictionary. You'll find books of limericks. You know, you don't… you know, those shelves over there are… those are more logical. There's The Bomb and whatever. But there are all kinds of books on India, I got interested in Fanny Burney for a time and a lot of stuff on her. Doctor Johnson, I was interested in Doctor Johnson. Became interested in linguistics. A lot of books on linguistics. Books on the stock market.

I have an email friend called EO Thorpe. There's a guy you should interview, by the way, EO Thorpe. EO Thorpe lives in California. He was a physicist turned mathematician. Then he taught for a while in universities and, while he was getting his degree, was at the time when this blackjack thing I told you about in Los Alamos was invented. And a teacher of his told him about it. And he was going to Las Vegas or somewhere with his wife and his teacher gave him this and Thorpe became interested. And Thorpe invented card-counting. He was the inventor of card-counting. And he wrote a book, I think it was called Beat the Dealer. And there's a movie, 21, which is kind of based on this stuff. And then he got out of physics and ran money. And he's a money manager for… he used to run billions of dollars in university endowments. I've never met him but we email a lot. He's an extraordinarily interesting guy.

I got very interested in Black-Scholes. I had a lady friend once and she said, tonight we're having dinner with a friend of mine and she's bringing her boyfriend, whose name is Myron Scholes. I never heard of Myron Scholes. And she said, he's going to win the Nobel Prize. I said, 'Well, that's interesting. In what?' She said, 'Well, in economics. He's worked on derivatives'. I thought oh, this poor girl, derivatives is a thing in calculus. Newton invented the derivatives, this guy won't win a Nobel Prize for derivatives… no idea what he was talking about. He was a very pleasant guy and I never asked him anything about what he did at all. And we parted and I didn't see him again. And by God, he won the Nobel Prize in economics because he and Fischer Black and this guy I couldn't remember when we talked earlier, invented this equation where you can compute... the value of a derivative. It's a very strange thing. You want to value a stock option. Now what is a stock option? A stock option is an option to buy stock at some future price. How do you value something, which is going to be realised in the future? How do you do that? So what you have to have is some… what you're trying to do is you have to have some way of foretelling the future and then using it to retrodict the past. So it's quite peculiar. So this Scholes-Black equation is a way of evaluating the future behaviour of the stock market. And it works by using essentially the same way in which Brownian motion, which interested me. So it's a Brownian motion thing. The stock market moves sort of by random collisions and out of this you get this equation.

The thing is that what ageing does is it makes it harder and harder for you to stay fit. That's why it's a dirty trick. I try very hard but if I try too hard, I injure myself. So you have to show some wisdom about keeping fit. I mean, I try, I ride my bicycle in the summer, I try to walk in the winter and so on but, you know, ageing's out to get you and it will. I said to a doctor I go to, a cardiologist. I said, 'Ageing's a linear function of time', I said. He said, 'No it isn't. It's a discontinuous function of time. There are spurts. People go along and then they suddenly age. They stay at a plateau and they go along. So it's a dirty trick but they say it's better than the alternative.' I don't know, I haven't witnessed the alternative. Woody Allen said about the afterlife… they asked whether he believed in the afterlife and he said, 'Well, can you get a good steak there?' I thought that was a pretty good remark.
