jj.norwich

John Julius Norwich (1929-2018) was an English popular historian, travel writer and television personality. He was educated at Upper Canada College, Toronto, at Eton, at the University of Strasbourg and on the lower deck of the Royal Navy before taking a degree in French and Russian at New College, Oxford. He then spent twelve years in H.M. Foreign Service, with posts at the Embassies in Belgrade and Beirut and at the Disarmament Conference in Geneva. In 1964 he resigned to become a writer. He is the author of histories of Norman Sicily, the Republic of Venice, the Byzantine Empire and, most recently, 'The Popes: A History'. He also wrote on architecture, music and the history plays of Shakespeare, and presented some thirty historical documentaries on BBC Television.

Well, I was born by Caesarean section which is one reason why I'm called Julius and I'm told that when I was one or two days old in the nursing home and bawling my lungs out, that my mother said something about how maddening I was being or something, and the nurse said, 'Oh, poor old baby. He's only trying to please.' My mother always remembered that story and maintained that that's what I've been trying to do ever since. Well, I hope it is; I should like to please people.

Anyway, I had the happiest possible childhood thanks entirely... well, not thanks entirely but thanks very largely to having really the best mother I could ever have hoped for in the world. She was a wonderful mother. My parents had taken 10 years before they'd had me, they were married in 1919, I was born in '29. And my mother was given up by all the gynaecologists of London, said not a chance. Then suddenly, out I popped. So was an only child and had this enormous amount of love and attention from the very, very beginning.
My mother was a marvellous educator. From the age of about I should think literally three or four, I would scramble into her bed every morning, still warm from the body of my father and we'd start lessons. And we'd have lessons in history, which was all the stories of English history that you might imagine. Little Arthur's England was the book at the time that was read. I was taught to read with a wonderful book called Reading Without Tears. And Reading Without Tears, I think I'm going even to quote you a little extract from it.

Reading Without Tears which was published originally in 1861. And all the words are separated by hyphens to make it easier for the little minds to follow.
'What is the matter with that little boy? He has taken poison. He saw a cup of poison on the shelf. He said, 'This is seems sweet stuff', so he drank it. Why did he take it without leave? Can the doctor cure him? Will the poison destroy him? He must die. The poison has destroyed him.'
This is for little children of four.
'William climbed upstairs to the top of the house and went to the gunpowder closet. He filled the canister. Why did he not go downstairs quickly? It came into his foolish mind: I will go into the nursery and frighten my little brothers and sisters. It was his delight to frighten the children. How unkind. He found them alone without a nurse so he was able to play tricks. He throws a little gunpowder into the fire and what happens? The flames dart out and catch the powder in the canister. It is blown up with a loud noise. The children are thrown down. They are in flames. The windows are broken, the house is shaken. Mr Morley rushes upstairs. What a sight! All his children lying on the floor burning. The servants help to quench the flames. They gather for a cab to take the children to the hospital. The doctor says, 'The children are blind, they will soon die.' Makes you wonder about Victorian upbringing, doesn't it?

She taught me Reading Without Tears, with the aid of that book which did its stuff extremely well and I could read by the time I was four, I should think, easily. Thanks entirely to my mother, not thanks to me, just thanks to these sessions every morning. And we did arithmetic, and we did addition, subtraction and multiplication. We never did division because my mother, all her life, claims that she never understood the principle of it. So we didn't do that but we did the other three. And we did geography which meant really, as far as I could make out, memorising the capitals of all the great countries in the world and so that by the time I was four, I could tell you that Caracas was the capital of Venezuela. And people were furious when I... when I got to my kindergarten because I knew it all already.
And she was also wonderful, my mother, she didn't only educate me. I mean, she took me out on wonderful jaunts. She had a yellow, open Packard it was a Packard by the time I remember it – a car. And she always kept it open unless it was actually pouring with rain. And it was... we lived in Gower Street, Bloomsbury and when I first remember looking out the window, it was the only car that was parked in the whole of Bloomsbury, this large yellow car. And she used to take me out in it in the afternoons and we used to chase fire engines and... Oh, we had a most wonderful time. And when she took me to the zoo, she always managed to inveigle her way past the keepers into the sort of... the back rooms, you know, where I was draped with a python round my neck or something like that. It was most terrific fun. But always keeping up a sort of pressure.

I remember we had a lovely little house just outside Bognor on the South Coast. The garden went straight down onto the shingle. It was extremely uncomfortable. It was very pretty but a nightmare. I mean, you couldn't have lived in it in the winter, it had no central heating, jolly little running water but we loved it and I remember that, again, we used to go on great drives over the South Downs and she wouldn't... no question of keeping to the roads, we're going over the grass, over the downland. And I remember coming to a fence once with a row of posts and a sign saying, 'Trespassers will be prosecuted.' And my mother said, 'Just go and pull up that middle post and we'll go through.' And I suppose I must have been not more than about six thought that 'Trespassers will be prosecuted' meant that trespassers would be executed, and so I was deeply reluctant to pull out this thing, but it was cowardice on the one hand or facing my mother's scorn on the other. So I pulled the thing up and through we went. She was very careful making me to put it back afterwards. And that was the sort of thing that she did. And she was most enormous fun to be with.

The Miracle was a play, but it was more than a play. It was a huge spectacle mounted by the famous Austrian director, Max Reinhardt who was the biggest name in the world theatre in the 20s and 30s. And he decided to put on this production called The Miracle. It opened in New York, the Century Theater in New York was dark for 6 months while it was turned into a Gothic cathedral, and by the time the audience went in, I mean, they went in and they sort of sat in pews. The whole thing was extraordinarily done. Then the bell would ring for 10 minutes before each evening performance.
And the story... well, I should say that by this time my mother... she was famous for her beauty. She was immensely glamorous. She was, theoretically, the daughter of the Duke of Rutland. In fact, she wasn't but everybody thought she was so she was a duke's daughter which was all very grand. And in those days before the days of proper film stars or 'celebs', she was the nearest thing to a celeb you could get which was all the social columns of the magazines and all that. And as a result of this, she made two films for a man called J Stuart Blackton, who was quite big in the early days of the cinema, and who starred her in two silent films one of which, oddly enough, was in colour. Not very good colour, it was called Prizma Color. I've got a copy of it somewhere. And it was called... one of them was completely lost. It was called the Virgin Queen, she played Queen Elizabeth and that's sunk without trace. We have no copies. The other one was called The Glorious Adventure and that one I have got a copy of. It's really not very good, it's the most appalling kitsch. But anyway, there it was. She did it and her name was, after these two films, even better known, and I think it was one of these films that must have caught the eye of Dr Max Reinhardt who summoned her to the Prince's Palace in Salzburg where he lived. He lived on an enormous scale, Schloss Leopoldskron, and invited my mother there and she went in full trepidation with my father and sort of auditioned, was told the idea of the play and auditioned. And Reinhardt was very pleased and she heard him muttering she could perhaps also play the nun. She was being cast for the Virgin. I'll now tell you the story because the story is extremely moving.

The story is of a Gothic abbey which is actually a convent in the Middle Ages and there is this beautiful, beautiful young girl who's just come in and taken her vows and the monastery, or the convent rather, has this miraculous statue of the Virgin and Child which achieves extraordinary cures and there are piles of unused crutches and trusses and things all around the bottom, and pilgrims come from far and wide like Lourdes. But the life is a pretty good nightmare for this young girl and eventually she can't bear it anymore and one night, after all the nuns had gone to bed, she goes and prays to the miraculous statue of the Virgin and says, 'Dear Mother of God, I can't face this: 60 more years of these dreadful old hags. It's more than I can face. Please get me out of here', at which the Virgin slowly comes down from her niche, puts on the nun's habit and becomes the nun, leaving the nun... leaving the niche empty, but leaving the nun to go off into the great big wide world, which she does.
And it's a total, total disaster, it gives Reinhardt marvellous opportunity for great sort of orgiastic courts and all sorts of marvellous things. Anyway, the nun, she's betrayed. Everything gets... she goes from what only be described as bad to worse and after two years, despairing, ill, with a sick baby, completely disillusioned she drags herself back to the convent and rings the bell. And the door opened to her and all the nuns are there in a group and suddenly, as she comes in, one nun rises miraculously up to the middle of the group and comes down to her and takes off her habit and puts it on the nun and takes the nun's baby, which is now dead, and returns to the niche.
So, I mean, in the hands of a great producer, you can imagine it's quite something. There was no... there was no speech. The whole thing was done in mime and with wonderful music by the first Engelbert Humperdinck. And it was an enormous success. After it finished in New York, it toured all over America, going not to small theatres but to places like Madison Square Gardens and the places where they did rodeos and that sort of thing. And then they came back and then there was a pause and then a year later they went all over central Europe, Prague – because language, you see, had no... didn't matter – Prague, Budapest, Vienna and then they ended up in England where I saw a little bit of it. This is what I remember, this is my first memory.

And it was only a few years ago, when I was editing my father's diaries, that I discovered exactly when it was. It was in February 1933 and I was three years old, and I remember my nanny and Miss Wade, who was my mother's maid, was discussing it all before we went, saying we were going in a box. And I envisioned this enormous hat box, sort of cardboard and I couldn't think what we could see in that so I was very mystified. But I remember being led into this box and seeing – the thing had already started – seeing my mother, a statue with a green light on her and she had to hold this position for 45 minutes before she came to life – it was a tremendous strain, but she would do it night after night. And I... I panicked at the sight of my mother still and green. I had never seen her in either condition before and I remember shouting out, 'Is that real mummy?' And nanny shushing me down, 'Yes, darling, it is, so it's perfectly alright.' But I wasn't really happy until I got back to the dressing room in the interval and actually saw her and gave her a hug, then I was alright. I don't think I stayed for the whole of the play, it would have been too long.
But that was a very important part of my mother's life and it was indirectly an important part of mine because she made lots and lots of friends. This whole thing lasted 10 years on and off. And it wasn't just the theatre, you see. In those days, duke's daughters didn't do theatre so all her mother's contemporaries were frightfully shocked, with all this, you know – appearing on the stage, it wasn't the thing that nice girls did at all. And... but I don't know, somehow they got over that one and so my mother had the extraordinary experience, really, of, not... unlike any of her contemporaries and friends of having not only the experience of theatre, but experience of Austrian Jewish theatre which was something quite different again. And she had large numbers of Austrian Jewish friends who remained with her all her life and who were tremendous friends of ours too. And... I mean, one of them was actually my guardian when later, during the war, I was to go to America.

[Q] What an extraordinary upbringing...
Yes, I mean it was very extraordinary, and it was punctuated every Christmas by going to stay with my uncle at Belvoir Castle. And Belvoir Castle is one of the most spectacular, not one of the most beautiful by any means, but one of the most spectacular great country houses of England standing on a hill. It's not a real castle, it's a mock castle. It was built in the early 19th century, but it is hugely imposing. And there we went every year from the ages of, in my case, from the ages of nought to 10 every Christmas.
So... and that was a great excitement, too. I mean, I start remembering it, I suppose, when I was 5 or 6. But I remember very, very well two days, three days in advance, enormous quantities of packing in these huge, heavy suitcases, everything wrapped up separately in tissue paper, you know, and these enormous cabin trunks like you never see today which had to be manhandled down flights of staircases and loaded onto taxis and got taken somehow to King's Cross where, in those days, regiments of porters – it took about four of them to carry some of these trunks, you know, we were only going for 10 days, a week. And arriving at Grantham Station, which was gas-lit, in the dark and these two enormous Rolls-Royces lurking behind it into which all this luggage was loaded. And then, I think, in 20 minutes, half an hour of driving through the night. Oh, when you're 5, 6 years old that, in the country, is very exciting in itself; you see all the rabbits in the headlights and all that. And then suddenly this huge castle on its hill. And you go in and you would go down a little passage and there's the main central hall, which is called the gun room, bristling with arms and armaments and spears and blunderbusses sticking out all over it, and this enormous Christmas tree in the middle, 20 feet high, superbly decorated and lit with a couple of hundred real candles, and two or three footmen in livery with long poles with sponges on the end patrolling them and keeping an eye if any candle looks as if it's not doing quite well, snuffing it out. And that was the excitement and then going to bed with a blazing fire, no central heating in that part of the castle, it was bitterly cold. It had, I remember, in order... I mean it was sometimes 3 or 4 minutes' walk from your bedroom to the main living room, and at strategic places all over the castle it had black woollen cloaks hanging on pegs. And you sort of went out of your bedroom and you put on a cloak to walk to the dining room or wherever it was. And when you got there, you took off your cloak and hung it on another peg. And I think there was one man who did nothing but rearrange cloaks all day.
It's very, very... the whole of that life, it's so completely gone and vanished, but my uncle would invite all his friends, all his family, I mean, not his friends, his family and including elderly maiden aunts and bachelor uncles and God knows what, and lots of children because he had lots of siblings and they all had lots of children except me – I was the only only child. The others all had lots and lots of brothers and sisters and I was much the youngest of them all, but that didn't seem to matter. I suppose he... my uncle must have been feeding... because they all brought their ladies' maids and valets in those days, and the children brought their nannies and their governesses, possibly even their tutors. So I think my uncle must have been feeding, I don't know, 40 or 50 extra mouths for 10 days, because it went over New Year. It was quite a thing and it happened every year and that was the main punctuation of my life.

Then, when I was a very small child, I went to Miss Betty's kindergarten in the middle of Regent's Park from which I graduated in 1936 to Egerton House, number 20 Dorset Square, in the North-West corner of the square. The building's still there. And where I... it was perfectly ordinary; not, I think, particularly distinguished, but of its kind, of its day, a perfectly good little prep school. And I stayed there until the war broke out and then the whole school was evacuated en masse to join a boarding school in Northamptonshire, Westbury Manor, where we were to stay for the war. And that was rather exciting, I rather loved that because Egerton House had been a fairly poky little place and this at least had space and it even had a swimming pool, unheated of course, full of dead leaves but at least it was a swimming pool. And that is where I was when the war broke out, but I have to go back a little bit because... and tell you about the other things that my mother did for me.

When I was three, or perhaps just four, I don't know but very early, she started with French lessons. I had Mademoiselle Perrier-Gentil who came three times a week and gave me an hour of French. And at that age, if you start early enough, there's no problem. You just absorb it like you absorb your own language. As a result of this, there's never been a time when I haven't been fluent in French. I've always... Not necessarily bilingual but I've always been easy and fluent in it. But my mother, in order to make it better still and also I think rather more importantly, to start weaning me away from nanny, took me off to France for my seventh birthday. We went to Aix-les-Bains and nanny was left behind, she didn't like it at all, there was a bit of a row about that but anyway, it happened. And my mother took me off and she hired an 18-year-old French girl, who spoke no English at all, in order that I should speak French all day. So it was the three of us, the French girl, Simone, and me and my mum. And we went to Aix-les-Bains and my mum hired a car and every morning she drove herself to the cure, the bains of Aix-les-Bains and there was a lovely big lake with artificial beaches on it so that was just a lovely French holiday. And I used to enjoy them very much but I always... the first two or three anyway, I was always deeply relieved to get back to nanny because the bond with nanny was greater than the bond even with my mother. By this time I realised that life with my mother was a great deal more fun than life with nanny, but the bond was still there and clearly it was going to have to be broken, that's the tragedy of every nanny's life, but the breaking was very slow and gradual and painless in the end.

And we went twice to Aix-les-Bains and on the third year we went to Geneva, League of Nations. This was now 1938, so the war was getting pretty close. I think my mother was... I think she really chose it because I think she was having a bit of a fling with the Swiss minister, Carl Burckhardt who was a very remarkable, fascinating man. He's been in the... he'd governed Danzig at one moment and later, after the war, he found himself the Swiss minister in Paris where my mother was ambassadress, so that was quite a thing. But he was a great friend, he was sweet to me. I knew... I always knew him very, very, well. I think there may have been a little bit of itsy-bitsy going on there, I'm not quite sure, but I think there was.
Anyway, that was the last holiday before the war and there were two winter holidays skiing. The first one was in Italy in Sestriere, and that was in 1936, Christmas... I mean winter '36, '37. And I remember we went by train, of course, as one always did in those days. And I remember waking up in the High Alps and seeing snow-capped mountains like I'd never seen before and thick, thick snow everywhere. And a huge sign on Turin station saying, 'Mussolini ha sempre ragione' which means... And I said to my mother, 'What does that mean?' And she says it means Mussolini is always right. And I said, 'But you were telling me the other day about the Pope and how he was infallible, how he was always right. What happens if the Pope and Mussolini disagree?' And she said, 'Well it just shows you how idiotic the whole thing is' and left it at that. So those were my six foreign holidays that I had before the war in France and in Italy. And then came the war.

In the only summer that he was king, the summer of 1936, King Edward VIII had chartered a boat for a cruise on the Mediterranean. It was called the Nahlin, N-A-H-L-I-N, and to my parents' great surprise, because they knew him and Mrs Simpson, they'd already been an item for over a year, perhaps two years. But they weren't close friends, they were acquaintances more than friends, they saw each other at parties, but they didn't invite each other much. And they were very surprised to receive an invitation from the king to join them on a section of this cruise, the section when they were in Greece. But of course… naturally, they accepted. And it wasn't a tremendous success actually, my mother had a septic throat and had to stay in her cabin for a couple of days and there was nothing very much went on. But we subsequently of course we realised that the point of the whole thing was that my father, of all the cabinet ministers having got a fairly Casanova-like reputation himself, the king thought might be the most... of all the cabinet ministers the one most likely to sympathise with his position, which, of course, my father couldn't. I mean... it was perfectly impossible. The first time he ever saw Wallis at a lunch party, he wrote down in his diary, 'She's a perfectly nice woman but she's hard as nails and doesn't love him.' That was his very, very first reaction. And anyway, everybody knew a twice divorcee, American woman just couldn't be queen. Everybody believed this except the king who still thought she was Helen of Troy. It was the most extraordinary schoolboy crush that he had on her and he really couldn't think of anything else at all. And he thought she was the most beautiful woman in the world and we only had to see her and know her to see what a wonderful queen she'd be and all that. We thought she looked like an old boot and we couldn't really see the point at all. But anyway, that was the point of the Nahlin cruise and I remember everybody talking and I used to sing songs I'd picked up from my parents' gramophone records and I remember there was a wonderful Calypso I think it was, 'Love, love, love along that made King Edward leave the throne' and several other songs like that I remember from the time. So anyway, that was the abdication.

Now I think we do come onto the war and we were staying in our little house at Bognor and I remember one summer Sunday morning when my mother had gone into town, which she regularly did to buy lobsters and prawns and seafood from a whole bunch of fishermen who used to stand out on the beach with their morning catch so they were as fresh as anything could be. There was one called Billy Welfare who my mother always went to to buy lobsters and prawns. And she did this and then we were walking back and somebody I think tapped us on the arm and said, 'Listen to this' and there was a car with its radio on. Very few cars had radios in those days. It wasn't our car, it was another car. And we stood and it was Chamberlain talking saying this country's at war with Germany. And I remember my mother got into our car and started driving home and burst into tears and said, 'That's it, the world is never going to be the same again.' And of course she'd known the First World War behind her. I remember her telling me that by the end of 1916, every man she'd danced with was dead. It was unbelievable. And she saw this whole thing happening again, you know, and possibly this time I was going to be one of the casualties and anyway, it was... it put a terrible damper over our Sunday, I remember that.

There I went to this boarding school in Northamptonshire which was fine and uneventful, and then in the summer of 1940, when all the worst things were happening, when France was falling, when Dunkirk and all that, I was having a very bad attack of measles and was really semi-conscious, I think, only. But I gradually recovered as one does, and barely had recovered when my mother came down and took me out to lunch and said, 'You're going to America.' And I think she thought I was going to burst into tears and say, 'Please, mummy, I don't want to go to America, I want to stay with you.' Instead of which I was incredibly excited. I mean, America, New York, skyscrapers, Hollywood, cowboys, Indians, Errol Flynn! I mean, I couldn't wait to be off. And sure enough, three days, four days later, I was off with my nanny who'd never been abroad before. Suddenly having to take me to America was jolly brave of her. And we took the train to Holyhead and then we took the boat across the Irish Sea to Dublin. And then my mother happened to know the American ambassador in Dublin so they met us off the boat and gave me breakfast, and I rather wish they hadn't because there then followed a drive across the whole of Ireland, which in those days, the roads were terrible. It took a very long time and I was throwing up every half hour because I was appallingly car sick always. It was one of my big troubles.

This goes in around 1935, 1936 that I used to go and stay with my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, Duchess of Rutland, who was a superb pencil portraitist. She spent her whole day drawing people, drawing anybody she saw. She never moved without a whole bunch of orange HB pencils and a sketchbook and a crust of bread with which she always rubbed out. She didn't believe in rubbers, she only liked the crust of bread. And she must have drawn a couple of hundred of me. She'd do it all the time because she loved me and whenever she saw me, she was out there doing it, you know. Nowadays from time to time people write me and say, 'I may have a drawing of you by your grandmother, would you like it?' I say, 'No, thank you so much, I already have 357, I really don't need any more.' They never stopped.
But she tried... she had this very unfortunate idea that drawing was terribly easy once you knew how and that she could easily teach me to do it for myself. And I happened not to be able to draw a line on a piece of paper. I mean, I'm so ungifted; I can't draw anything at all. But I spent hours in bed with her learning... doing... she only did features. We did eyes and ears and noses and mouths and chins, and I got no better at all. It was tedious, it was appalling because I knew I was never going to get it but she always thought success was just round the corner.

We return to the war and to my voyage to America. We... we crossed Ireland, we got to Galway where out in the harbour there was this enormous American liner called the HS Washington with an enormous stars and stripes painted all over the hull, just one huge American flag so that all submarines should realise it was neutral. And on this we crossed the Atlantic. And I remember being slightly disappointed that all the places I was most looking forward to like the gym and the cinema and all that were all full of beds. They were just trying to get as many child evacuees out as they possibly could.

The reason my mother was so keen to get me out was that my father was number three on Hitler's blacklist after Churchill and Anthony Eden, and he... my mother had this sort of nightmare that when... that he would invade. Everybody knew that there would be an invasion – that I remember very well. The question was not, are they going to invade, it's when? Are they going to invade next week or are they going to invade the week after? You know, we were really on our toes waiting for this. And my mother had this theory that if they did come, that the first thing they would do is kidnap me and hold me as hostage for my father's good behaviour, and every time he did something he shouldn't have, they'd pull out another one of my toenails or something. And so she had... this became a fixation and so she had to get me out, so she got me out very, very quickly. And I went to Long Island where I lived with Mr and Mrs William S Paley. And Mr William S Paley was very, very big noise indeed. He was the founder president of Columbia Broadcasting, which I think by this time was the biggest broadcasting company. And he was enormously rich and had this wonderful house in Long Island with swimming pools, tennis courts, I mean whole works, you know. And there I lived for my next half-dozen school holidays.

School was Canada because my father was determined that I should go to Eton in a couple of years and the Canadian curriculum was much closer to the British curriculum than the American one was. So at the beginning of every term, I would take... The first time I did it with my nanny, after that I did it alone. I would take the night sleeper from Toronto... from New York to Toronto where I would be met and taken to Upper Canada College Prep School where I was educated. And I enjoyed Upper Canada College, really I think very much. One thing I liked about it in particular was that instead of playing football in the winter, we played ice hockey, which I infinitely preferred. I'd always hated football but ice hockey was terrific fun. And the education, looking back on it, I don't think it was all that good but I don't know, it's hard to judge at this stage. Only a couple of years ago I was in Canada and went back there and was given the real red carpet treatment. They looked after us and showed us around. The whole thing is so completely transformed now that there was absolutely nothing to be seen of the old Upper Canada College Prep School that I remembered at all.

In April 1942, I was summoned by the senior house master, Mr Chit Carson, who said, 'Pack up, you're going home.' And I said, 'What do you mean? The war's still on.' And he said, 'I don't know what I mean. As you say, the war's on, everything is secret. Nobody tells anybody anything. All I've been told is I've got to put you on the train to New York tonight. So go and get packing.' So I went and he put me on the train to New York and my guardian was... had been Max Reinhardt's secretary, Kaetchen Kommer, who was one of my mother's Central European dearest friends and was my official guardian all the time I was there, met me at the station and handed me a ticket to Norfolk, Virginia. And so I went to Norfolk, Virginia and there I was met, I seem to remember, by a young naval officer who took me on board the cruiser HMS Phoebe on which I was to return to England. And what had happened, of course I now see. The only way things did happen in the war when... I mean, everything had to be scrounged and fiddled because there was no other way of doing anything. But my father, because he'd been the First Lord of the Admiralty knew a lot of sailors and the First Lord of the Admiralty had a great perk of a yacht in those days in which he was meant to travel around the world inspecting all the fleets. I mean, we had a home fleet and an American fleet and a Far Eastern fleet and a South African fleet and all these things. It was a huge navy in those days. And he'd had this Admiralty yacht on which he'd actually never gone beyond the Mediterranean and the Baltic. But the captain was a man called Peter Friend who was also a great friend of his. And I think he just met him in London one day and Peter Friend had said, 'How is your little boy?' And my father said, 'Well, we're longing to bring him home, he's in Canada.' And Peter Friend said, 'I've got to bring a cruiser back to England from American in three weeks' time, I'll give him a lift.' So this is what happened.

I and one other boy found ourselves therefore on HMS Phoebe and we set sail across the Atlantic alone without a convoy. Looking back on it, it was pretty dangerous; there were U-boats all over the place. But I don't know, I was too unimaginative to see that. It was great fun. We had... every day we had gunnery practice, we had depth charge practice and we had torpedo practice and we had every other sort of practice you could think of. We were constantly being reminded of the dangers we were running. But somehow I think we seemed to know vaguely where the U-boats were and we did a lot of zigzagging. We took 16 days to cross the Atlantic instead of the usual five but we got there in the end. We got to Plymouth and I took the train along the south coast to Bognor. I was by this time 12. And there were my parents waiting to meet me on Bognor platform.

And they'd had an extremely alarming first half of the war themselves because my father had started... well, he'd resigned in a protest against Munich so he was out in the wilds until Churchill had got in in May 1940, and Churchill made him Minister of Information which was a new job that he'd just invented. My father was not the man for the job and was the first to say so. He was... for the beginning it was out of sympathy for him but it was all about censorship and things like that which he hated. And also dealing with the press and he didn't really have the common touch with the... certainly with the gutter press. And he wasn't happy doing it and I don't think he did it very well. Brendan Bracken, who succeeded him, did it infinitely better because he was a journalist born and bred. So my father, then in the summer of 1941 – by this time I'd been in America a year – was given the job of going and reporting, going to the Far East, based Singapore, travelling all over the Far East and reporting on the state of the British defences because we were beginning to get a little bit worried about Japan. And so he and my mother flew out to Singapore, and they took the westward route which enabled them to stop and see me for a day or two in America and then they went on to Hawaii and across the Pacific. And it was a completely useless trip as marvellously described by my mother in the letters which she wrote to me which I published a few years ago – it's called Darling Monster – and there are wonderful accounts of all that they did. My mother refused to leave my father ever, she was always at his side. The civil service... the officials hated it, they said, 'We really can't have ladies here', but it was no good. Once my mother had set her mind on it, there she was. And always at my father's side. They flew all over the Far East which was no fun in 1941 on those very, very slow planes and no proper schedules and no heating in the aeroplanes, no light in the aeroplanes, you couldn't even read half the time. It was pretty grim and extremely uncomfortable and, as it turned out, totally useless because by the time my father was half-way through the job, the Japs were in. He only arrived in Singapore in September, the Japs were there in January so I shouldn't think his report was ever read. It was sent to London but I shouldn't think they ever bothered to read it because, as I say, it was so completely out of date by then.

And after that my father had a year or two as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster which was one of those ministerial jobs which mean whatever you want it to mean. He was actually in charge of MI5 and MI6 and all that thing. Until 1st January 1944 when Winston made him his official representative to General de Gaulle in Algiers on the understanding... this is already '44, we knew we were winning, it was only a matter of months before Paris was liberated, we knew that. And he got this job to go to Algiers to General de Gaulle on the understanding that when Paris was liberated, he would be the first post-war ambassador in Paris. So my parents spend about eight months in Algiers and then they went on to Paris afterwards. Paris was liberated at the end of August, by mid-September they were there staying first of all in the Hotel Bristol, because the embassy was absolutely full of the belongings of all the English families who'd left everything there when they'd got out in 1940 and the Germans had respected the diplomatic immunity of the British embassy. They'd been very conscientious about that. So the embassy was absolutely full of people's tennis racquets and, you know, everything they'd... All their belongings they'd left there and it was a long time, over two or three weeks while all this was cleared out and it was made ready for occupation during which time they stayed at the Bristol across the road. And on the first night in the Bristol, came down with Mr and Mrs PG Wodehouse. And that was a bit of a problem too because the Wodehouses spent the entire war in Berlin in the Adlon broadcasting to the Americans saying what nice chaps the Germans really were and so my father wrote in the next day and said, 'Look, I'm sorry, I cannot spend the next three or four weeks going up and down in the lift with the Wodehouses, I really can't. So the Wodehouses were shifted to somewhere else. I don't know who paid for them, they seemed to be enormously rich.

There's a very nice story of the Wodehouses in 1940. I mean, they were so completely unworldly. He lived in this mad world of his own in the 1920s and they had no idea what was going on in the great big world outside. They were the only British people in 1940 who remained stayed put on the north coast of Normandy in their little house perfectly happy but not realising the world was disintegrating around them. And they went for their little afternoon walk one afternoon and as Wodehouse described it later, his wife said, 'Don't look now but I think the German army is following us', which it was. And they were interned but in those days the Germans didn't know who PG Wodehouse was. They didn't realise, I mean they had really quite a good prize with him. They thought he was just another dotty old Englishman. So they sent him to a camp in Upper Silesia and he sent his wife a postcard which I've seen saying, 'If this is Upper Silesia, I don't like to think what Lower Silesia is like.'

Anyway there my parents were ensconced in the embassy which is the grandest and the most beautiful house in the whole of Paris and certainly the most magnificent embassy of any embassy in the world. I mean, it was owned by Napoleon's sister Pauline. It was bought from her by the Duke of Wellington when he was made ambassador himself just after Waterloo and it was a palace by any standards. And I got there in time for Christmas, my Christmas holidays. Very excited because the war was still on so how did a schoolboy get from London to Paris when the war was still on? I'll tell you how a schoolboy got from London to Paris when the war was still on. His father came over and he went back with a squadron of Spitfires under escort. That was the way things happened. And it was three days and three nights of my father and me sharing a twin bedded room in the Dorchester until the weather was good enough for the RAF to fly us to Paris. Three days before Christmas, you know. And during those three days, we were told never to leave the hotel for more than a couple of hours because at any moment there might be a little window in the cloud or something like that.

I remember we did two things while we were there during those three days. We went to see the Laurence Olivier Henry V, which had just come on, and my father took me to lunch at 10 Downing Street. And that was wonderful because there was Winston Churchill; I had met him several times before as a small child. He was a great friend of my parents but I hadn't seen him for a long time and now there he was at number 10 wearing his siren suit, which were these dungarees that he'd designed himself made of velvet I need hardly tell you. And looking – it was like my mother said – he always looked exactly like the good little pig that had built his house of bricks.
And I remember I put my foot in it over lunch because this was the time of the flying bombs, the V1s and the V2s and the Prime Minister turned to me and said, 'And I trust your college is doing... is supporting the new bombing raids.' And I said, 'Well, fortunately sir, it's not. It's wonderful because we've all been allowed off morning chapel. They don't want too many people gathered in one place, so morning chapel is out for a little bit. So we're terribly lucky.' 'I am very sorry to hear that you have allowed German involvement to have interfered with your daily schedule. It's very important that boys should go to their regular daily worship. I think you should protest and demand the headmaster that morning chapel should be instantly reinstated.' So I obviously sort of... my father leapt to the rescue and there it was. It was alright in the end. He tipped me £2 which was the largest tip I think I've ever been given by anybody. Normally you were lucky if you got one.

And then the next day we flew off to Paris and my mother, who was by this time absolutely determined that she was not going to see either of us ever again, waiting at Le Bourget to meet us and to drive us back into this very, very, very sad, grey, icy-cold Paris. That winter of 1944-1945 was one of the coldest winters Paris has ever had, and hardly anybody had any heating except, of course, the British embassy it was boiling and also had vast, I mean, innumerable amounts of gin and whiskey. So my mother had open house every single night. Every night they were at the embassy for three years, it was open house from 6 to 8 and all the great and famous would come in, not having seen gin and whiskey for five years and whooping it up like billy-o. All of the great ones from Jean Cocteau down really, you know... and soon, of course, joined by Louise de Vilmorin who became the last... not quite the last but perhaps one of the greatest, most important of my father's great mistresses, who actually moved into the embassy and had a room on the top floor and she was there, I means she was sort of semi-resident. My mother didn't mind a bit. God knows what the staff used to mutter about, I don't know. Nobody ever said anything to me, obviously, but the staff must have been deeply shocked, I think. But it's not something my father worried about and not the sort of thing that my mother worried about. That was the great thing: my mother loved Louise every bit as much as my father loved Louise. And I remember saying to her one day long, long afterwards, 'Did you never mind all my papa's mistresses?' And she said, 'Darling, why should I mind them? They made him happy and I always knew they were the flowers, I was the tree.' And she didn't mind what little things went on in the bottom of the trunk. She was it and she always knew it. And my father, in his diaries, when he's writing about these ladies always says 'Of course, she's not a patch on Diana', or, 'If I had to choose between her and Diana, it would be like choosing the night and the day.' And my mother knew that. I mean, there was one moment when she and I and Louise, the three of us, went on a 10-day holiday to the South-West leaving my father working in Paris. It was just the three of us and Louise was wonderful company, never stopped talking or singing. She sang beautifully to the guitar, taught me hundreds of songs. And anyway, she was a great asset to the whole embassy thing, as it turned out.

Well, the embassy was a tremendous success from my parents' point of view. I mean... my father did it beautifully and my mother did it beautifully and I think they both enjoyed it enormously. As did I because I went over every holiday and travelled a lot all over France with them. And if I have a regret, it is that I was there really between the ages of 15 and 18, just a little bit too young. If I'd been there just a little bit later, let's say 18 to 21, I would have known what Jean Cocteau was all about, I would have understood the whole thing much better. But anyway, as it was I learned a lot obviously and met everybody, really, who counted in France in that time. And fortunately as I said, I was always easy and fluent in French, not bilingual but fluent and so language at least wasn't a problem.

Obviously I didn't see as much of my father as I did of my mother. I mean, he was busy, he went off to the office early in the morning and I saw him weekends probably or at least summer weekends when we all went to Bognor and in the evenings he would... he would always come up and say goodnight to me. I would be in bed about to go to sleep and he'd be going out to dinner or something like that and he'd kiss me goodnight. And I seem to remember three nights out of four white tie and tails. I remember the feel of the stiff, white collar on the side of my neck because in those days, you wore white tie and tails if you went out to the theatre. Again, the world is so different.
And from time to time we used to have reading aloud. My parents were tremendous readers aloud to each other and to me and we had a lot of that in the evenings. Particularly, I suppose... Perhaps that was a little bit later. My mother used to read to me often children's books. My father, by the time I got to like grown-up books, we did... we read a lot of Dickens. He adored 19th century novels: Rider Haggard, that sort of... We... He hated music, so that was a thing. I loved it and he was completely tone deaf so that was one thing we couldn't share which was perhaps that. But he loved poetry, he loved reciting. Again, I mean, reading aloud – that was only part of it, that was also reciting poetry and I was taught to learn poetry by heart from a very, very early age both... by... really by both my parents. Both my mother and my father could spout poetry for hours by heart and we used to do that very often, when we were driving long distances in our car, we would all recite our poems. And my mother made a point of making me recite whenever she had a lunch party. At the end of lunch I would go and recite poetry, I mean, only for I don't know what – five minutes, six minutes, something like that to these unfortunate guests who would find themselves forced to listen to this horrible child spouting forth. They were usually funny poems. They were poems by Hilaire, Belloc and people like that.

Belloc was a great friend of my parents, I remember him very, very well. He always wore a black suit, black wing-collar in memory of his wife who I think died 40 years before, but he was always in mourning for her after that. And... but tremendous fun. And I seem to remember he wore a cloak which was incredibly heavy when I helped him off with it, which I was trained to do, because it had... it was full of pockets and every pocket had a different flask. There was a flask of brandy, a flask of whiskey, a flask of port, a flask of everything. He was the walking wine cellar. He used to come... And he used to live not terribly far away from us at Horsham and he used to drive over in his battered little car and come to lunch and at the end of lunch, nearly always, he would start singing old French drinking songs in his old cracked voice of his and occasionally his own stuff, 'Do you remember an Inn, Miranda? Do you remember an Inn?' The French rolled 'r' always. And I adored him, he was wonderful fun.

This was at Bognor. This little house on the sea coast. It was... it had been, I think, a sort of coastguard house. It was built about 1820, I should think. It had belonged to my grandmother and she had given it to my mother. It was very pretty and had about three acres of ground, I think, probably not more. Very, very uncomfortable. No central heating, one moderately nice bathroom at the far end of the house from the best bedroom. But we loved it and you just walked down out of the garden and onto the beach – that was the great thing about it. Didn’t even have to cross a road. So one swam all the time and my parents always in the summer and they used to have lots of people down for weekends.
In those days, people were much less fussy about their creature comforts than they are now. It’s so strange. They would... they would have come frequently with a valet or a lady’s maid. On the other hand, they never seemed to mind there being only three inches of tepid water in one bath which they would have to queue. The things I did mind... I mean, I’ve never wanted a valet one little bit, but I do quite like an en suite bathroom. They never got anything like that. It was far more uncomfortable for them. I mean, just to have your cuff-links put in your evening clothes seems to me to be frankly unnecessary, but a good bathroom does help. Anyway, people used to come.

I do remember one telegram that came saying, 'Thanks so much for your invitation. Would love to accept as long as don't have room at top of stairs.' I remember the room at the top of the stairs, I couldn't see his point more. It was this sort of half of a wagon-lit, there was hardly room to stand up in it. But anyway we loved this house and so indeed did all our friends because they all used to come before the war.
[Q] Could you say a bit more about the other people who came? Who they were?
Well, the people who came, the ones I remember I think I've already went through – the Churchills used to come from time to time, not very often. They weren't really regulars. Rex Whistler the painter was a regular; I have a lovely picture of the house painted by him. Maurice Baring, the writer who was my godfather, but he sadly fell victim to Parkinson's rather badly when I was eight or nine so after that we didn't see so much of him.
There were a lot of writers, AW Mason who wrote The Four Feathers. It was one of the most... they made it into a film four times. Arnold Bennett used to come. I don't really... can't really put a face to him. Otherwise, cousins, members of the family principally and politicians. Brendan Bracken was there very often and I think of the main politician, Euan Wallace who was an MP and I think he'd also been a minister at some stage. He was married to Barbie Wallace who was the daughter of Lutyens, the architect. They used to come a lot.
I can't remember all of them. There were several cousins.

[Q] There was Iris Tree...
Iris Tree of course but Iris was very seldom there. Iris was my mother's greatest and oldest friend and if she'd been in London, in England, she'd be there all the time but Iris had gone off I think at that time with Krishnamurti, you remember who… thought he was God and he turned out not to be. And he had a sort of centre, an ashram in the Ojai Valley in California, and Iris was there a lot of the time. She was a rolling stone and I got to know her really well only after the war when she went to live in Rome. I used to see quite a lot of her there. But Iris had been wonderful. Iris, she was a real eccentric. She was the daughter of Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree, the great actor and had started as an actress herself and had been involved with my mother in The Miracle at a very early stage.
But then, I remember she and my mother in the late 1920s were both desperate to have a child and my mother just went round to all the doctors, did what she could. Iris, typically, went and lay prone on the erect penis of the Cerne Abbas Giant, that huge white figure, 4th century figure carved into a hillside in Dorset at Cern Abbas. Iris went and lay on that for a night. It worked. Her child, her son is 6'7" and he is now a psychiatrist in Stockholm. Quite odd.

[Q] Evelyn Waugh – do you remember…
Evelyn Waugh? He was there quite a lot, yes. Evelyn Waugh, I think he was in love with my mother, as so many people were. He would never have done anything about it, he was much too Catholic and much too uxorious, but he liked this sort of flirtation, and my mother was always rather frightened of him – he was rather frightening. My father was always in two minds about him; he didn't mind him fancying my mother a bit, but Evelyn was argumentative and loved rowing. My father actually had loved a good political row too, but they used to almost come to blows, those two together. I remember an evening during the war, 1942 I suppose it must have been or 1943, when Evelyn came for the weekend without his wife. He never brought his wife, he was always alone. He lived very much a bachelor existence despite eight children. And one evening he was there and he said, 'I'd rather the Germans won this war than we won it on the backs of the Americans.' That did it. My father went absolute puce in the face which is a thing he did from time to time. A great vein would stand out in his forehead and he would quiver and his whole face would shake like a jelly with rage. And this was something that he enjoyed very, very much I have no doubt, but he couldn't do it very often because there were very few people who he could do it to. Evelyn was one. So there it was, it was a sort of love-hate relationship. It was a bit odd. But all his life Evelyn came and stayed regular weekends. Every time he came to France he stayed with us and... but he was an uncertain guest at the best of times.

Servants in those days were a) necessary because there were no labour-saving devices at all, and b) they were a dime-a-dozen, I mean they were... £20, £30 a year is what a housemaid cost in those days. My parents married on £1100 a year and they had a staff of four, increased to five when I was born. They had a cook, my father had a valet, my mother had a maid and there was a housemaid or perhaps two housemaids. And that was normal. I say, there was no labour-saving devices, no nice easy vacuum cleaners and that sort of thing. It was a major battle in the kitchen, of course, it was far more complicated on a huge, great Aga stove. It wasn't even an Aga, but it was an enormous, great stove that looked like an Aga but it wasn't nearly as good as an Aga.
When I was a small boy living in Gower Street, I don't think we had a refrigerator at all. We had a larder where things were covered with wire netting to keep the flies off, but that was the only cool place we had. We had a very primitive refrigerator at Bognor which worked on gas. It was brown and worked on gas. But we did have ice in our drinks at Bognor, I remember that; I don't know if we ever did much in London in Gower Street.

But then we left Gower Street when I was seven. I remember it quite well, it was just an ordinary little terraced house like there are still. Ours is gone but there are still others, lots of others just like it in Gower Street. It was on the east side of the street. And when my parents bought it, they just bought a regular house. But when money started coming in, which it did from The Miracle – my mother made a lot of money on The Miracle – and they were able to buy the first floor of the next-door house which was divided into flats and eventually they bought the fourth... the first floor of the next door one. So they had a piano nobile. They had a huge first floor which was actually three... the first floor of three different houses, but on all the other floors, it was just one.
And the nursery floor where I and my nanny lived was immediately above. They had their bedroom on that grand ground floor, drawing-room, bedroom, and my father’s study, three great big lovely rooms one after another. And then my nanny and I were on the one above and then Miss Wade, my mother’s maid and the cook and the housemaid, probably sharing, were at the top. They had no bathroom. We had a bathroom of a kind, nanny and I. It had a bath, a sort of kitchen sink and a loo; it was pretty primitive, but it was alright. And my parents had a bathroom each by the end.

The drawing room my mother got frescoed by Rex Whistler and it was absolutely lovely. I remember there was a huge, great niche, a false, trompe l’œil niche, it was an absolutely flat wall in fact but it looked exactly like a deep niche with an enormous urn, very carved, rather baroque sort of urn. I suppose it must have been about four feet high, all painted. And at some stage, obviously, the urn had been broken. There was a little crack running down it with a couple of rivets and a fly... a big, black fly on the front which the maid tried to sweep off every morning, but it would always remain there.

And the other thing I remember is one night I'd just gone to bed and my mother came up and said, 'Wake up, put on your dressing gown. Come down because Chaliapin is going to sing in the garden.' The great Russian bass, Feodor Chaliapin who was also a great friend of my mother's and an admirer. Anyway, Chaliapin came down to sing and he suddenly said, 'I think I will sing' and telephoned his friend with a balalaika who came round and they sang in the garden. It was a hot summer night and he sang in the garden. And I remember looking up and every surrounding window had people looking out of it, but nobody said, 'For God's sake shut up, some people want to get some sleep.' They realised they got something... Chaliapin was something so special and they were applauding. They didn't want it to stop. I remember that very, very well.
Chaliapin was the sort of figure in my very, very early childhood... I think he must have died when I was about seven or something so I don't really... I remember this very, very big tall man with a great ruff of, as I remember, very, very white hair. And he loved my mother and he thought that the best way to my mother's heart was to me. He therefore gave me a large number of presents including a large woolly white dog on wheels which I called... we called Feodor after him, and also a large number of his gramophone records and I had a wind-up thing for 78 records. And we played, endlessly. I remember by the time I was five I could do the Death of Boris Godunov by heart.

Chaliapin was an unbridled force of nature and he'd fallen in love with my mother, and he went when she was doing The Miracle in London, he went to see it on the matinee performance. He'd seen it a hundred times before, I think, but he went again because he loved it. And he came... burst into her dressing room the moment it was over and my mother was sitting at her make-up table rubbing cold cream all over her face and getting the make-up off and all that. And Chaliapin in his excitement seized her hand and in order to show her the state of his immense excitement, clamped it to his groin. And my mother said, 'Feodor, what are you doing? My dresser's here, my father's arriving in a minute, everybody's going to arrive! Take it away.' So he took it away. So then several people did arrive and she saw, to her horror, there was a huge sort of white hand, of the prophet... the Hand of Fatima all over the front of Chaliapin's trousers made of white cold cream or vanishing cream or something like that. She said it was one of the most embarrassing moments of her life.

When I was seven, at the end of '36, we left Gower Street because my father had been, to his great surprise, given the job of First Lord of the Admiralty which carried Admiralty House with it, that wonderful building on the top of Whitehall on the left, and that was where the First Lord of the Admiralty lived. So we moved there and my mother went all nautical typically and, of course, Rex Whistler designed her a wonderful bed with a crown of dolphins over the top and the whole thing which Rex had a lovely time doing. And there was then this period in the... when we lived in the Admiralty and they went on these cruises which I've mentioned before.
And then my father resigned from the government as a protest at what Chamberlain was doing at Munich, giving Hitler everything he wanted, total appeasement. And my father said at first he thought that it would be a question of peace with dishonour, then he saw an alternative of war with honour but now, after what Chamberlain did, it was war with dishonour. It was too much, that he couldn't take. He left. He was the only member of the cabinet actually to resign but he did so. He always called it his finest hour.
And he was deluged with mail, most of it fan mail, some of it calling him a warmonger and that sort of thing. But I remember helping with the mail. I was, by this time, quite good at forging my father's signature and I forged it on an awful lot of letters saying, 'Thank you so much for your sympathy and support.'
And anyway, then we had to leave... when he resigned of course we had to leave the Admiralty in a hurry – make way for Winston Churchill.
[Q] That was an extraordinary brave thing to do.
It was, it was a brave thing to do. It was the only thing he did and he loved that job more than any job he'd ever had. To give the whole thing up, it was very brave, but there it was. He did feel very, very strongly that Chamberlain was selling us down the river.
And so we left and we didn't go back to Gower Street; I suppose Gower Street must have been sold. And my grandmother had left my mother her house in Chapel Street, SW1 so we went and lived there. And that was lovely because it had a huge library running down the one side of the back garden so for the first time my father, who had accumulated vast numbers of books all his life, most of which were always in packing cases because he never had enough place to put them, at last had a great big library and he had them all together for the first time. So that was lovely for him so made some compensation for the loss of his job. But of course, he was out in the wilderness until Winston Churchill took over in May, 1940.

And then that was in, I suppose in April or May and I went to Eton in September. And during that summer, I crammed – or the first half of the summer anyway – I crammed for the Common Entrance for about two months. I used to go every day carrying my little gas mask on the bus to Chichester where there was a man called Mr May in the... who lived in the close of Chichester Cathedral who brushed me up on all the subjects necessary and who was so good on geometry that he really got me excited about it, I remember. You know, I've often thought I might, even now in my old age, try and take it up again. I just love the cool classical, logical perfection of it. It was wonderful. And the only thing Mr May couldn't teach me was Latin verses which, believe it or not, was a requirement for 11-year-olds going to Eton, the ability to write Latin verse. That was instilled into me by Mr May's next-door neighbour, the Reverend Mr Hazelhurst, who at least told me what it was all about. I understood at least what I was being asked to do.
Anyway, I got through Common Entrance without any difficulty. That was all right. I took Upper Fourth which wasn't the best. The best was taking a Remove but Upper Fourth was better than Middle Fourth or Lower Fourth or Third Form which was just terrible. So I was B grade and I was pretty terrified, as everybody is going off to a new school, particularly if you have no close friends going with you at the same time, which I didn't. And I remember going down to Eton and meeting my housemaster and we had a little problem with my housemaster because he looked exactly like Neville Chamberlain. My father actually couldn't look him in the face at all. The resemblance was astonishing. But anyway, he was a perfectly nice man, a mathematician called Jack Herbert who built the floating Mulberry harbours in the war, he invented those. And I remember first of all, more than anything else, the sheer discomfort. The cold. Eton does have one tremendous advantage which is every boy has his own room. It may be the size of a wagon-lit, but even from the very beginning, there were no dormitories. You always got a tiny room to yourself which gets bigger as you go up the school; you end up in quite nice ones.

I'm now reminded of another story, in parentheses. My godmother, Margot Asquith, who had been married to the Prime Minister in the First World War, and was my godmother – she must have died, I don't know, around when I was about 10 or something. She was a huge, old, magnificent character with a great beaky nose and this sort of thing. And she had a son called Anthony, who was always known as Puffin, and he became a very successful film director, Anthony Asquith. He was famous as a film director in the '40s and '50s, but he was always called Puffin. And my father met Margot in the street clearly in a terrible state and he said, 'Margot, what's wrong?' And she said, 'I've just taken Puffin to his new school. Do you know, they've put 11 other boys into Puffin's room!' So that was what normally happened but, as I say, at Eton you've got a room to yourself.
But it was extremely cold. We had no central heating, winter was coming on and we had a tiny little fireplace, I think about half the size of the one I'm looking at now. It must have been about nine inches across, I mean, tiny! And in that, we were allowed a coal fire every other night, the theory being that every other night you went in with your next door neighbour, but of course the rooms were so small and there was only one chair and your next door neighbour really hadn't got any room for you. But anyway, that was what it was and the cold was intense. I remember my old friend Martin Jacob who is now my oldest friend today, I see him all the time, actually coming down looking like something from Ancient Egypt with hands like that, both arms in slings from chilblains. And God, it was cold. The Thames Valley in winter is a killer.

School started at 07:30 in the morning. We had a 50-minute period before breakfast and your schoolroom might be anywhere from five or six minutes away, so you were called at 07:00 by the... each house had about three maids chosen for their appalling hideousness in order to constitute no conceivable temptation to any of the boys. Any of the three of them would have put you off sex for life. And they went to call you at 07:00, then one usually stayed in bed until 25 minutes past and then somehow managed to get dressed and run to one’s classroom by about 07:30. And there were coffee and buns laid out downstairs, but nobody ever had time to have one. And then we came back for breakfast and then we had a short period before morning chapel, which Winston Churchill was so worried at the cancellation of, and then we went into our 50-minute lessons which succeeded each other.
Tuesdays and Thursdays and Saturdays were half-holidays, we didn’t have work in the afternoons then, but we had games which I... which I dreaded, I absolutely hated. Eton had its own special sort of football called the field game which I was absolutely hopeless at and the only goals I ever scored were those against my own side. And I used to dread that. And the cold, of course! Going for... walking for 10 minutes to the playing field and then taking off everything but your shirt... oh dear, I hated it so.

Latin and Greek... we were three or four hours a day we spent on Latin and Greek, much too much looking back on it. We were taught mathematics rather well, I think, and there were science labs although I’m not a scientist, I don’t know how good the scientific tuition was but we vaguely... we did simple chemical experiments and we made bangs and smells and things. And music was very, very underestimated, I thought. That was one of my principle complaints if I had to go back on it all now. To think that… if we had music lessons – I had piano lessons, I’d always had piano lessons – and if you had piano lessons, you got half an hour a week which was really nothing and absolutely no time to practise. And playing the piano or playing any instrument is all practice. You need very, very, little tuition. After that you’re really teaching yourself by practising. And they work you very, very hard at Eton. The only pianos were in the music schools which were quite a long way away – not very good little uprights – and there was just no time to go and practise so nobody ever did. And the result is that I don’t think anybody ever learned an instrument well at Eton unless they were exceptionally gifted in which case, perhaps, their gift was noticed and they were given special treatment. That never happened to me. There was a thing called the Musical Society but that was largely choral. And no theatre at all, no swimming pool. We swam in a little tributary or estuary of the Thames called Cuckoo Weir which was pretty nasty, pretty murky, dysentery I should think in every drop.

I'd say the whole thing, really, I didn't feel it had got on much in the last 100 years. It was still very much the same sort of place, I felt, as it would have been in 1840. There were regular beatings by the Captain of the house with a cane. The first time, my first half – 'half' is what we used to call terms – and my first half, there was a beating probably four or five nights a week. Almost every night after prayers there was a beating by the captain of the house who I now realise was a sadist. He subsequently became very distinguished in the fine art business, but he was a sadist because when he left at the end of my first half – everybody hated him, he was very, very unpopular among his contemporaries as well as among all the young who he'd beat to a jelly – but after he'd gone, we perhaps had one beating a term, one beating a half. And it all sort of went down to normal and it wasn't anything like so bad. But this was a reign of terror but as I had nothing to compare it with... I was beaten twice myself, once for failing to put my air-raid clothes... to put my air-raid clothes on a hook outside the door and once for playing football 'insufficiently keenly'. Those were my two faults for which I was swiped.
But anyway, I wasn't mad about Eton. It did pay enormous attention to your sports prowess, which in my case was nil. There were about 40 different sort of caps you could get for various sporting abilities. I never got any. I wore what was called a skug cap which means you had no colours at all all my days. And I never got to the sixth form, I was a pretty good flop. Considered talented but a little bit lazy and, you know, not in any conceivable sense of style, I was a never a member of Pop, I was never anything like that.

My father said when I was 17, he said, 'It's far better… stay on if you like but I think you ought to get out now. You've done your' – what corresponded to the GCE thing, higher certificate or something - I can't remember what it was called – 'and you've done that. If you were going to be a great success at the school, if you were going to be the Captain of a house or President of Pop or something like that, it might be worth staying on. But as you're clearly not going to be a success, if I were you, I'd stop now and go somewhere for a little bit of time before... in other words, have a gap year.' The phrase was unknown at that time but that's what he was really suggesting I did. And so that's what I did, and I knew that I was due for call-up at some early stage after my 18th birthday, and so I left a year before it.
And I went to the University of Strasbourg which was great fun. I lived with a French family and went on talking French. I thought Strasbourg would also teach me German because all Alsatians are bilingual, but of course they'd just had five years of war in which they were part of Germany and made to speak German. So you just couldn't get them to do it. They would sort of politely answer you in German but within about two or three sentences, they'd gone back to French again; they really hated it so much. So I didn't really learn any German there at all. They had quite a good Russian faculty, I'd started adding Russian earlier on. And that was... that was moderately good although, but again, I don't think it helped me very much largely because if you want to learn any language, you've got to immerse yourself, and learning Russian at Strasbourg was like learning Russian at Oxford, you know, it's no good. You've got to go in there to a family and be completely surrounded as I was in doing French in Strasbourg, but in Russia of course in those days that was out of the question. The Iron Curtain was firmly down and you couldn't do anything like that at all. So my Russian never got any good, really. I read War and Peace in it, but I couldn't ask for the butter and it was all very odd.

Well, that was Eton. I don't think I've got very much more to say about Eton. I was perfectly happy there, I mean, I wasn't bullied or anything like that, but I didn't really have any great affection for it. I didn't think it had done me very well. I don't think it had educated me all that well. Of course one never knows what it would have been like without so it's hard to say, but... Osbert Sitwell writing his entry in Who's Who under education wrote, 'In the holidays from Eton', and I feel a little bit like that myself. I wouldn't have gone that far but...
Anyway, I know that when my son, Jason, was born I was far from certain that I was going to send him there. For my father, it was unthinkable to send me anywhere else. He'd loved it, he thought it was wonderful and essential to the life of any English gentleman, etc. But I didn't feel that way and my wife and I looked at five or six schools including, one or two co-educational ones. We did plump for Eton in the end, though, because of the space. It's got so... and it's a different place to what it had been when I was there. It had a wonderful swimming pool, it had a wonderful theatre, it was doing all sorts of things that we never did in my day.
The prospective headmaster, I also liked, took me out to lunch to an Indian restaurant. I thought that's a good sign somehow. And anyway, we did send Jason there and it did him proud. He's by nature a mechanic and there's a very good school of mechanics who saw his point and even gave him the key so that he could use it in the holidays and things like that. A marvellous man called Mr Evans who really saw his point and helped him along. So I'm full of gratitude to Eton now in a way I never was – then.

Certainly I left it and I went to Strasbourg and Strasbourg was great fun. I didn't do much work at university, I really didn't. I went there from time to time and attended a few lectures, but there wasn't really very much point. I knew I wasn't going to be able to pass... to get any degrees, I was only going to be there for 6 months for Heaven's sakes, you know, so there was no point – it was really just a way to fill in my time. And I was filling in my time very happily at Strasbourg. I was taking music lessons again, thank God, and living with this very nice young family. He was a young Strasbourg lawyer called Paul Schmidt with a very nice, very attractive wife who must have been in her early 30s, called Betty who was a very, very good tennis player. We played a lot of tennis, we also played a lot of ping-pong after lunch, we went to a... there was a sort of cafe round the corner which had a marvellous ping-pong table and I rather prided myself with ping-pong and she was very, very good at it too.
And one day, one winter day after we'd been playing ping-pong, we opened the first door to the outer cold, there were double doors to keep the cold out, I opened the first one, between the double doors, I found myself seized and given an enormous kiss by Betty, a rather wet one on the lips, and I was terribly surprised! I had no idea this was going to happen. It took me completely off balance. And then this then became rather a thing. And I... I can't believe she was seriously in love with this 17-year-old boy, Englishman, but I think she was probably rather keen to devirginise me which she failed to do alas, but she used to try quite hard. But it was always rather alarming for me. I mean she was... we would start dancing cheek-to-cheek to the gramophone, but at five minutes to one when her husband was coming in at one o'clock, and at any moment I saw myself being caught in these compromising positions. I don't think he would have minded a bit. I think she probably told him every step that she was taking and gave him a full nightly report about how the programme was getting on. I don't know, it might have been like that, it might not, I don't know. Anyway, he never seemed... he always seemed to be completely relaxed about the whole thing, but I say I never really... I doubt whether she'd have let me get further than first base, but I never even got to first base, I was too embarrassed really, you know.

Anyway, there it was. Naturally, I left Strasbourg and we went out of each other's lives. And it was only about 10 years ago that she suddenly telephoned me as an old woman and she said, 'It's Betty Schmidt, do you remember?' And I said, 'Yes, of course I remember, Betty. How lovely to hear your voice again.' And she said, 'Well, you know, I'm getting old now, but I was French over 60s tennis champion, ladies' tennis champion in the over 60s the other day. And I'm very active and I play a lot of bridge and I play tennis and all that and it would be lovely to see you again.' I didn't think it would be lovely. I thought it would be too embarrassing, by then we'd be two completely different people, you know. And I'd love to... bring your wife for the weekend to Strasbourg, you know. I couldn't quite face it. He, I think, Mr Schmidt was by this time dead. But anyway, it never happened.
Then I found myself, a year later, writing my memoirs. And I got to Strasbourg and I thought, am I going to put this in? It may still be the story about my attempted devirginisation. Am I going to put it in? I don't think I can put it in, she may still be alive and it would be read by her friends, in the unlikely event of it being translated. Anyway, I wrote to her and I said, 'Dear Betty', I got the piece I'd written beautifully translated, professionally translated into French. I wanted to make absolutely certain that she was getting what I was giving and sent to her and said, 'I'm thinking of putting this in my memoirs, do you have any objection?' And back came a thing saying: publish and be damned, yes, sure, carry on, what-o. So she did and then I think at the same time she said that she was... she had a touch of pneumonia and I think that was it, I've never heard from her since. I think she's now been gathered, but fortunately not before she'd given me permission to tell a remarkably boring story. But still, there it is. Well, I mean it was sort of with no end. If it had all ended in the most marvellous, terrific affair, that would have been quite something but alas, it didn't so there it is.

She [my mother] was absolutely astonishing by any standards, she really was. Did you read the letters she wrote... the Darling Monster, the letters she wrote to me? They're marvellous.
[Q] Yeah, she's such a good writer... 
Wonderful writer.
[Q] And I've been dipping around on and off into her...
Yes. No, she was really very, very extraordinary.
[Q] Was it... you know, one does wonder what it would be like to be, I don't know, Jean Simmons' daughter or something. Did it have a distorting effect?
No, I don't think so. She was my mother, you know, and that was the important thing to me, much more than... I mean I never thought she's the star of The Miracle or she's this famous society beauty. In fact, I could ever see her beauty at all because I think one can't when it's your mother. You see it every day of your life. And people would say, 'What's it like to have such a beautiful mother?' And I would say, 'I don't know.' I really couldn't see the beauty at all until once, very shortly before she died. She was in bed – she spent her last three or four years in bed – and she was in bed and suddenly I came in and I remember the light was particularly good and I suddenly saw the beauty of this face on its pillow. But this was when she... I mean, it had taken me 70 years to do it. Well, not 70, 55 or 6 years to do it; I was, what was I? I was 56 when she died. But it always... everybody said she's so beautiful but I say it was only really then that I could see it myself.

Being an only child, again, one has the problem that one doesn't really... one doesn't really know what it would have been like to have not been an only child. Obviously life would have been extremely different, but one doesn't quite know exactly how it would have felt. I was always perfectly delighted to be an only child; I never wanted brothers and sisters one little bit. Fortunately, I think I've always been able to amuse myself. I've never been bored for very long and I didn't think... I don't think I needed the company of siblings to keep me going. And at the same time, of course, being an only child I got a lot more of my mother's attention than I would have had and I think this made an enormous difference. I think that my mother was one of six and my grandmother was a great one for favouritism and there was one of her daughters she really didn't like and that went on to the next generation too. She didn't like the children of that daughter.
And then there was another daughter whom she loved, her eldest daughter, Marjorie, who again had six children, and one of those she absolutely worshipped, the other one she hated. Well, not hated, but just didn't like and took absolutely no trouble at all. So at Christmas, Caroline would be given a wonderful, beautiful necklace costing perhaps over £100. Liz would be given a wooden photograph frame, you know, and that is the sort of thing that warps people's characters, I think – seriously – feeling unloved when other people are being loved around you. And I didn't have that. I was the only one and I was very much loved. I've been incredibly lucky and I don't think I don't know it and aren't grateful.
[Q] It seems surprising that you mother was able to devote so much time and attention to you as you described...
Yes.
[Q] ...when she was obviously so busy and so much in demand that...
Well, I think she gave me priority, you know. She seemed... in the afternoons, she seemed never too busy to take me to the theatre or take me to the National Gallery or take me to the zoo or do a lovely boat trip down the Thames. I don't know, I mean. She was up for anything and I think she frequently probably did that rather than doing smart things with her friends.
[Q] That's because you were her darling monster.
I was her darling monster, you see. And for some... and what I can't understand, because I'm very bad with children, I'm... I'm bored by the company of children after quite a short time. She, fortunately, was not. I seem to have been able to keep her entertained. I couldn't have kept me entertained for all the tea in China, but I did entertain her, I suppose.

I left Strasbourg in the summer of 1947. I can't quite remember what I did for the rest of the summer because all the time I was waiting to be called up, I never quite knew when my call-up papers were going to arrive. I was going to be 18 in September, so really, at any time after that something might happen. In fact, they left me until December. And I remember it was almost exactly the same time as my parents were leaving the embassy. My parents gave a great farewell ball on leaving the embassy about three or four days before Christmas. It must have been about the 20th of December or something like that. And almost immediately, I think the next morning, I went to England and got myself ready and on the last day of the year, presented myself at HMS Royal Arthur, Corsham, Wiltshire, which was the preliminary training place where everybody went. I think all the Naval Lower Deck started at Royal Arthur for six or seven weeks for a sort of very, very, very basic naval training. And we always had to pretend, from the very beginning, you know, you had to pretend it was a sea-going ship. You put your suitcases down on the deck and everything was as… there was port and starboard and there was a quarterdeck and you practically felt yourself, you were almost starting to get seasick by the end.
And you were kitted out and told all about the Navy and how it worked and taught knots, which I instantly forgot again. I never... after that I never taught, never tied a knot in my life. And then, at the... by this time we had decided, or probably more truthfully the Navy had decided for us, what role we were going to play in the Lower Deck. I had no desire to be an officer, because that would've meant staying in the Navy much longer, for a three- or four-year term or something like that. I did hope I should be an able... an able seaman, but even the seamanship training was too long for someone who was only going to be in there for under two years. So, I was given the choice of officer steward, cook, stoker, or writer. Well I, not surprisingly, picked writer, as you may imagine. And writer could be one of two things. It could either mean doing the accounts, which were nightmares: pounds, shillings, and pence, of course, in those days. Huge ledgers, I mean, that size, and unbelievable complications. We were all taught how to do it, but thank God I was never obliged to do it.

My job was always, as secretary to the Captain's secretary, in the Captain's office, which was nowhere near where the Captain worked. I mean, it was way down below in the Captain secretary's office, really. But that was the best decision I ever took, because quite apart from it obviously being a much nicer job and one that I like much more, it also had an enormous advantage, which I hadn't realised, coming as I did into the Navy without really knowing anything, that any hardened, seasoned, experienced sailor joining the Navy, getting onto a ship, the first thing he does is find a little place where he can sling his hammock with maximum privacy.
I had, when I got eventually to my sea-going ship, I got the Captain's office, so I could sling it in there, which was absolutely wonderful, instead of having a mess deck with 200 men smoking all night and probably all the portholes shut. This was absolutely wonderful, but, of course, I hadn't got to my ship yet. I had seven weeks on HMS Royal Arthur and then, as I was going to be a writer, I went up to what was called the supply and secretarial training, which was at HMS Ceres, Wetherby, Yorkshire. C-E-R-E-S, like the Greek Goddess.
[Q] Still on land?
Still on land, very much on land. Wetherby, Yorkshire, I mean, you could hardly get further from the sea, you know. But anyway, that was where we... where I learned to be a writer and alas, of course, what I would really have liked was if they'd taught me proper touch-typing. Again, no time to do that. I've always been able to type very, very quickly, but always with the wrong fingers on the wrong notes, and that's as far as we ever got in the Navy.

I was sent to HMS Cleopatra, which was a light cruiser, at present in dry dock in Portsmouth, and we were going to remain in dry dock, I gathered, for another two or three months. And then, very exciting, we were going to join the entire Home Fleet for a cruise to the West Indies. Well, this was really thrilling to me, you know. I'd never been to the West Indies or, indeed, anywhere tropical at this time, and I was terribly excited and looking forward to it more than I can possibly say. And the days and the weeks seemed to pass very, very slowly as we gradually... I think we were leaving at the end of September, something like that. And then, in the middle of August, one of my jobs was to receive all the daily mail that came in for all the sailors and, indeed, all the mail that came in for the ship's office. And while I was sorting through it, there were always transfers of people, suddenly I opened up an envelope and there was my own name, transferred from HMS Cleopatra to HMS Vanguard for Royal Cruise, which was the following year. The King and Queen were going to Australia. And my heart absolutely sank. I got my... you know, my heart was set on the West Indies. I was looking forward to it, I'd been reading up about it. To have to stay in England and go off to a huge battleship, Vanguard, where, I mean, there'd be an enormous amount of red tape and flannel and God knows what, and then, even worse, when the Royal Cruise started. And I knew, from the moment I opened that envelope, I knew it was my mother had been at work. My mother couldn't resist pulling any strings that seemed available. And she'd heard about the Royal Cruise, oh, John Julius must go on that, you know, not realising that, I mean, as a snotty-nosed member of the Lower Deck I wouldn't clap eyes on any member of the Royal Family, you know. 'Oh, he'll be dancing with Princess Margaret on the fo'c'sle'. No, no, that was the sort of thing my mother thought, but it just wasn't so. And I knew she'd done it. I knew she'd rung up the First Order of the Admiralty or someone and pulled strings and I was furious with her, because she hadn't asked me first. She never did when she pulled strings. And anyway, I went absolutely straight to the Captain, and on a ship the Captain is God. I mean, if you're Lower Deck and you asked to see the Captain privately, that's really quite something and you are pretty frightened. But this was a delightful Captain, and he was, in fact, a relation of my godfather, Maurice Baring, and I said, 'Look, this has come and I know it's my mother pulling strings and I really don't want to do it. I love this ship. I've been on this ship now for two months. I'm greatly looking forward to the thing. Please can you get me off this thing? Can you cancel it?' And he laughed and said, 'Leave it with me', and of course it was cancelled. But that was a very bad moment and very typical of my mum. And anyway, so we sailed off to the West Indies.

The voyage itself was lovely; it took about 15 or 16 days. We were about 30 ships, the whole of the Home Fleet, and the idea was that we were all going to go to the West Indies and then, of course, we were going to split up and we'd all visit different islands. So, every island gets a visit from somebody. And once it got warm enough, every afternoon at half-past-four, the whole Home Fleet stopped in mid-Atlantic for swimming. So, that was absolutely wonderful. I mean, diving into water five miles deep, you know, is a most wonderful feeling. And I looked forward to that all day long, I remember. It was a wonderful half hour, diving into this really, really deep and totally clean, clear water. It was wonderful.
And so then we arrived in Trinidad at sort of 8 o'clock, I suppose, one morning. It was looking marvellously exotic, you know, and then the whole of the next time, the next whatever it was, two, three weeks in the West Indies, really was an absolute joy to me. I mean, we moved every couple of days to a different little island, you know, and the only really bad time that I remember, and it was a nightmare, was the first night, because everybody had gone ashore and we had about 60 boy seaman on board who were 16, 17 and had never been abroad before and had never really drunk anything much before; they weren't allowed into pubs in England.
And then, of course, the moment you get, rum is tuppence a shot or probably rather less, and the girls are roughly the same price, and it was a sort of... that first night was an absolute orgy, and you know, rum was being poured, well, you never even had to pay the tuppence, rum was being poured down your throat all the time by everybody, and there was this awful moment around 11 o'clock at night where one was faced with perhaps a hundred completely senseless bodies, drenched in sick, which you had to search for their... to find their pay books, they all had to carry them, to find out what their name was and what ship they were on and then somehow, there were all these liberty boats going back to the various ships, somehow get them on the right one. And it went on until about 3 o'clock in the morning, it was an absolute nightmare. You know, I mean, the smell and the, oh God, it was awful. Anyway, that was my worst night in the Navy. I never had anything like as bad as that again to deal with. Everybody, I think, had learned a little bit of a lesson after that night.

And we went on to Tobago, which was lovely, and to St Vincent and to St Lucia and Montserrat where I had a frightful row with a drunken dentist, I remember, who I was not consulting professionally, but he was just picking quarrels on the beach. And last stop Bermuda, and home in time for Christmas, so it was perfectly wonderful cruise.
And the other good thing about being a writer was that I didn't have to work watches. If I'd been a seaman, that'd be the port watch and the starboard watch, and every other night or every other day you would've been on duty and couldn't go ashore. I could go ashore whenever I liked, as long as I'd finished my work and didn't have anything urgent to do, I could go ashore. So I had far more freedom and much less discipline, really, than anybody else. Well, I mean, I wasn't the only one. There was another, a very nice man called Frank Sutcliffe, who was also working in the Captain's office. We slung our hammocks together. And he was preparing to be a classical organist. I don't know whether he made the grade, but he was jolly musical.

After a short Christmas break, we then went back on board and we went down to Gibraltar for six weeks. That was a good deal less fun, really, because, you know, I mean, Gibraltar is fine, but not for the whole weekend. And we were there for six weeks and you got to know every... you know, you walked up and down that high street every afternoon and you knew every item in every shop window and the tedium was very, very great. And there were two enormous pubs with two elderly ladies doing Spanish dances. The same old ladies had been doing them, I think, for the past half century. One of them was called Sweaty Betty; I can't remember what the other one was called, but they wore dresses like enormous lamp-shades, you know, and castanets, and they were perfectly terrible but were cheered to the echo by all the drunken sailory.
And on three occasions we were allowed out of Gibraltar, three occasions in the six weeks. We were allowed into Spain. One, we went... a friend of mine he was a [unclear] and, actually, we went off to La Línea, which was really one, huge red light district for the Navy. And eventually we were both rather frightened, but we were prevailed upon to go in and watch an exhibition, which was performed by two elderly ladies with a large banana, and was one of the most unsexy evenings I think I've ever spent in my life – put you off sex for life! One time we went to Malaga on a trip, and it was ever so extraordinary. It was quite a long bus drive to Malaga and seeing all these tiny, little, lovely little white-painted villages on the coast, you know, one of which was Benidorm and one of which was Torremolinos, and now, and I'm thinking, you know, how lovely it would be just to buy one of these tiny, little cottages to see... and now they're skyscrapers. It's quite extraordinary how that coastline has changed. I mean, when I knew it there was no development on it at all, that first time I went.
And then the third time, actually, we didn't go to Spain at all. We went to Tangier where we went by submarine, which was rather fun. It was the only time I'd ever been in a submarine. We didn't submerge, we stayed on the surface. Not much fun, because you can't see out of the window, but anyway, that's how we went. And there was a wonderful old man called David Herbert who was a tremendous friend of my parents, who was the Queen, in every sense of the word, of Tangier and who lived in Tangier. And was wonderful, he was funny. He'd been a great war hero and... but was very, very gay and, of course, which was still theoretically a crime in England, so he lived permanently in Tangier, and invited me out to lunch, and there were a lot of nice, jolly people and took me to Tangier's famous gay bar which was called Deans. And then we came, we left at about 5, I suppose, on our submarine to get back to Gibraltar, again, many very bad drunks on this submarine, including the padre, who was in a terrible way. He was wearing a fez for reasons which I can't quite make out now, but he was going around and saying to everybody, 'I can't remember your name, but your fez is familiar.' And that was the second of the three cruises.

And the last one, which was that last summer of 1948, was to Scandinavia and we went to Esbjerg, which is on the west coast of Jutland in Denmark and is therefore the furthest possible place away from Copenhagen, which was where all the fun is. Other more fortunate ships went to Copenhagen. We had to go to Esbjerg. But we did have... the last day, we had off and I said to my friend, the same one as we'd travelled in Gibraltar, I said to him, 'Why don't we go to Copenhagen for the day? I have a great friend in Copenhagen, he's a writer, he's known as the Danish Somerset Maugham. He's called Kelvin Lindemann and he's always said if you ever come to Denmark, let me know, so, you know, we can go and get perhaps an early dinner off him before we have to take the train back.' So, we got up early in the morning and it was a very long journey, because you have two ferries to deal with before you get to Copenhagen. And anyway, we got there, I suppose, around, I can't quite remember, I suppose around lunch time and there he was at the railway station, arms outstretched, warm welcome, took back... charming wife, took us back to his very nice house, gave us a lovely lunch, and then he said, 'And we've got a lovely evening lined up for you tonight.' And we said, 'We're terribly sorry, we've got to be back on board at 10 o'clock, we have to leave on the 6:15 train', or whatever it was. And he said, 'Oh, you can't do that, you can't possibly do that, no, no, we've got all this lined up for you, come on, it's your first time in Copenhagen. Oh, don't worry, I'll ring up my uncle, he's the Admiral, he's the Chief Admiral of the Navy and he'll just have a word with your Captain and it'll be all right.'
Well, I knew that I was going to have to... I should've been very busy that night, but there was nothing to be done. I mean, these Danes were sort of taking it over, you know. So, the Admiral rang up the Captain, the Captain naturally gave permission, he could hardly not, so we stayed the night and we had a lovely evening, as promised, and we went back to Esbjerg the following day to an extremely chilly reception, because they all thought we'd swung it, that we'd demanded it. I had to... by the time I'd explained it, that it was taken up by the Lord High Admiral and was completely out of my hands and they thought a little bit better about it, but my boss, the poor old Captain's secretary who was a lieutenant, I mean, he'd been working until 04:00 in the morning, you know, doing all the things I should've been doing. So, I wasn't terribly popular and that was really the end of the... of that episode.

David [Herbert] was a remarkable man. He was the youngest son of the old Lord Pembroke and he had been in the Merchant Navy during the war as a radio operator, tapping away Morse code. And he'd actually been shipwrecked. His ship had been torpedoed and he'd been sort of bobbing about in the water for, I don't know, I mean, several hours before being picked up. He wrote a hilariously funny account of it. He saw one man swimming in the water with his cap on and his cap was sort of bouncing around and he said, 'What's happening?' He said, 'Oh, it's only the canary.' He had a canary inside his cap that he was saving. Lovely little stories like that. He was a darling man, very, very gay, but terribly sweet and hilariously funny. I really loved him. He was enormous fun when he came for a weekend and that sort of thing. And he spent more and more time in Tangier. By the end, he lived there and, indeed, died there. I saw his grave there last year in the graveyard of the local English church. And he ran a soup kitchen every day, I think, and was a sides-man or whatever he was for the church every Sunday. I mean, all that, and he really, he pulled his weight in Tangier and I think he really was a very happy man. And, you know, he was very, very conscientious, you know, going to live in a foreign town as an expatriate, you've got to pull... you know, you've got to do your bit. You've got to make your contribution, which, indeed, he always did, as well as, I'd say, being terrific fun.
[Q] And he was your mother's friend?
He was, well, my father's as well, but my mother's more. And, I mean, he wasn't remotely interested in the political world like my father was, you know. He was much more interested in the stage and all that sort of thing, which was, which interested my mother much more.
[Q] And if you were Lord Pembroke's son at that time, would this be quite a thing to be gay and disappear in Tangier? Was it like a scandal or...?
No, there were a lot of black sheep around, you know. There was no... I don't think there was... it was generally accepted. Everybody loved him, you know, and he used to, as I say, have regular boyfriends and most of them were extremely nice as well.

We finished with Denmark and we went briefly to Norway, where the ship's company gave a party on-board and invited all the sort of local Norwegians. And I got talking to a perfectly ravishing girl who I really took to and invited her out to dinner the following night. And I said, 'Is there anywhere...? – it was in Kristiansand, the extreme south of Norway, and she said, 'Oh no, there are no very nice restaurants around here, but why don't we take a picnic up into the forest, into the woods, because they're so lovely at this time of year and it's blazing sunshine, you know, it'd be lovely. And we would just have a lovely walk in the woods and a picnic.' So, I was looking forward to this enormously. She never turned up. The disappointment was deep. Anyway, I was very much hoping to lose my long-preserved virginity, but I failed. And so that was my last recollection of Norway.

Then we returned to England where I was demobbed. And that was in August 1949 and in September or early October, I went to Oxford. New College, Oxford, decided to read modern languages and much against my father's advice. He, my father, it's very odd – he wanted me to be a businessman. He was always interested in the City though he never had anything to do with it himself at all, but I was never remotely interested in the City or in business. All I wanted to do was travel – travel and languages, that was what I wanted to do. And I hoped to make myself a good linguist. I already spoke very good French, but my German was rotten and I'd been slogging away with my Russian, but, you know, I could read it slowly, but I could read it. I read War and Peace and, but couldn't ask for the butter, because I never had any practice.
And so, anyway, I decided, I was determined. I said, 'No, I'm going to read French and Russian', so that's what I did. And it was a great mistake, as my father said, you see, he said, 'What do they do? They try and teach you languages at Oxford. You can't learn a language at Oxford. The only way you can learn a language is by going and living with a family and speaking that language all day long.' Total immersion in youth, and when you're old you can't do it even then, but in youth, total immersion is the only way and there is no way you can do total immersion in Russia in 1942... in 1949, because the Iron Curtain was tight, tied down, you know. You couldn't just go with a Russian family and anything like that.
But anyway, I insisted. He said, 'So you can't... they can't teach you the language, really, to talk it. And the other thing they tried to teach you is literature and the literature in my view is, literature should be for enjoyment and not for work. You should settle down with a book because you love it, not because you're studying it.' And he was always terribly against it like that. He hated when people said they were reading English. That was even worse than reading modern languages, because he said literature ought to be fun, that's what it's there for, it's to give us pleasure and if they turn it into work, it just ruins it for you. And he was perfectly right, it did. I mean, I had such a... I was so stuffed with French and Russian literature for those three years, I've barely read a French or a Russian novel since, even in English. You know, it's just sort of put me right off them, so he was completely right and it's the one thing that I really deeply regret about my Oxford career. I wish I'd done history. I should've done history. I was idiotic not to do it, but, there.
[Q] Did you read Proust?
I read Proust, yes. I didn't read Proust at Oxford, I read Proust afterwards, I think, actually. Oddly enough, I read Proust in the most extraordinary place. I read Proust in the middle of the Sahara, merely because I wanted to find something that was as far as possible, as different as possible from the Sahara.

[Q] When you were a writer in the Navy...
Yes.
[Q] Did they... I'm not sure there was a lot of writing, but did you learn to write well, do you think? I mean, you write terribly well, so...
No, no, it was nothing like that. It was called... it was the naval word 'writer'. It was really the secretary to the Captain's secretary. I mean, I wrote dreary little six-liners to the Admiralty by the hundred, you know, about what the ship needed or, I don't know, people coming and going, and occasionally, quite a few of the sailors were more or less illiterate and I had to write letters home for them. But there was no question of good writing at all, you know, and the first time I started doing that, really, was when I wrote essays at Oxford and I had no idea whether they were any good or not. I haven't kept any of them and I haven't seen them since I wrote them.
[Q] One of the things they say about National Service, before we leave that, is that it brought people from different classes together. And I'm just thinking, given your background, when you write letters home for the sailors and so on – is there anything to say about that?
Well, I think that's another thing that should be said about... about the Navy. I'm enormously grateful to the Navy for all sorts of things, for having taken me on these wonderful cruises, for having taught me a lot, and not least, for the first time, giving me the opportunity to mix with all the other members of the Lower Deck, you know, when I'd never really mixed with members outside my own class before, ever. And it was... I got on with them extremely well and I think I liked them very much. I made several very good friends and I think they liked me, you know. There were little jokes early on, I was always called Duff and, you know, but they got used to me, as I got used to them, and it really... we really sort of hardly noticed after a bit, you know. The whole class thing sort of seemed almost to disappear. And I'm terribly grateful to the Navy for that.

I think that, partly because I was unhappy with my subject, I didn't really enjoy Oxford as much as I'd hoped to, as a lot of other people did. I mean, I did enjoy it, I had three or four very, very good friends and we had a wonderful time.
I bought a wonderful old car for £75, it was a 1922, and it was called a Bean. And most of us had... were sort of mechanised in some way or another, so we really had a lovely time, but I don't know, it just... I don't look back on my Oxford days with the sort of pleasure and delight that I know an awful lot of other people do, you know. There was no unhappiness at all, but there just wasn't the total, the real fun and excitement of life that one reads about in Evelyn Waugh or wherever, you know. And it was during the time that I was at Oxford, and, indeed, I think possibly also in the one or two years before, that we had... in France, my mother had a wonderful, she called him her sugar daddy, and he was a very, very, very mega-rich man who had about 17 houses in France. He was called Paul-Louis Weiller, W-E-I-L-L-E-R. It was an Alsatian name originally, he came from Strasbourg. And he was enormously rich, enormously hospitable, and had, among all these wonderful houses, a most wonderful house in Le Lavandou in the South of France, on the sea with a little sort of peninsula and then two wonderful beaches on each side, and, you know, water-skiing, boats, and God knows what, and it was absolutely lovely and we went there every summer, for quite a lot of summers, anyway. And it was there in the summer of 1950 that among our fellow guests there were Sir Bede and Lady Clifford – Sir Bede had been a colonial governor of Trinidad and Mauritius and the Bahamas – and their three lovely daughters. And I fell in love with the eldest of the daughters, Anne, and she then... that became an affair and we talked, we... I wrote to her regularly from Oxford, you know, and saw her as much as I could and all that. That went on and, of course, eventually I married her in August 1952. I was not yet 23, so it was pretty early in those days to get married. She was five months older than I was. We divorced many years ago, but we're still tremendous friends. I mean, I'm having lunch with her next week. We have regular lunches in a Thai restaurant near where she lives.

I was still at Oxford. Well, I married only when I left Oxford, but I left Oxford in the, well, I'd only just, I left Oxford in June '52 and I married Anne in August, so it's only two months, and Artemis was born the following April, so that had all happened quite fast. And then... then what was going to happen was that I had... I was hoping to join the Foreign Office because what I really wanted was to travel. More than anything else, I wanted to travel. I wanted to see the world. Well, in those days, the early 50s, there wasn't civil aviation like there is now. I mean, now you can fly anywhere whenever you want. In those days, people didn't travel much, people still travelled basically by train, you know, and if you went on a holiday to Athens it was 5 days each way, there was 10 days gone before you even started to enjoy yourself in Greece, so people really travelled very little.  And I wanted to travel and I decided that the two best ways of travelling were either to be a member of the Foreign Service or to be a foreign correspondent. So I decided it's either diplomacy or journalism for me and I put my name down for the Foreign Service and decided that if I got in, which was extremely unlikely because they took in a very, very small proportion of the number of people who applied, if I got in I would accept it. If I didn't, I would go and talk to the Times or the Daily Telegraph or somebody and see what I could do, or perhaps the BBC, see what I could do in that field. Anyway, to my enormous surprise, I got in to the Foreign Office by the skin of my teeth. I was one of 17, I remember, who got in that year and I started, I think, probably in about September or October, by now already married.

[Q] You got in, was there any string pulling?
No, I think there was no string-pulling there, largely because my mother would've much preferred me to be a journalist anyway, and my father didn't really want me to go into the Foreign Office very much. I'd say he wanted to send me to the Harvard Business School, but I hated that idea, and so neither of my parents really were very much in favour of this Foreign Office thing, so no string-pulling there.
And I started off in the Foreign Office in Northern Department, which covered not only the whole of Scandinavia but all communist Eastern Europe. I mean, it included Bulgaria – so much for Northern. And it was extremely interesting and I did it... I hope, well, I did it as well as I could, but I was always longing to get sent abroad because that was the thing, you know, that was why I'd joined. And I was about three years before they... living in London before they let me go abroad. Then eventually I was posted, as they'd always say they were going to do, to Moscow and, you know, at last I was going to be able to polish up my Russian and get it fluent. And I was looking forward to it enormously, wrote to the Ambassador as you do, 'I'm so glad that I'm coming on your staff', and I got a very nice little letter back. I even went as far as buying myself a new umbrella and having my name and British Embassy Moscow in Russian written around the brass thing. Three weeks before I was due to leave, they switched – you're not going to Moscow after all, you're going to Belgrade. Mother, string-pulling. Again. I knew it.

I knew it was my mother. My father, I should've said, my father had died on the first of January, 1954, and my mother was in a pretty bad way. She was missing him quite, quite dreadfully and it's true to say she... she felt she needed me. She was living in Paris and she was always determined that I would be sent to Paris, which would've been ideal, obviously, from her point of view. But I always told her that there was no way I was ever going to be sent to Paris because it was less than 10 years and she and my father had been these very, very famous, hugely successful ambassadors in Paris and me, as a very junior diplomat, to be there again, it would've been impossible for my boss, for the new ambassadors, you know. I mean, me going off to these sort of, to all my mother's smart friends every weekend and meeting them all the time and my mother, obviously, having to invite them and me being the third secretary. It would've been terribly embarrassing for them and my mother, I think, frankly, would probably rather have overshadowed them, you know. And she had this lovely house in the country looking at, you know, it would've been terrible. And I always told her it's never going to happen and they never would. 'Oh, don't you be silly, darling, I'm sure I can fix it.' And she couldn't, she never did, but what she did do, I think, she rang up... when she heard I was going to Moscow, she rang up the Foreign Office and said, 'Please, please, don't send him to Moscow, send him to Paris.' They said, 'Look, well, we can't send him', yes, I'm making this up, but I know that it's what happened. And they said, 'I'm sorry, we really can't send him to Paris, he's the last person in the world we can send to Paris at this moment.' 'Well, then if you can't send him to Paris, send him somewhere at least a bit closer.' And I think she was thinking of Belgium or Holland, you know, or something like that. So, they sent me to Belgrade, which was, in fact, much, much, perhaps deliberately, I think, you know, it was nearer than Moscow, but it didn't have an airport and Moscow did. I could've flown back from Moscow in four hours. To get back from Belgrade would've taken me two days on the Orient Express. And so that one blew up in her face, rather, and Belgrade it was. Blew up in my face too, because I'd much rather have gone to Moscow.

But I did love Belgrade. I learned the language very, very quickly because it's so like Russian and I got fluent in it, and, indeed, I acted as an interpreter from time to time, once with Field Marshall Montgomery, no less. And the drawback was that we had nowhere... for the first six months we had nowhere to live. There was a terrible housing shortage in Belgrade. I hadn't succeeded anyone, so there was – I was an additional – so there was no house I could just move into from my predecessor. And we didn't even go house-hunting. There were no houses to look at. We were stuck in extremely small rooms, well, Yugoslavia's, Belgrade's best hotel, but in the 1950s Belgrade's best hotel wasn't up to much, and forced to have every meal in the dining room, which took an hour-and-a-half before they even asked you what you wanted, you know. And, having to go out to dinner every night, nearly always in a black tie, and having one wardrobe the size of a sentry box in this one little room to share. Uncertain bath water, I mean, you can imagine. It was a pretty good hell and my poor, darling wife must have wondered what she'd let herself in for.
But, as a result of this, and because they pitied us so much, we had a long-wheel-based Land Rover, which I'd brought out, which was a very sensible thing to have on Yugoslav roads, fitted with an extra petrol tank because there were no filling stations. And because of this, I was able to go touring and they sent... the ambassador, Frank Roberts, who was a wonderful man, just sent me on as many tours around the country as he possibly could. So, those first six months, I think, we rode over, drove over almost every road in the whole country, you know, and it was wonderful in those days, because it was very, very primitive. I mean, some of the hotels were absolutely unspeakable, but that's too bad, but it was so picturesque. I mean, the peasants were nearly all wearing national costumes still, you know, and it was gloriously unspoiled. We had a four-wheel drive. We still, from time to time, got completely stuck in the mud while trying to ford, you know, rivers that had turned out to be slightly deeper than we thought they were. Three or four times we were pulled out by horses and carts.

When we heard that we were going to Belgrade and that there was nowhere for us to go except a hotel room, we thought well, we can't bring Artemis until we'd got somewhere to put her, and so we... my mother was only too delighted to have her at the house in Chantilly in which she was living. So, Artemis and her nanny went to Chantilly and stayed there until such time as we were able to bring them out to Belgrade, which proved to be six months or getting on for, anyway I can't quite remember, but a matter of months anyway. And then we were, it seemed we were as far away as ever from ever finding anywhere to live when a friend of mine called Jean Dorney – she was a model – came out to Belgrade with a gentleman friend and the gentleman friend was called Gerald Severne, but I don't think it was his real name, I think he was really Central European – he'd anglicised it. And he was a maker of gramophone records and what he'd wanted to do was to get really good LP recordings – we're in the 1950s, you know, everything was still very primitive. These things didn't exist. He wanted to make good LP recordings of the Russian operas. There was no way, in those days, of doing it at the Bolshoi, but the Belgrade Opera were pretty good, because they do, I mean, Belgrade... I'd say Serbia and Russia are so close and they could sing in Russian and they did regularly, and they were jolly good performances. They had wonderful voices, these wonderful, rich Slav basses, you know. So, he had come to make recordings of Boris Godunov, Khovanshchina, Prince Igor, you know, the obvious ones and he brought his, I'd imagine, his girlfriend who, as I said, happened to be a friend of mine. And so they came and called, we gave them a drink one evening in... in the hotel and said, 'You know, we still can't find anywhere to live.' And he said, 'Oh, I'm sure it can't be as hard as that.' Two days later he'd rung up a friend of his and we found a wonderful flat over an architect called Brašovan, which had never been offered for sale or for rent or anything like that before, but he'd... I mean, without him I don't think we'd ever have lived anywhere in Belgrade. As it is, we had a jolly nice flat for the last two years we were there. And so after that, really, everything changed and Artemis came out, obviously, and we had a nanny because we were still travelling around the country quite a little bit and she was only two or three or something like that. And we stayed on a little bit extra. We were doing... I was... I heard that I was going to be posted to Beirut, which was where I desperately wanted to go, and I think there was a little string-pulling there, but not by my mother, by the Lady Roberts, my boss's wife, who was, herself, Lebanese.

And we got very friendly with the Robertses. I mean, you know, obviously it was 'Sir' and all that, you know, but we went out on jolly weekends and had picnics and things. And there weren't very many people in Belgrade, you know, you took what you could get. And so we got on with them very, very well and I talked a lot about Beirut and how much I wanted to go there. And she, being Lebanese, sympathised and I think they pulled a string. Anyway, we got sent to Beirut, but we were going to go to Beirut in June, I suppose, 1957, but then suddenly there came the news that Laurence Olivier and Vivien Leigh were bringing out a production of all Shakespeare's plays, Titus Andronicus to Belgrade on a European tour.
It was a very, very good production by Peter Brook, who was coming too, and Maxine Elliott and... I can't remember, but it was a jolly good cast. And anyway, I knew the Oliviers well because they were friends with my parents and so they said would you stay on a couple of months and sort of look after them and, you know, while they're here, and so I was only too delighted to do that. And they brought this extraordinary play, I mean, it's, you know, it's the most macabre of all Shakespeare's plays, you know, eating your children in a pie and things of that sort go on. And there is a marvellous moment, the best of all Shakespeare's stage direction, which is: enter Lavinia, her arms cut off, her tongue cut out, and ravished. So, this is quite an entrance. Vivien Leigh entered looking perfectly exquisite, I mean, with her lovely white arms tied very, very, very tightly behind her so that you couldn't see them, and streamers of this pink silk ribbon coming out of her mouth, which suggested blood, but didn't look remotely like it. And then at a given moment, she has to trace the name of her seducer in the dust with a... she's carrying a rod sort of under her elbow, under her armpit, and somehow she has to write the name of her seducer in the dust. And the story goes that on the first night in London, she dropped, not surprisingly, the staff as she was trying to write this name and Noël Coward, who was in the audience, shouted out, 'Butter stumps!' She didn't... she was, by the time she got to Belgrade, she was quite good at it and so none of that happened. It went down very well. I can't think what the Yugoslavs made of Shakespeare. It was the first Shakespeare they'd ever seen, and to start with Titus Andronicus is not, in my view, the best idea. However, they did and it was all a great success. Vivien was already becoming quite seriously manic. Well, she was manic depressive and it got worse and worse and I think, you know, the marriage was under considerable pressure. I think she was driving Larry out of his mind. But anyway, they got through it all right and they went away and we went to Beirut.

Well, the normal work, actually, was very, very interesting. I mean, in my case, I'd say for the first six months it was largely writing up reports on all my travels, which had been extensive, you know, to Macedonia, to Bosnia, to Herzegovina, to Slovenia, Montenegro, all very different, all semi-independent with their own parliaments. And I was sort of calling on people, you know, and then the Church was... the Serbian Church was quite important, we had to keep up with it, go and talk to bishops and things like that, monasteries. I took the Ambassador around some monasteries just before we left. I remember the Foreign Office wrote, it must have been, I suppose, around Christmas 1956, the Foreign Office wrote to the Ambassador saying, 'We've upgraded Belgrade to be a Rolls-Royce post. The Ambassador's going to have a Rolls-Royce.' And Frank Roberts wrote saying, 'Don't do anything of the kind, the Yugoslav roads are absolutely terrible, it won't last well, people have never seen a Rolls-Royce here, they don't expect Rolls-Royces, you know, give me something sort of strong, you know, a glorified Land Rover or something is what we need here, no Rolls-Royces.' But they insisted and the embassy driver was sent to Coventry for three weeks to learn how to drive Rolls-Royces. And the Rolls-Royce arrived with a very smart, young man in a sort of old Etonian tie and a beautifully cut suit; he'd driven it all the way out from London where it was delivered. And it was, indeed, very splendid and after about a week or two, the Ambassador said, 'I must use this thing, I shall go on a trip to Croatia and John Julius, will you come with me as my interpreter?' So, the Ambassador and I got into the back of this car. We hadn't gone, I suppose, more than 20 or 30 miles before there was a sort of ping and what appeared to be a pair of braces shot out from between our two shoulders, which was... it was the central arm-rest which had suddenly come away and its moorings had shot and flattened themselves against the window separating us from the driver. And about an hour or two after that, the hooter started and wouldn't go off. So it wasn't a good beginning, and when we got to Sarajevo, about 10 miles outside the city, the whole of the back of the car went urgh, like that, and collapsed over the back wheel. The Ambassador and I officially entered Sarajevo in a peasant horse and cart, which we'd borrowed. And there were no great garages or magnificent mechanics or anything like that in Sarajevo in those days. It was a very, very backward sort of town. And we were told that the best... we were told that the best mechanic was a man who lived in a shack, a real little shack, you know, but they said, 'Well, he's the best, if he can fix it, anyone can.' So, we took this magnificent Rolls-Royce to him and a day later, we came back, and he said he'd been crying, because he'd always been told that Rolls-Royces were the best cars in the world. They were so far better than anything else. And he took out this little thing that looked like a sort of toasting fork, I remember I had no idea what it was, and said, 'Look at it, it's just broken clean away.' He said, 'I wouldn't put that on my horse and cart, you know, the metal's terrible, it's rotten.' So, the Ambassador wrote a stinker to Rolls-Royce with a photograph, incidentally, of him and me arriving in a horse and cart, and the same man, young man, the old Etonian tie, looking extremely sheepish, came out again to drive it home. It was a very, very humiliating incident all round. Whether it was replaced, I don't know.

So, we left, the first six months in Belgrade had been pretty good hell, but we had grown to love it by the end. It had a marvellous sort of Balkan feel about it. You felt you were living in a sort of Eric Ambler thriller pretty much all the time. And we were really... after we'd found our flat, we were really very, very happy there. And we left with a lump in our throats, but we left, and there was the thought of lovely Beirut awaiting us.
And we went directly... we didn't go back to London in the middle, we went directly from Belgrade to Beirut and this involved taking the train to Genoa, spending the day in Genoa, and taking the boat from Genoa in the evening. And we had lunch, I remember, with the British Consul. The British Consul was the most extraordinary man at that time, he was called David Balfour. He had travelled a lot with Freya Stark. He comes into a lot of Freya Stark's travel books. And he had, I believe, at one moment been a monk on Mount Athos, which is unusual for a British Consul. But anyway, he was perfectly delightful and gave us a jolly good lunch and then I said, 'Well, look, it's now half-past two, we've got to be on-board the ship at half-past five, what are we going to do? We'd never been to Genoa before, what do we see? One thing?' And he said, 'No question about it, get into my car, I'll drive you to the cemetery.' So, to the cemetery we went and the cemetery is absolutely wonderful in Genoa because it's got all these superb carvings of whole sort of scenes from Genoese life. Cher Papa, in full evening dress sort of lying on his bed like this, you know, and cher Maman and the little bambini all sort of doing this in their sailor suits around the edge of the bed. And every stitch of cher Papa's sock is lovingly carved and there were whole rows of these sort of tableaus and they're absolutely wonderful. And there's one old lady who spent her entire life selling peanuts on the corner of the square, and she saved up all her money for a statue and there she is with her peanuts and every peanut is beautifully sculpted, you know. And it's absolutely, it's immensely Italian and completely unique, it's wonderful. So, we went to the cemetery and then we boarded HMS Esperia, or the SS Esperia, Italian line, and had a perfectly lovely cruise.

So we got on the boat to Genoa at around sort of six o'clock in the evening, and we really had a very enjoyable week's cruise. I felt, really, the Foreign Service is really treating me most remarkably well. And we stopped at all the right sort of places: we stopped in Naples, we stopped in Syracuse, we stopped in Athens, we stopped in Alexandria. And we finally got to Beirut, I think, about six days after we left where there was a warm welcome from the Embassy, much nicer than when we'd arrived in Belgrade where nobody seemed to want us – there was nowhere for us to live.
This time we very rapidly found by far the most beautiful house I've ever lived in, which was a very old-fashioned Lebanese house with tall... tall windows with tracery on them, sort of Gothicy windows, groups of three, rather like the Venetians used to do. It was very much an old Lebanese style. It was perfectly lovely, looking out onto an enormous terrace where you looked out... you had a view of the sea there and the city there, we were quite high up, the city down there, just below us. And to there was a great, white, double-crested mountain of Sannīn, with snow on it all the time, even in mid-summer, a little bit, you know. And it was the most glorious view. It was pretty uncomfortable. I mean, there was only one very seedy little bathroom in which you had to light a fire about half an hour before you wanted to bath, things like that. But that was... that seemed to us a very small price to pay for the beauty of the house. And when we had English guests to stay, as we did sort of quite often, if it was over the full moon – for six months of the year we had dinner out on our terrace, and for six months of the year – and we always tried to have a dinner party, if possible, with some English visitors on the night of the full moon. And you put the English visitor there facing the mountain, knowing that at 9.10 their jaw would drop open as this enormous, yellow, grapefruit rose from behind the snowy mountain, you know. And that was the wonderful thing about the weather in Beirut: you could trust it. You could say, we will go out on a picnic on next Thursday week and you would know that there wouldn't be a cloud in the sky. That was, I think, one of the reasons I loved it most, actually. But, of course, it was in those days a sort of terrestrial paradise, I mean, apart from the perfectly lovely climate. Well, all right, it occasionally got a bit too hot in the summer, but if it did you could, within half an hour you could drive up to 2000 feet in the mountains where there was a nice cool restaurant, and, you know, and get some lovely, fresh mountain air before coming back to bed. And there were wonderful restaurants anyway, because, of course, the French had been there for so long and they'd left a wonderful gastronomic legacy.

The other wonderful thing about it, of course, was as a jumping-off place for everywhere else around the Middle East. You could be in Damascus in two hours, you could be in Jerusalem in four, and, really, the Middle East was your oyster. So that was enormous fun. Sadly, when we arrived, we couldn't go to Damascus, because we'd broken off... after Suez – I arrived in '57. Suez was '56 – and we'd broken off relations with what was called the United Arab Republic, which was combined Egypt and Syria. It was meant to be... at one stage. It didn't last long, but it did for a bit, and so we couldn't go there. But then that was all fixed by the following year, and then we would nip backwards and forwards to Damascus, you know, as easily as we'd now go to Oxford or somewhere. And so that was lovely.
And lots of very, very nice friends, nearly all of them much richer than us. In Yugoslavia we'd been much richer than everybody else, but in Beirut, you know, I mean, there were lots of very, very, very rich people, and, oh, I mean, three or four cocktail parties every night. By the time you got to dinner you were absolutely speechless. And you never sat down to dinner till about 10:30. It was very often a buffet dinner, anyway. But then the good news was that the moment you knocked down your coffee you went back to bed. You didn't sort of linger on after dinner at all. And that went on perfectly fine, until the spring of 1958. I'd arrived in July '57, so I had very nearly a year.

At Easter '58 I'd gone back for some Easter leave to see my mother in France, and one morning received a telegram there saying, 'Sorry to cut short your leave, but please return at once.' So I took the next plane back to Beirut, where what looked awfully like a civil war was breaking out. It didn't quite get to the civil war stage, though in the 1970s it did. At that time it was really a dress rehearsal for what... for the much, much worse things that happened in 1970. But for about five months the opposition, which was 90% Muslim, was really besieging the Christian President's palace. We lived immediately above the Christian President's palace, so we weren't actually in a terribly good place, and bullets were whizzing around. And for six months we couldn't go out on our lovely terrace at all. And at various moments the Embassy said, 'Do you really think you ought to go on living where you are living?' But I thought there was no real point in moving. It wasn't all that dangerous as long as you kept your head down, you know, and didn't sort of go out on the balcony and that sort of thing, it seemed all right.

There was one day, my little girl Artemis, who was by that time... what was she? She was six. She was going to school and there was a school bus. I remember on one occasion she... the fighting was such that the school bus couldn't deliver her back home at lunchtime. I was lunching with the American journalist Joe Alsop at the St Georges Hotel, so I had to bring her too, tiny five-year-old. There weren't many five-year-olds at the St Georges Hotel, but they were very nice about it, and Joe was charming about it, so all that worked well. And that led to my one great adventure, when towards the end of August, the hottest moment of the year, I was shot in the head.
It was entirely my fault, really, looking back on it. I had a little German bubble car, an Isetta it was called, and it was the only one in Beirut, so everybody knew it. And there was a curfew – at 8 o'clock every night we always had to be back in bed. But I had a curfew pass, because I had to go and meet the diplomatic bag at 3 o'clock in the morning at regular intervals, in the airport, so I had a curfew pass. And I was coming back just a little after 8, I suppose, 8.10, 8.15, something like that. It was a very, very hot night. And our house was on a little sort of eminence, and you approached it from below, like that, and then you went around the side and you came up the other side into the front door, so you had to sort of really drive round the house before you got to it. And just at the foot of the road, underneath the house, there was a police post. There were lots of police posts; it was just one of many which would stop one and ask to see one's papers. So I was perfectly used to this, and, normally, you used to hear them say... you just... they just sort of... they didn't have a barrier. They just sort of shouted, 'Stop!', and rather hoped you wouldn't hear, I always thought, because they were always a bit nervous at who they would be stopping. But, anyway, I mean, I got used... I just stopped anyway, because I knew that this was a regular thing. I mean, it happened every night. So I stopped, but I didn't hear any shouts of stop, but I stopped anyway, and I waited and I waited. I waited, I suppose, for half a minute or something, and no one came anywhere near me. So I thought, well, there it is; they know me so well in this little car, and it's incredibly hot and they don't like sitting in that sandbag hut. They like going and sitting out on the nearby roof, I know that, where they get a little breeze, and they... clearly they can't be bothered to come down. And so I drove on. And 5 seconds later, deafening report, windscreen shattered.
I didn't know first of all what had happened. I didn't know whether I'd sort of gone over a bomb or whether I'd been shot from the front or behind or what had happened. I was sort of bewildered and mystified. But I remember thinking, am I all right? Two arms, two legs. Twice two are four, twice four are eight, brain seems to be okay and doing a little sort of quick inventory. And I seemed to be fine, but my hair had fallen over. I did that and my hand was absolutely covered with blood, as well as my shirt. I mean, it looked like Nelson's, you know. And I was by this time surrounded by neighbours, all of whom ought to have been indoors, but they were... it was so hot they were all sitting out in their gardens or on their terraces. And I was completely surrounded by hysterical neighbours, who saw this blood-stained figure and clearly thought I was very, very badly hurt. And there were about... one moment there were about sort of six of them around me, all, you know, offering me a drink and a bandage and their sister… I don't know, I mean, everything they could think of. And I was saying, 'No, no, no, one thing only, please, please listen. My wife is up there in that house. Please, somebody go to her and tell her that I have had this accident, but that I am perfectly, perfectly all right. I look like nothing on earth, but two minutes under the shower and I'll be fine.' So, anyway, they went and got her, and she was very good and sensible. And just as we were still sort of standing there, a white United Nations jeep, which there were quite a few patrolling the city, drew up and said, 'What's all this?' And I said, 'Well, I just seem to have been shot. I thought it was... it never struck me it was the police; I thought it was the opposition, the Muslim opposition.

They took me down to the American university hospital and bound me up, and while I was being bound up a policeman came in and said, 'What's happened?' And I said, 'Well, I've been... I've had an accident, somebody tried to shoot me.' And the policeman said, 'Where's your car?' And I said, 'Well, it's where I left it, where the accident happened.' And he said, 'Well, as soon as you've had your head bound up, will you please go back and get it and bring it down here so that we can photograph it?' And I said, 'No. There's a sniper out there. He's tried to get me once this evening; I've got to go back again to go home tonight, but if you really think I'm going to go back three more times... and, anyway, if you want to photograph the car, surely the only point is photographing it where the accident happened.' And they said, 'Oh, no, we couldn't do that.' And I said, 'Why not?' They said, 'Well, we understand it's rather dangerous up there.' That was the Lebanese police.
Anyway, then they took me back to our house, and by this time, the police post were in a state of absolute panic. They'd shot a British diplomat, you know, so they were all quivering. They all thought they were going to get executed. And the young lieutenant, who was in charge, came out – he was so frightened he could barely speak – trembling, saying, 'We are so, so, so sorry. It was a dreadful mistake. I don't know what... the young boy who shot was... it was his first night on, he didn't recognise you. We're really sorry and he must apologise... he wants very much to apologise.' I said, 'Look, it was just as much my fault as his. I drove on without stopping.' I mean, I stopped, but I drove on without being told to go on. 'And it's more than half my fault, and I am completely unhurt. I don't know whether a bit of bullet shaved off by car or a bit of car shaved off by bullet went in here and came out there, just a graze. And so I'm completely unhurt, I'm in no pain; I haven't even got a headache, so let's not worry.' 'Oh, no, he must apologise.' I said, 'Well, all right, I am quite keen to go to bed now. I've had a very exciting evening, and... but please... so make it quick, you know, let him just come for five minutes.' 'Oh, no, he can't come now, he's on duty. He can't come till six o'clock tomorrow morning when he gets off duty.' That was not the time I was hoping to see him, but that is what it was. There was nothing to be done. And our old-fashioned house had the bedroom at one end and then the main living room and the bathroom way over at the other side of the house, so I had to navigate all that, while this boy, trembling, was sitting, waiting to make his apologies, which as he only spoke Arabic, and I didn't, he didn't, really couldn't apologise much. But, anyway, we had this rather ridiculous little conversation and I congratulated him on being a good shot, but not, fortunately, quite good enough. And all was well. But there was a tremendous fuss in the papers and the Government and all that. We didn't hear the last of it for months.

And then I remember, my mother I knew to be in Athens, staying, as I assumed, at the Grande Bretagne Hotel, where she always stayed when she was there, and I thought, she's going to read about me in the papers, and she's going to panic and think I'm dead, so I've got to get through to her and reassure her. It wasn't very easy in 1958 doing long-distance calls between Beirut and Athens, but I managed it. And she... the telephone switchboard in the Grande Bretagne Hotel is in the main foyer, the hotel's main lobby, and I got through to the switchboard assistant and said, 'Could I speak to Lady Diana Cooper?' And the assistant said, 'Oh, she's just over here, I can see her from here. I'll get her.' So the line was appalling, and I screamed out, 'Look, I've been shot, but I'm all right.' 'What? You've been shot?' 'Yes, yes, but I'm all right.' 'He's been shot! Mademoiselle, aidez moi, mon fils a été fusilier!' And eventually I think I got the message through, that I was okay, but it was quite a funny moment. Anyway, that was the worst that happened during what was delicately known as 'the events', les événements, of 1958. And then, from one moment to the next, everything sort of quietened down again, literally within 24 hours. It was quite odd how quickly peace was resumed.

And then the last year of my life there was absolutely lovely again, you know: quiet, peaceful, sunny, not too much work, delightful all round. And I was very, very sorry when in May 1960 I had to leave. I'd had three years, you know; I mean, it was the normal thing. So my wife and I drove all the way back. She flew back with Artemis first and dropped Artemis with my mother, and then she came, flew out back to Beirut, and then she and I drove back to London together in the Land Rover. And that was great fun.
And we were driving through Turkey which in 1960 was still fairly primitive. I mean, no tourists at all. You know, the roads weren't up to much, but it was wonderful and unspoilt and ravishingly beautiful. And as we drove back, we got to a town called Kütahya, which is famous for its pottery. And we stopped there for the night, merely because it was getting dark and we were tired and it seemed a sensible place to stop. And then we knew that we were going to have to set up a house in London when we got back, and so we thought we'll buy some nice Turkish china. So we went round after dinner that night, and all the shops were still open, and we bought quite a lot, and said to the man, 'Okay, now, you pack them up tonight and we'll come back in the morning. I've got to change a traveller's cheque when the banks open, and we'll come back in the morning and pay for them and take them away', so that was all arranged. And then the next morning at about 6, we heard shouting, screaming, military music, God knows what. I mean, something obviously very exciting was going on – we had no idea what. We got up, had our breakfast and walked down to the bank, and saw, to our horror, that the bank was being guarded by two men with Kalashnikovs, and barring our way in. So I was baffled. I don't speak a word of Turkish, so I had absolutely no idea. But then the most extraordinary thing happened. Two girls walked up the street who obviously worked in the bank, and they were being allowed in, and I heard them and they were talking Serbian, which I could speak, having spent three years in Belgrade, I mean. And so I stopped and said, 'Please tell me what's happened, what's all this about.' And they said, 'Oh, the Prime Minister, Mr Menderes, was arrested last night; there was a coup.' And one never then quite knows whether to say, hooray, or how terrible, or what, you know. But we... I asked them a few more questions, and she said, 'Yes, he's... it happened here in Kütahya last night and he's now imprisoned in that castle up on the hill.' So we were actually there where it all happened. I mean, if I'd been a journalist, it would have been the scoop of my life. As I was a diplomat, I had to pretend it was nothing to do with me. Anyway, we got our china. We got in and cashed the traveller's cheques, largely thanks to these two girls, and got out and drove on. But then the continuation of the drive was pretty tricky, because, again, there was a police post, a sort of checkpoint, every hour or so along the road. And we had been given a wonderful laissez-passer by the Turkish ambassador in Beirut, but he was a Menderes man, so would it... was it a good idea to show it, or wasn't it, you know? And it was all very delicate, and we... it took us quite a long time. We weren't actually ever imprisoned, but we were sort of detained for an hour or two from time to time, you know, before they said, okay, drive on. And we eventually arrived in Istanbul really pretty exhausted and very, very relieved to be out of it.

Well, the work was very varied. It wasn't so much distressed British subjects – we had a consulate to look after tourists who'd lost their passports or got drunk and got into trouble or something like that; thank God we didn't have to worry about... What we were doing, well, it was two things: it was reporting first of all, what was going on in the country; I mean, regular despatches to London saying what was happening, how the political situation was changing all the time, which, of course, it did; Lebanon's relations with the rest of the world and, particularly, her fellow Arab countries; always the Israeli problem was causing trouble. When I arrived there, almost the first thing my boss said to me was, 'Oh, incidentally, don't get involved in discussing Israel.' And I said, 'I thought that was really what I was here for.' And they said, 'No, the thing is so fraught with emotion; nobody listens to reason; that's not the point. The Israelis know they're right, and the Arabs know they're right, and there's nothing to be done. And if you get into arguments, you just lose friends, so stay off the subject', which, to the best of my ability, I always did.
But there was a lot to be done. I mean, not only on the reporting side, but there was a lot to be done about sort of keeping the Lebanese happy, organising for ministerial visits, that sort of thing; or the Navy would come to Beirut, and that would always be a... take a lot of work, you know. And then there'd be the sort of ceremonial things like... there were 11 different religions in Beirut, and the entire political system was based on religion. There weren't political parties as such, but there were 11 religions and therefore there everything was an exact multiple of 11: the Cabinet was of 11 people, the president was always a Maronite Christian, because, in theory, they were the majority. In fact, they weren't by then – the Muslims, who had far more children, were. But it was sort of agreed, the president was a Maronite. The prime minister was a Sunni Muslim; the foreign secretary was a Shi'a Muslim. Then there were two Armenians: Armenian Catholic and Armenian Orthodox; Greek Catholic, Greek Orthodox; Druze, and I don't know how many that is, but, I mean, that's how it worked. And 11 in the Cabinet, 99 in the Parliament, everything exactly organised so that every religion should have its say. And then, of course, on the religious days, you had to go and congratulate the bishop or the patriarch or the archimandrite or whatever he happened to be, which involved sitting there, as usual rather – well, usually they spoke French, but not quite always – and sitting on a sofa next to an enormous black-robed, bearded, huge man with a great whiffling beard and pectoral crosses on the stomach going quietly up and down, you know, and usually holding his hand. One sat on the sofa, holding hands, for five, six minutes, making what conversation it was possible to make. And then one got up, bowed politely and went home. But all that was very important.

[Q] Did you have anything to do with spies?
Spies – well, there was a big spy centre in Beirut. MI6 had about, oh, I don't know, it must have had six or eight at least, perhaps even more; I can't quite remember now, you know. And I used to see quite a lot of them, because there was a very useful little establishment called Joe's Bar immediately around the corner from the embassy, and we all used to congregate in Joe's Bar every day for a quick one before lunch, to help us drive up the mountain to where we were living or wherever it was. In those days, you had a quick one or two to help you drive. How things have changed. And that was... there were about six or seven regulars, of whom I should think four were MI6 boys, 'our friends', as we used to call them. I wasn't. And there was always Kim Philby there, and Kim would always have got there by about 11.30 and be absolutely smashed by the time we got there, so we never really spoke. He sat there looking incredibly romantic in a bush jacket with a sort of red scarf tied nonchalantly around his neck and that sort of thing. But he was a very handsome man, but he never said anything; he just sort of sat at a back table. And we never understood him at all, because he never went to a press conference, and yet every Sunday, on the page one of The Observer, there was a very, extremely well-informed and thoughtful piece from HAR Philby, our correspondent in the Middle East, and we always wondered where he got it from. I think possibly overhearing all our conversations at Joe's Bar may have been one of the principal sources; I'm not quite sure. We never got that straight. But, yes, there were... there was a fair amount. But in those days, it was so odd, all this cloak-and-daggery; it was much more cloak-and-dagger then than it is now. Now everybody knows who's doing what, really, you know, and it's all open. But in those days, it wasn't. And one would receive these reports in a red jacket, obviously top secret and all that. But one very, very seldom found anything that one wanted to know. I mean, a new oil-refinery had been opened in Homs; there's not a lot you can do about that, you know. That was the sort of thing. So the red jackets used to... tended rather to sort of pile up in one's in-tray and not get read very much, you know. But, anyway, I suppose, you know, I've no doubt that a lot of people were very much more interested in it than I was.

We then... as I say, we drove back to London, this rather eventful drive through Turkey, and left... went to see Artemis, who was very, very happy with my mother, and my mother delighted to have her, loved educating her just as she'd educated me when... extremely well, and while we house-hunted in London. And the house-hunting actually didn't take long, and the house that we bought in Blomfield Road, Little Venice, had actually belonged to the father of one of the secretaries in the British Embassy Beirut, which is quite an extraordinary coincidence – Commander Leslie. And we moved into temporary accommodation for a bit, I think, while workmen were in, and then moved into the house which I was to occupy for the next 56 years.

So we moved into Number 24 Blomfield Road, on the canal, which was a great joy to us and where, indeed, I was to be extremely happy for the next 56 years, you know. Anne and I split up later, but that I can tell you about... I'll tell you about that in a little while.
I then had to go back to my Foreign Office job. I never really liked working in... in the Foreign Office in London very much, but it was time; I'd been away for 5 years and I was due back. And they put me in a thing called Information Policy Department, which since I'd just left the Middle East and knew a certain amount about it, was… really involved in selling Britain to the Arabs, basically what it was. It was propaganda, it was sending lovely... we published a magazine in Arabic about England, which had quite a big sale, actually, over in the Middle East in that time. We produced tapes for Arab radio stations to play about England and that sort of thing, to fill up their time, made little films. It was all propaganda, and working in very close harmony with the Ministry of Information, not... the Central Office of Information, it was then called, that's right, which provided all this stuff. And it was actually quite fun, and it was made more fun by the fact that I was at that time a member of something called Buck's Club, of which another member was the Prime Minster, Harold Macmillan. And I happened to know his secretary, who was in the Foreign Office, like me – Prime Minister's secretary is one of the things that Foreign Office people have to do occasionally. And Philip de Zulueta was Macmillan's secretary. And having gone to Buck's Club quite often for lunch, I noticed that the Prime Minister was quite often there at the central table where people go when they haven't got anybody else to have dinner... to have lunch with, you know; you just joined... there was a great big table in the middle. And so I then got into the habit of ringing up Philip and saying, 'What days next week is your boss going to go to Buck's Club?' And Philip would say, 'Well, I know he's going on Thursday', and I would ring up the correspondent of Al Ahram and invite him to lunch at Buck's and make sure that he had a nice chair looking out into the room. And, sure enough, at 1.15, the Prime Minister, looking about a million, would shuffle in and take his place at the central table, and, you know, the neighbours would sort of say, 'Oh, hello', you know, and they would hardly notice him; they'd just continue with their conversations. And this was immensely rewarding to the Arabs, because they couldn't believe it. They'd say, 'Excuse me' – I'd be going on, talking about something else – 'is that not your Prime Minister who's just walked in?' 'Oh, yes, it is, actually. As I was saying, yes, we were... let me see'... But one actually said, 'Where are his motorcyclists?' I mean, he walked across the park, entirely alone, you know, tipping his hat perhaps to occasional people who recognised him, and that was the way it was in those days. It was so lovely and so, you know...

I got to know him [Harold Macmillan] really quite well, because he was a great friend of my mother. They'd been together in Algiers in 1944, and she'd always backed him as a future Prime Minister. And she always called him 'my horse', 'He's my horse'. And he was therefore known as The Horse. And he used to come to lunch with her quite often. My mother by this time had left France, having given up all hope of me being posted there, and moved into another house in Little Venice, only about a couple of hundred yards away from my own, around the corner, in Warwick Avenue. And she settled in there, and she used to give a series of dinner parties. And Uncle Harold, again, as he was sometimes called, was a regular and was wonderful company. I mean, he shuffled in, bleary-eyed, you know, and you would think, well, good God, this is going to be terrible, he's past it. And then he'd suddenly sort of wake up and start talking, and he was a wonderful talker, reminiscing about the different oratorical styles of Lloyd George and Winston Churchill. He was very, very, very good company. And so, anyway, that was... I sort of settled down in Blomfield Road to an ordinary life.

And then in 1961 we had a Middle East crisis – surprise, surprise. Iraq tried to take over Kuwait. This was not the Saddam Hussein occasion, this was 10 years before. Exactly the same thing happened. 20 years before, I never knew when. A man called Abd al-Karim Qasim tried to take over Kuwait. And there was a frightful crisis, as a result of which I was pinned to my desk throughout the summer, every day, including weekends, at one moment, and a good deal of the night. And the result was that we didn't get any leave until mid-October, at which point I said to my wife, 'We've got to go somewhere... if we want any warmth and sunshine, we've got to go somewhere fairly well south now; it's, you know, it's mid-October.' And so we went to Sicily. And we had a wonderful time in Sicily. We hired a little car. Well, actually, I think we drove there. Yes, I think we drove there, that's right, and wandered around for 10 days. And I was absolutely flabbergasted by the Norman monuments, because I'd no idea... I mean, I think I perhaps had a vague idea that the Normans had at one moment been in Sicily, but I didn't know why or where or anything about it. But the monuments that they'd left behind them were so extraordinary, because they combined, as I've never seen any other monument combine, the three great civilisations of the Mediterranean: the Latin, the Greek and the Arab all came together. And this was in the 12th century, a century when... the century of the Crusades, when a few hundred miles to the east they were bashing each other's brains out, and yet in this one little island it was all working perfectly, and this seemed to be absolutely thrilling.
And when we got back to London, I went straight to the London Library to read about it, and discovered that there really were no readable books on the subject at all, in English, anyway. And there were two unreadable volumes by a French archivist, called Monsieur Chalandon, published in 1910. I read those, and they were marvellously informative, I mean, he'd done all the research; he'd been everywhere; he'd taken up everything. He'd put in things like indexes, which were very rare in 1910, and bibliographies and all that. And one... the only thing he hadn't done was seen the point of anything he wrote at all. He never made any comments, never any... never gave any opinion; it was just fact after fact after fact, and it was a tedium absolutely indescribable. But it was all there. So I decided that I had to write this book. And I think I really knew that I couldn't write it while I was still a member of the Foreign Office. I had friends – Philip Ziegler, Douglas Hurd – who wrote books in their spare time, but this was going to take an awful lot of time at a library and a lot of research and that sort of thing, and I knew I was actually going to have... at one moment, I was going to have to choose: was I going to do this or would I leave the Foreign Service and do this for the rest of my life, or not?
And then, I think it was 1963, that's right, 1963 that I decided really that – at least I semi-decided – that I was going to leave the Foreign Office forever. And it was an agonising decision, because, I mean, Foreign Service is a very good job; it's got admirable prospects. I might have ended up as an ambassador somewhere; in fact, I almost certainly would have. And I had a wife and two children to support and practically no money of my own at all. I was living on my salary plus… I had a little sort of camel's hump that might last me for two years, but not more. And so I was very, very uncertain what to do. And I went…  But, anyway, I made an appointment with the personnel department and said, 'I'm going.' And John Henniker-Major, who was the head of the department, said, 'Oh, John Julius, are you sure? Are you really, really sure?' And I said, 'No, I'm not really sure. I'm in a terrible way. I mean, I can't decide. I'm in agony of indecision.' So he said, 'Well, I'll tell you what we'll do – we'll put you on disponibilité for a year, during which time you will not be paid and you will not have to come to the office at all. You will remain a member of the service, and at any time you like you can come back into active duty again. But otherwise, for a year... and you mustn't get involved in politics and you mustn't take another full-time job. And I said, 'Well, that's absolutely wonderful. That's what we'll do.'

And then I did my year, and even at the end of the year... I'd done a lot of research on The Normans by then, but I hadn't actually written Chapter One or, indeed, sentence one. And I started at the end of the year dreading the telephone ringing, calling me in. And, actually, they gave me about 15 months, but eventually the telephone did ring. And I remember sitting in the tube, saying, what am I going to say? I still... I was still uncertain. And then I went in and I said, 'I'm leaving.' And as I said it, I thought I'll be back tomorrow morning, on all fours, saying, 'I didn't mean it, take me back, take me back, please', you know. But, in fact, that's what happened, and I haven't regretted it for a single second since. I'm absolutely convinced that it was the right decision, and I don't think I'm that interested in diplomacy and foreign affairs. I don't think maybe I was a... would've been a terrific success. I mean, I think I'd have been an ambassador, but it might have been in Nicaragua or somewhere, you know. And, anyway, I was out. And what I loved, first of all, really, what I loved was the independence, saying, 'I'll stay in bed tomorrow morning if I want to'; or, 'Yes, of course, I'll come to Nigeria' or whatever, you know. I was free. So that was a tremendous excitement.

Within a month or two of getting my liberty, I read in the newspaper that they were going to build an airport in the Seychelles, and I thought, here's an opportunity. If one managed to acquire a little property in the Seychelles now, before they build the airport, when it's still... you have to go by boat from Mombasa. And, you know, it'll shoot up in value once the airport's there. So I got my millionaire brother-in-law, Michael Astor, to finance me; I got him interested in this. I said, 'I'll go and you'll pay my fare, but I'll go and I will buy a nice, big property on the sea for you, and a little one for me, and we'll just wait... and then when the airport is there, either we'll have wonderful holiday homes, or else we sell and you'll be even richer than you are now.' And so he thought that was really a quite good idea. So off I set, and because in those days there were no sort of cheap flights, you just did it the way you wanted to, I thought, well, I'm in no particular hurry. I will leave a week early and I will stop in Beirut to see old friends, and I will stop in Addis Ababa because I've always wanted to go there and it's on the way, and then I'll get to Nairobi, and then I'll take the train to Mombasa and then I'll get the British India Line to the Seychelles. This started fine, I got into the airplane, terribly excited and all, and we were halfway to Beirut, first stop, when the pilot came over and said, 'I'm sorry, war has broken out in the Middle East' – this was 1967 – 'war has broken out in the Middle East. We can't go to Beirut. We're dropping you off in Rome.' So we got off in Rome, and I went around to the airline thing and said... I thought, well, you know, OK, I can't do Beirut, but I can probably do Addis Ababa, no reason not to do that. And so I said to the girl behind the desk, 'Have you got... are there any flights going to Addis Ababa this afternoon?' And she said, 'Yes, there's one at two. It's going via Khartoum.' And I said, 'Well, that's all right; Khartoum's an Arab country, but, I mean, it's such a long way away and...'

And so I took the plane to Khartoum, got out at Khartoum, where there was a horrible dust-storm blowing – temperature about 110, no air-conditioning in the airport, of course, in those days – and they said, 'Where's your visa?' And I said, 'I have no visa, but it's all right because I was told I didn't need a visa because I'm just in transit, I'm going straight on to Addis Ababa.' And they said, 'Oh, no, you aren't. That was the last flight. We're closing the airport now. We're at war – war has been declared, and so I'm afraid, chum, you're stuck.' So I rang up the British Embassy, which had also had its diplomatic relations broken, so it was in a pretty shaky state itself. But I did know the ambassador very, very slightly, egg-bald, and he was very nice. He said – his name was Fowler – he said, 'We don't know what's going to happen to us, but, anyway, you'd be better off with us than you are at the airport, so I'll send the car to bring you here.'
So I then spent the next two weeks stuck in Khartoum, at the British Embassy Khartoum, missing all my connections, including my boat to the Seychelles, to which I never got, and stuck in this Embassy. And every morning he said, 'Tennis?' And there was a grass tennis-court just under my bedroom window. I saw it being watered every morning. We played always at one o'clock when the sun was at its highest, heat unspeakable. He never wore a hat. His egg-bald head frying. I couldn't bear to watch it even. And the grass was a bit long, and he apologised. He said, 'I'm terribly sorry, the grass is a bit long, but the lawnmower… the spare part for the lawnmower has arrived, but it's stuck in the airport; we can't get it out.' And I said, 'I know just how it feels.' And, anyway, every day we played tennis and every day the grass was that much longer than it had been the day before. And I had this terrible vision of being stuck there perhaps for the rest of my life, playing tennis in pampas grass with this mad, bald ambassador forever. It's like something out of an Evelyn Waugh novel, you know, being read Dickens, reading Dickens to Mr Todd in A Handful of Dust.

And, anyway, every morning I went round, the airline offices in Khartoum, all of them, saying have you got anything leaving? And they would say where do you want to go to? And I would say the destination is totally immaterial; I wish to leave Khartoum as soon as I can. I don't care where I go. And eventually, after about a fortnight, I found one and it was going to Addis Ababa. So I went to Addis Ababa, but it was not a great success. I arrived the day the rains began – the Great Rains – and it just poured, and I really didn't see very much. I had a very nice dinner with a charming ambassador who told me how a few months before, his wife had put both children in the car and gassed all three of them, so he lost his wife and both children. You know, they just... she just put them in the car and put on the exhaust and… terrible story.
And, anyway, then I went back, and there was... I flew back, and they said, 'This is going to Athens.' On my way home now; I mean, I'd chucked everything. Flying to Athens. To my horror, we came down in Khartoum, and I thought oh, my God, if anything happens now I can't go back to that embassy, you know. But it was all right. We took off again in an hour and went to Athens, and I spent a couple of days in Athens, and home. But it was a… the whole trip was a total disaster, so I never got anything in the Seychelles. And, of course, I couldn't very well ask my friend to pay it all, so I… because it was entirely due to my own incompetence. If I'd flown straight to Nairobi there'd have been no problem at all and I'd be a rich man now. However, there it was.

The Sicily book, well, no. It wasn't on hold, I was working at it. I mean, this was... I took this little brief thing off, because I had this wonderful financial idea, the only good financial idea I've ever had in my life, and look what I did with it. But no, no, by this time I was actually spending the days in the London Library, working on the Sicily book, which came out – it was eventually in two volumes. And thanks largely to Mr Chalandon, who I'd say had done all the spadework, all I had to do was to make Mr Chalandon readable. And – which I did – and the books went down very well and, you know, it started me off. And then I went on to do Venice, and this is what I've been doing for the last 50, 60 years now – 50 years, not 60.
[Q] Did you belong to the London Library? You mentioned the London Library much earlier.
Yes.
[Q] Is that something you'd always been a member of?
Well, I mean, I've always been a member of the London Library. The London Library is the most extraordinary institution in the world. I mean, it possesses about, I don't know, I mean, two million books, all on open shelves. You just go to them, unlike the British Library, where you have to fill in forms and wait for hours until your book is delivered and all that. London Library, it's all according to subjects. You just go to the History shelf, look up N for Normans, and there you are, there they all are. And you can take them out and you can take them home. And there's a lovely big reading room, where I worked for half a century, every day. I was part of the furniture. That's where almost every word of every book I've ever written has actually been written in the reading room of the London Library, until the last three. The last three... I don't go to the Library much anymore; I'm too old. It's too exhausting to get there by tube. And if I go by taxi it costs me about £60 a day extra, so that's no good. And, of course, thanks to Wikipedia, which people laugh at, but is by far the greatest new information tool that's happened in my lifetime. It's absolutely wonderful, I think. And I never catch it out. I've caught out Encyclopaedia Britannica several times; I've never caught out Wikipedia, except once on a minute point, and I put in a correction. And I was delighted that within half an hour they were on to me. They were ringing me up and saying, 'What did you mean by this and what is your authority for making this change, you know?' You can't just muck about with it, as people think you can. I find it totally reliable and perfectly wonderful. And so I now, in my old age, use it a very, very great deal, and it saves me going to the London Library, which now anyway has too many stairs and it's too big. It's just doubled in size. I mean, 15 years ago, you know, they bought the building next door, so now it's twice the size it used to be, and I can't even find my way around it any more. I mean, I used to know every single step and stone of it, but I don't anymore, and it's... there are so many stairs, and I'm bad at stairs now, particularly if I'm carrying a lot of books, so I go there now very seldom. I love it dearly; I owe it an enormous debt. When I... when we moved house a year ago I had to get rid of an awful lot of books, and I thought the least I could do was to ask the Library to come and look and take anything it wanted. It took about 30 or 40 books, so I was glad to be able to repay a little of what I owe it. But, I mean, I couldn't... I couldn't have produced those books without it, no possible way.

[Q] Wasn't she quite keen on driving up drives or something? Is someone who...
She always did that. Well, that was... she was always terribly interested in houses, and if she saw an open drive-gate she would always swing in and go down the drive and have a look at the house. Probably not stop, just look at it and drive out again, you know; do a U-turn and drive out again. And she always had a fallback position if somebody... if challenged. She would always say, 'Does Mrs Fordyce live here?' And there was a terrible moment when a lady said, 'I am Mrs Fordyce', once! That was a very bad moment, the only time I think I've ever seen my mother at a loss for words. But she... driving was enormously important in her life, and it was actually doing that, swinging into the open driveway, she did that one day in France in 1940... when we were at the Embassy. It must have been in 1945. And she swung into this driveway. And there was a very pretty, small house with an American GI lounging on the steps. And she said, 'What is this house? Do you happen to know who owns it?' And he said, 'Well, I do, actually. It's owned by Bill Bullitt, who was the American ambassador in Paris just before the war.' And Bill Bullitt was actually still in Paris. He was by this time working in SHAEF, which was the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force in Versailles. So my mother rang him up and said, you know, 'Are you still using your house? And he said no, no, it's part of my life... and it doesn't belong to me, it belongs to the Institut de France, who'd been letting me have it at a peppercorn rent, but, I mean, if you want it you can take it. I don't want it anymore.' So that's what happened, and we got the peppercorn rent; we paid practically nothing for this perfectly beautiful house, in which my father stayed until he died in 1954, and my mother stayed on until 1960.

[Q] Your father died quite young?
He died very young, indeed, yes. He died at sea. He was on his way, on holiday, to stay with a friend in Jamaica, and he got a sudden very, very, very bad haemorrhage at sea, and the ship put into Vigo in Spain, by which time he was dead. And my mother was clearly in a terrible way about it. He'd been ill for a long time, but he… I think he knew he was dying, but we didn't, he never told us. And I was working at the Foreign Office at about 5 o'clock one afternoon and the telephone rang and it was my mother saying, 'Darling, it's the worst.' And I sort of suspected what that must mean, but she said, 'Papa's dead and now I'm in Vigo with…' – he's been put in this sort of huge Spanish, wildly-carved Baroque coffin – 'and I've got to get him to London. Can you arrange for a plane to come and pick us up?'
And I managed to find some sort of private air company that did this sort of thing. But the sad thing was, they said, 'Yes, we could do it, all right.' And I said, 'Good, well, I'll… you know, where are you taking off from? I'll be there.' And they said, 'I'm afraid we won't have room for you and a body and a heavy coffin and your mother. We can't take anybody more.' So I couldn't go to her, as I wanted to, and I had to wait till she got back to London. But, anyway, there it was. And she was in a very bad way for about a year and drank too much, and it was all rather awful and embarrassing, and I was afraid she'd never get over it. But she did. She got over it very, very well in the end and went on for another quarter of a century. I mean, she was actually a widow longer than she was a wife and lived to be 94.

[Q] Do you want to tell me something about your friend, Patrick Leigh Fermor?
Patrick Leigh Fermor, known to all as Paddy. Paddy was the most extraordinary man I think I've ever known in my life for sheer erudition, on the one hand, and fun, on the other. I've never known a man, I think, really, with such extraordinary energy and imagination and fantasy and knowledge about everything, particularly...  I first really got to know him... I'd met him on several occasions before, but he became a really bosom friend of my mother's. I mean, they corresponded. She was one of those three or four people that he corresponded with most. I've got endless letters. That pile over there is the second volume of his letters, which I've been going through, and the editor, Adam Sisman, is coming to pick them up this evening. I first really got to known him when we all went on a cruise. My mother was lent a little Greek caique, which was seating ten people, or not even I think, six. And this was in the late summer of 1955. I'd just arrived in Belgrade, but I managed to get a couple of weeks' leave. Anne and I drove down to Athens, Piraeus, and picked up this boat, and it was very small and pretty uncomfortable, but perfectly delightful. And Paddy and Joan were there, and two other great friends, Frank and Kitty Giles, and my mother and Anne and I. And we sailed for a fortnight around the Aegean. And it, I think it was one of the most informative and also formative fortnights of my life, because there was Paddy being huge fun, but also knowing absolutely... speaking bilingual Greek, of course, and talking about everywhere and talking about Greek life, talking about Greek history, talking about Byzantium, talking about the whole world. It was Paddy's world, really, and he talked about it magically and fascinatingly and gave me an insight into the Greek world, into the world of the Eastern Mediterranean, that has really changed my life. I mean, without it I think I would never have written three books on the history of Byzantium. I probably wouldn't have written my book on the Mediterranean. I don't know. But that's just a tribute to his knowledge and erudition.

What was just as important really, with Paddy, was the sheer fun, I mean, the singing. He knew heaven knows how many songs and loved singing songs in a different language, making it up as he went along. 'Gnorízeis, John Peel, con su abrigo... you know, Gnorizeis, John Peel, and [...], Jan Stewer, Pietro Garni, Pietro Davi, Danieli Widden, Enrique Hawk, El Vecciozio, Thomas O'Cobbly, e tanti quanti...' he was... you know, anything like this. He'd get the whole thing going. And I remember a day when... on that cruise when we were in Santorini and having a drink in some little café, and there were some people next door in this tavern, the table next door which was, I think, fairly drunk. And this was the height of the Cyprus crisis in '55. And they started... they realised that this was an English table, and they started, according to Paddy... I mean, we couldn't understand a word they were saying, but they were sort of making rather nasty remarks for us to hear. And then suddenly they started to sing, and Paddy instantly said, 'Quick, stand up, National Anthem!' So we all stood up, and Paddy, of course, knew all the words, and sang them lustily at the top of his voice. And then, when they'd finished, he alone went on with verses two and three, which the other table didn't know, so it was game, set and match to us. And they did come over and apologise afterwards and we all had a glass of ouzo together and it was all right. But that was a very remarkable moment.

But you have to read Paddy's books and read his letters to understand the extraordinary charm of this man. I mean, he seemed to be able to speak every language, he knew every poem, you know, Greek mythology... I don't know, he was impossible to fault, really. Anything in history. But this wonderful comic imagination that went with it, he was astonishing, and I think, you know, he was sacked from about four schools as a child, and then when he was 16 he decided to walk to Constantinople, which he did. Took him about four years, taking... the books he took with him were so extraordinary. I mean, one of them was a volume of Horace's Odes, and the Oxford Book of English Verse, and he had about six books that he took with him in his rucksack.
He lived on £5 a week sent to him by his mother to poste restantes. And he had one letter of introduction to some German baron, who lived in some castle, somewhere, so he went there. The German baron said, don't worry, all right, we'd better put him up for the night or something like that. It'll be rather a bore, but he's 17-year-old... and then, he was so fascinating and so fascinated with and went straight through to their library and discovered the most wonderful things and talked and talked and talked all night, this 17-year-old, you know, that they wouldn't let him go; he stayed for about three weeks. And then, of course, they wrote to the next castle down the road and said, this boy's absolutely extraordinary, do take him in for a couple of nights, because, he'll fascinate you. So Paddy did this thing, you know, and some nights, sleeping under a hedge, other nights in a huge four-poster bed in a Schloss.
And he wrote... he should have written three books; he wrote two: A Time of Gifts and Between the Woods and the Water, both of which must be... they are essential reading. They are dazzlingly brilliant and frightfully funny as well. And his last book, he really got a sort of writer's block on; it was terribly sad. He was always... he eventually, I think, realised that he was never going to be able to finish it. He was, by this time, in his late 80s. And he wrote endless bits and pieces for it, which were all cobbled together by my daughter, Artemis, and Colin Thubron, because Artemis wrote his biography, so she knew him really better than anybody. And she and Colin Thubron, after he died, found all the little bits of manuscripts and cobbled them together in another book called The Broken Road, which is not quite like the first two, obviously, but is... it's full of wonderful stuff, well worth reading. No, he was certainly the most remarkable man I think I've ever known in my life. 

I first went to Venice in the summer of 1946 when I was about to be 17 years old, and I fell in love with it then and there. We only went for a day. My parents had a favourite hotel on Lake Garda that they went to every year. It was a very simple little hotel kept by a drunken Irishman called Leonardo Walsh, and it was ravishingly beautiful, 16th-century little house right on the edge of the lake. Pretty uncomfortable, but good food, fish straight out of the lake. And the most enchanting place, really. I think one of the loveliest places I've ever been to in my life. And they went there every year. They discovered it before the war and they went here every year and picked up when the war was over. And so this was the first post-war visit, and they took me with them. And one day my mother said, 'Let's go to Venice for the day.' And it was only two hours along the autostrada, and so off we went. We got up very early in the morning, I remember, and we drove off and got there at about 10:30 or 11. And I remember my first sight of the piazza; I was absolutely flabbergasted. In those days... I mean, I was not a sensitive child, I wasn't mad about looking at buildings or pictures or anything like that, but Venice hooked me from the very, very first day. And I remember that afternoon, my mother had some appointment, she had to go and see someone she hadn't seen since before the war or something, and my father and I were left together. And my father said, 'Right, I'll show you Venice.' He knew it very, very well, because they'd always gone there before the war as well. And he said, 'The great thing to remember about Venice is that the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. However beautiful any individual church or palazzo may be, the ultimate miracle is the ensemble, is the whole thing; that is the wonder.' So he said, 'This afternoon we're just going to walk through Venice, we're just going to walk around Venice. We're not going into any buildings at all, except two. At the beginning, we're going to go into Saint Marks, and at the end we're going to go into Harry's Bar', and that's exactly what we did. And when we left, after we'd had our drink in Harry's Bar and met up with my mother, we got into a gondola, which in those days one used as a taxi in the normal way, got into a gondola and drove up to Piazzale Roma, where we'd left our car. And as we... as I sat in that gondola, it was just at twilight and all the lights were coming on, and I thought, this is the most beautiful place I've ever been to in the world. I must always... You know, I'm going to make this part of my life; it's too wonderful. I remember thinking that.

Anyway, a year or two later my father left the British Embassy and was asked by his friend, Sir Alexander Korda, if he would represent the British Film Producers' Association every year at the Venice Film Festival. Any my father, of course, was only too delighted. He'd never taken a photograph in his life, but that wasn't the point. The point was representation of and giving smart little dinner parties for the directors and the stars and all that. And, fortunately, this happened in my holidays, so I was able to go, too. So that was another three years, I should think, of being in Venice and going to Venice and getting to know it a little bit better.
And then, really... well, then I joined the Foreign Office and was sent elsewhere, and Venice was more or less out of my life for quite a few years, until 1970. And in 1970, I think it was, it might have been '69, I was rung up by Sir Ashley Clarke, who had been our ambassador in Rome for years and years and years, and said, 'We've got to do something about Venice.' You remember that in 1966, three, four years ago, there had been these terrible, terrible floods, both in Venice and in Florence. And he... 'We' – said Ashley Clarke – we started up something called the Italian Arts and Archives Rescue Fund to work in both Florence and Venice. But it soon became clear that Venice was, had suffered far, far more than Florence. Florence – it was a one-time thing; it was probably never going to happen again. Venice – it was a sign that something was seriously wrong, and it was getting worse and worse every year, practically.
Italy appealed to United Nations, well, to UNESCO. UNESCO commissioned a report on Venice. Big, fat book like that came out, which was very bad news indeed. It said, basically, that Venice was being attacked on three sides simultaneously: first of all, the sea, which was rising; secondly, the land, which was sinking; and, thirdly, the air, which was polluting. The rising of the sea, global warming, I mean, there's not too much one can do about that, although, in fact, in Venice they've now very nearly finished this tremendous series of gates, like the Thames Barrier, only much, much bigger, around the three entrances into the lagoon. But there had been things you could about the other things. The land was subsiding, largely because after the war they had trebled the size of the industrial zone on the mainland, Mestre and Marghera, and added sort of petrochemical industries. So these factories were belting out about 50,000 tonnes of concentrated sulphuric acid every year, which was screwing its way into the stone, the marble, the brick, the bronze... I mean, everything Venice was made of was being eaten away by this terrible pollution. Well, and, thirdly, the same industrial zones were responsible for drawing immense quantities out from under the bed of the lagoon, with the result of the whole bed of the lagoon was sinking, and Venice was sinking with it.

So the last two problems were very, very quickly solved. The industrial zone was made to change a lot of old plant and old equipment for newer, less polluting stuff, and aqueducts were built. Well, they really more pipelines, but the Italians call them acquedotti, to bring fresh water from the mountains, only 50 miles away, so that all the wells leading to the table of freshwater under Venice have been sealed. I mean, every square in Venice has its well, but you can't get into any of them now; they've all got a steel cover on top, and they're... And the result of this was that within a very, very short time, the subsidence virtually stopped, and one or two little corners of Venice actually went up a bit. And gradually over the years, also, the atmospheric pollution has got very, very, very much better. The global warming, the sea is now the big problem. As I say, they have built, they're about to finish, these great closing locks, which will normally lie flat on the bed of the lagoon, but will rise up like that when the waters threaten. And when they're in place, then I think Venice should be safe from all the major floods, until... well, I don't know, forever is pushing it, because I suppose, theoretically, there might come a moment, if global warming continues, that the waters rise above the level of the dam, and then we'll be in trouble again. But, I mean, that won't happen for a century or more, and, with any luck, won't happen at all.

Ashley rang me up, as I say, in '69 or '70, and said, 'We are now... we've now realised that it's Venice, not Florence, that has to be helped. So we're founding a new organisation, which is to be called Venice in Peril, and will you be chairman?' And I said, 'No, of course, I won't, Ashley. You've got to be the chairman. You're the ex-ambassador. You're bilingual in Italian. You know all the ministers by their first names; you can go and bang the desk on, in their offices and things in a way I can't possibly do. You've got all the clout; I've got none.' And he said, 'No, but Francis, his wife and I are going to live in Venice and oversee all the work that we're going to be doing. What we want is a fundraiser in London so I couldn't think of any more reasons to say no, so I said yes. I mean, I loved Venice anyway, and I obviously wanted to help all I could. And so we started Venice in Peril in 1970, and it's still going strong, I'm glad to say. Its work will never be over; there'll always be work to be done. And it's no good saying, oh, well, Venice is part of it; why don't the Italians do it? The Italians are totally crushed by the weight of their artistic heritage. I mean, every town and every village in Italy has got so much to be preserved, conserved, insured, I don't know, I mean, the list is endless, they can't do it all themselves. And, after all, it's we who go there for our holidays every year and enjoy them, so it's up to us to do our bit. And Venice in Peril actually has done an enormous amount, not as much as Save Venice Inc., the American opposite number, which obviously is much, much bigger and much richer and has done a lot more. But we've done about a dozen major monuments in Venice, starting with the Madonna dell'Orto, which was Tintoretto's parish church, and we not only restored the building, but we also restored all the Tintoretto pictures he left there, of which there are five. And we did the Porta della Carta, the main entrance into the Doge's Palace, and we did a lovely little church called San Nicolo dei Mendicoli, which very few people know. It's way out on the outside, but it's one of the oldest and loveliest churches in Venice. And a lot of other stuff, and... But, I mean, as I say, there will always be work to be done. And there are still several, I don't know how many, other international... I mean, not international, but other national organisations like ours that are still working on it. The Dutch have a very active one, I know, for example. Of course, the Dutch know more about flooding than anybody, so they've been very useful in other ways too.

To me, Venice is such a miracle. I can't bear to see what's happening now, because it's being totally killed by international tourism. Thank God they've now made a law banning these huge ships, these vast, 17-deck, 5,000-passenger leviathans, but... they passed a law last week stopping them, but it'll be a good five or six years before they've got the alternative ready, so it's going to go on for some time. And, you know, the last time I was in Venice, which was last February, I don't... I was there for three days; I don't remember seeing a Venetian. There were only tourists, you know. And the Venetians are leaving. They can't bear it any more. I mean, they can't get onto a bus, you know. Life is impossible for them.

[Q] You wrote a very famous book about Venice.
Well, I wrote A History of Venice in two volumes. I mean, one was just a continuation of the other, because, you know... Venice was an independent republic for over 1000 years, time comfortably longer than that which separates us from the Norman Conquest, during which... during several centuries, of which it was the most powerful state in the Mediterranean and certainly the richest. That all went, say, in the 15th century, thanks, first of all, to the advances of the Turks all over the Eastern Mediterranean. And, secondly, of course, to the discovery at the end of the 15th century of the Cape route to the Indies, which meant that you could load... you could load one ship in London or Antwerp or wherever, Hamburg, and sail it all the way round to the Indies without unloading. In the old days, of course, you'd have gone through the Mediterranean, but when you got to the east side of the Mediterranean, you had to unload and either go down through the Red Sea, which is... was bursting full of pirates, or put it onto a shambling camel caravan that would take the next four years walking through Central Asia, you see. But, I mean, at least you could do it; you could get there, you could get to China. And then the... when the Turks mopped up the whole of the Eastern Mediterranean, that was no longer possible. So the Mediterranean became a backwater; it lost all its importance, and Venice suffered with it. And then came, really, came the great problem: with every year that passed Venice was getting poorer and poorer. Nobody wanted the Mediterranean anymore, nobody wanted the ships... It was known for its shipping, for its commerce. It was out of a job. Its occupation was done. And so what was it going to do?
And then, we don't know who, but some genius, I like to think, round towards the end of the 17th century, said, 'I know, we will make Venice the pleasure capital of the world; we will make it the Las Vegas of the world', which they did. This was, fortunately, coincided with the beginning of the Grand Tour. So everybody, all the rich, young milords, not only from England, but from all over northern Europe, would come out on the Grand Tour, you know, and they would make, on the whole, for Rome, which was obviously the... finish off their good-son classical education. But on their return journey, they would always stop in Venice, where the gambling was for higher stakes, the courtesans were more beautiful and experienced; where, if you were that way inclined, you could listen to opera, which was invented in Venice in the middle of the 17th century; and where, if you were English, of course, you would call on the Consul, Consul Joseph Smith, who had lived there ever since he was a child and knew everything and everyone, and happened to be Canaletto's agent. And Consul Smith would say, oh, you must come and see my friend, Canaletto, in his studio, because he's got some wonderful things, you know. And so you would go with Consul Smith to Canaletto's studio, and you wouldn't get out of that without a couple of rather large canvases, of which Consul Smith would clearly take his cut. And that's why there are a hundred Canalettos in England and about two in Venice, you know. But then they don't want them in Venice; they know what the place looks like, you know. But for the young English milords, they went back after three months or so in Venice, you know, with a couple of Canalettos and a mild dose of the clap, and, you know, I mean, for them it was the greatest year of their lives, and we've got all the Canalettos to prove it.

[Q] How did you go about writing that history? Did you do that from the...
I did it from beginning to end, the only way I can ever do anything. The advice given originally, I think, to Alice in Wonderland, you know: start at the beginning, go on until you get to the end, and stop. And that's always what I've done. I mean, I've never... I have friends who sort of start in the middle of... even novelists, they start in the middle of the novel, you know, or they start a particularly easy bit or a particularly difficult bit. I just start at the beginning.

I went to Mount Athos twice. The first time I think was just the moment I'd left the Foreign Office, I t was about 1963, and the first time was not a success because I went entirely by myself, it poured with rain, I couldn’t speak Greek, it was bitter cold, and I gave it up after three days. I was having a perfectly horrible time. Also, I didn’t have a proper rucksack because I'd been told that it was, you just picked up a mule at the port and, of course, there were no mules, so I had my little suitcase, which I had to carry, which was ridiculous in itself, shows how inexperienced and hopeless as I was at the whole thing.
But anyway, a couple of years later we did it again much better. This time I had a Greek friend with me, a lovely friend called Costa, whom I'd known for a long time. He was a wonderful traveller, and my friend Reresby Sitwell, who was the son of Sacheverell Sitwell and the nephew of Edith and Osbert Sitwell, who was an exact contemporary of mine at school. And he was, at that time, working for Fortnum & Mason and brought a wonderful, special rucksack, absolutely full of Fortnum & Mason goodies, which, my God, one needs on Mount Athos where the food is... I mean, it's gastronomic crucifixion three times a day, it's a nightmare. And anyway, off we went, and the second time it was an enormous success because it was, first of all, the sun shone, and it is one of the most beautiful places in the world.

The Holy Mountain, it has been there since about the tenth century, and it consists of 20 Orthodox monasteries, 17 Greek, one Russian, one Bulgarian, and one Serbian. And all you do is you wander from one monastery to the next. I mean, they may be an hour, two hours, three hours away from each other and you'd walk. Nowadays, I'm told, you've got a nasty little road and a bus or two, which I hate the idea of. It was all much purer in my day. But the point of Mount Athos is, as you probably know, the most famous thing about it is that it's completely all male. Not only is no women allowed onto it at all, but no cows, no hens. I mean, as far down the animal scale as you can get, for as long as you can ban the female, you do. It doesn’t, alas, go as far as mosquitoes, but there it is. Anyway, it's been like that for the last thousand years and it is very, very remarkable. You'll never see a woman, you'll never see a child, and we were there for 17, 18 days and 17, 18 days without actually seeing a woman, it's quite odd and eerie, something about it, you know, not seeing a child at all or hearing one cry or anything. But there it is, just these black robed old men and some of them are actually quite young, most of them in their 60s or 70s, I suppose, and doing really nothing, but praying and organising these great, wonderful services, which go on all day and, indeed, most of the night. Anyway, this is... off we went and we covered, I think, 17 of the 20 monasteries. I'm told that nowadays, in theory, you're only meant to stay there for 3 or 4 days, but in my day you could stay as long as you liked.

It was perfectly fascinating, because every monastery... they're nearly all extremely beautiful, these wonderful things, you know, often looking out on the sea, sometimes from a great height. There's one that looks like the Potala [Palace] in Lhasa, the Simonopetra Monastery, which is right up there on a high, high, high mountain, gazing down at the sea, it's absolutely vertiginous and perfectly wonderful. And what you do is you arrive, you have to arrive before sunset, at sunset all monasteries close completely, and they have their own times, so you can't do it, you can't say at half-past four or five, because half-past four or five is half-past nine or ten in Athos, I think. One never gets the time right – every monastery has its different time. But sunset they all shut, so you have to be there before sunset. And you go in and you politely ask if you could have a bed for the night and they always say yes. You don't pay, I mean, a little donation at the end is fine, but no money is actually asked for, and it's pretty uncomfortable. I never saw a bedbug, I have to say. The beds seemed to be very clean. The sanitation leaves quite a lot to be desired, the long-drop at the corner of the rather insecure looking balcony. And I say absolutely disgusting food. I mean, a single, stone-cold anchovy staring up from your plate saying, 'I bet you can't.'
And anyway, you wander from monastery to monastery and you meet the most extraordinary people. I mean, one or two, I met two men who'd driven taxis in New York and then, you know, their wives had died and they'd come at the end of their life here to spend their last years on Athos. And I met one man who had never, actually, in his life clapped eyes on a woman. That was a most extraordinary thing because his mother had died in childbirth having him and there were no other relatives, except her brother who was a monk on Mount Athos, who took this tiny baby to the monastery where he'd been ever since. He was now about 80 and during that time, in his entire life, he'd never seen a woman. The nearest he'd come to it was frescos of the Virgin, because there were wonderful frescos everywhere in all the refectories, all over the monasteries, lovely, lovely frescos, usually about the 16th or 17th century. And you are allowed frescos of the Virgin Mary, but she was the only woman who may be represented, so that's what you get. You don't get Mary Magdalene or any of the other female saints, only the Virgin. So, that was the only, the nearest to womanhood he'd ever come across in his entire life.

And we were there, I'd say, nearly, we were there, I think, two-and a-half weeks or something like that. It gets quite tiring by the end, but the beauty sets you up so, I mean, it's so marvellous and so completely, completely unspoiled, you know. And it's really a wonderful walking holiday through this ravishingly beautiful country and, I'd say, a sort of minimum of hospitality extended at the end of the day. So it was great fun and I... we said as we tramped along, we said, 'We must write a book about this', and I said, 'Well, we'll split it. I'll write half and you, Reresby, write half.' Costa, as a Greek, wasn't going to write anything. He was a beautiful photographer, he provided a lot of photographs. Well, we all took photographs for it. And then the only trouble was that Reresby said, 'It's no good, I can't write.' And I said, 'Don't be silly, you're a Sitwell, you've only been told by your family you can't write, because they never stop banging away at you. You're the only male member of this generation.' He had a younger brother, actually. And they never stopped telling him that he was unworthy to carry the name of Sitwell. I mean, they were all absolutely beastly to him, so he had a walloping inferiority complex and I said, 'I'm perfectly sure, you know, this is just the sort of thing, you write this, Reresby, you'll do it beautifully.' And the terrible thing was, of course, that he was right and I was wrong – he couldn't write. And his piece is really, I think, rather embarrassing. He's dead now, so I can say this. He actually compared the individual monasteries on Mount Athos to houses at Eton, which was a bad one, and I read it and my heart sank, but anyway, there is it. The book was published and, and it had quite a good... it quite a success. He wrote the sort of itinerary, where we went and what days we went, and I wrote a sort of historical essay on the Holy Mountain, and it turned out all right. That was actually the first book I ever wrote between two covers. The first time I saw my name on the cover of a book. I'd already started writing my big book on the Normans, but I hadn't got very far on it by then. And that was the first of my sort of major expeditions.

This is the book that we actually wrote about it. It came out in 1964 or 1965, I think, and it was the first time I ever saw my name on the front cover of a book, you know, and it's full of lovely pictures of the monasteries and I look through it quite often, really, just to remind myself of how beautiful the place was and what a marvellous time we had there. It was... it's still, I gather, going strong. Oddly enough, I had dinner last night with a man who just came back from there. He says it's not quite the same as it was in my day. There are now vast numbers, apparently, of Russian and Bulgarian pilgrims who come along, who are very pilgrimmy, I mean, they appear to be very, very pious. But there are large numbers of them and, I mean, it was the emptiness of the place that was so lovely in my day and I feel it may be getting uncomfortably crowded. On the other hand, he said that the monastic food was now delicious. This I find very, very hard to believe, considering how completely filthy it was in my day and I don’t quite see, either, how the monks have the money to, unless they actually charge nowadays. Perhaps they do, I don’t know. But they certainly didn’t in my day and, you know, inevitably, all those things, they must ultimately change, they must get spoiled, but they are being very firm about the number of people who can go and, theoretically, apparently, your stay is restricted to three monasteries, three nights at three different monasteries. And that's it. Then you're out. Although he did say that, in fact, once you're in, nobody looks at any of your papers and nobody knows how long you've stayed at all, so, in fact, you can stay on forever if you wanted. So anyway, that's... that’s Mount Athos and it's been going for well over a thousand years and long may it last.

And then, about three years later, my telephone rang one morning and it was my friend Costa, with whom I'd been on Mount Athos, saying, 'Then' – he started every sentence with the word 'then' – 'then there are some friends of ours who were doing, crossing the Sahara by Land Rover and camel to make a film, would you be interested in coming?' And it happened that, actually, the previous day I had written the final full-stop to my first book on the Normans and so I was free. You know, it seemed almost an indication that I was being told to go and so I said yes, and forked out £400 for the complete cost of the whole trip.
And there were... seven of us, three ladies, Anne Balfour-Fraser, who was running it and making the film, and her friend, Marie-Thérèse [d'Arcangues] – this was very much a lesbian thing – and Marie-Thérèse's friend, other, Miss [Micheline] Holzer. So there were three girls and there was my friend Johnny Hinchingbrooke, now Lord Sandwich, and me and Costa. And three Land Rovers, three in each, because we had one Saharan driver and one Frenchman who was a Saharan guide, who spends his life in the Sahara taking people round, absolutely fascinating man, called Jean Soudriez. And we flew, well, Costa and I joined the party later. The party had flown... had driven down from Algiers to Tamanrasset, which was in the extreme south of Algeria, quite deep in the desert already. And we, Costa and I flew down and joined them, I think, two days later, and then we, off we set. We turned east to drive about a thousand miles, I should think, more or less due east, through the south of Algeria into the State of Niger, and then from there into Chad. And you go through... you start off in the mountains of the Tassili, which were absolutely full of wonderful prehistoric frescos. And then you go on, by the time you get to Chad you get another even bigger, more formidable and highly volcanic range called the Tibesti, which was our objective, our target. That's where we had to go. And it was, again... and I found it absolutely fascinating too, on about the second night, you just drive all day across, not naturally across dunes, you can't drive across dunes, it's impossible, but only about a seventh of the Sahara is made of dunes. Most of it is good, quite good flat gravel surface. I mean, you can go, I don't know, 40 or 50 miles an hour on it, probably. Of course, at any moment you're going to be held up by something. There was no road. But nobody had been across that particular track, I think, for about 50 years, well, no, 40 years. There was a Berliet expedition in 1926. The tyres made by the Berliet trucks, the marks, were still there, because nothing ever disappears in the desert, everything you do leaves its mark and the mark stays forever. It's quite extraordinary because it's so dry. There's nothing to sort of wash anything away. And the feeling you get after a couple of days, you sort of, after you've sort of changed gear, there's a moment of panic before you change gear, you know. This is so strange, this is so empty, this is so wild, it's such a long way away from absolutely anywhere, and panic rises in your breast, but it subsides again, fortunately. And you change gear and once you change gear, it's absolutely wonderful.

The first thing, I think, that strikes one about it is the total, total, total silence all the time. The only place I've ever found that elsewhere is in the Antarctic. There was just not any noise at all. Sometimes the wind, but apart from the wind, absolutely nothing, and that's a most extraordinary and wonderful, peaceful feeling. And secondly, the other wonderful thing about it was the cleanliness. Everything was sparkling, sparkling clean because it's so dry that if any small animals and things die, you know, it's dry, white bones in no time flat. And everything is sort of sparkling in the sunshine. And one day we came across, we saw, on the horizon, what seemed to be a large mountain made entirely of silver. It's very difficult, because it's so, the air is so clear, that you can see for miles and miles and miles and you don't know whether the mountain that you see is a huge thing 50 miles away or quite a small thing one mile away. All those sorts of the basic, instinctive measures, the way we have to decide how far distance is and that sort of thing, it doesn't work there, so one is endlessly being surprised of the distances, how short or how long something is. And we saw this huge silver mountain and it proved to be... well, it wasn't a mountain and it wasn't silver, it was an enormous pile, 40 feet high, of tins left by the French Army, 30 years before, all sparkling, you see, nothing rusted, all glinting in the sunshine, and there were signs of the French occupation. There were little French forts and camps, all, of course, completely deserted now, but looking marvellously like sort of Beau Geste forts, you know, of the old days, the old days of the French Sahara. And anyway, we reached our target in the Tibesti and we... no Land Rovers, I mean, much too steep, so we moved onto camels. We left the Land Rovers at a little oasis called Aouzou [sic], and moved onto camels, or really, moved more onto our feet because travel by camel in that area, at least, is so uncomfortable that nobody could really bear it for very long. The Toubou, the tribe who lived there, had never got around to designing a proper camel saddle, and it's just two pieces of wood, like that and like that, and you sit between them, and it's torture. And so, occasionally, after a very long day you get on the thing for an hour, if you really feeling very tired, but really, most of the time you're walking. It's much easier. They're nasty animals, camels, anyway, I mean, they're bad tempered and they suffer from halitosis, unique in my experience, and one's happier off them than on them, certainly. So we walked or camelled up through the Tibesti Mountains to see this extraordinary volcanic, gorges, sort of natron. I don't quite know what natron is. It's sort of tar or something of that sort. And a great sort of bubbling, volcanic, bubbling mountains, you know, and extremely unpleasant smells. A very, very sinister place indeed. Then, anyway, then we did all that and we started our journey back.

Sadly we had to go back on the same route as we'd come. It would've been nice to have done a circuit, but all the time we'd been leaving petrol and water at various places to keep us going and therefore there was no alternative, we had to go back the same way. And we were just getting into a place called, I think, Bardaï, not very far on our homeward journey, when we were still on the camels and we were all actually, at that moment, riding and we got to within, I suppose, I don't know what, half a mile of the little oasis and French ex-military camp, where... I mean, the French had left in theory, but, in fact, there were one or two still around, you know, who'd attached to the Army, sort of remainers who loved it and wanted to stay at all costs and that sort of thing, because it gets to you, the Sahara does, in the most extraordinary way. And anyway, the camels sniffed home and like all quadrupeds when they sniff home, broke into a gallop and Costa fell off. And Costa was already in his 60s and not athletic and it's a long way from the top of a camel onto rocks. And he hurt his back very, very badly. We thought he'd broken it. He was lying there in excruciating pain. We eventually... the oasis was only a few hundred yards away, and we got a door, I remember, and carried it back and somehow got him onto the door and we carried him in and put him into bed and then it was worse. And there was this little French Army place still functioning, I mean, about three men, and they had a radio, but the radio, I need hardly tell you, was broken and we had... we knew, I mean, we had to get help. He couldn't have bounced another thousand miles across the desert, that was absolutely out, he had to be flown out somehow. So, every day, for about 3 or 4 days, I used to go up to this little army group and say, 'Any news of the radio?' 'Pff', they always said, you know, 'Pff', and then one day when I was coming back, it was the most extraordinary thing, I saw this young French sergeant in a pale blue quepi leading a group of about 10 – they're called goumiers, they're the local sort of soldiery, they're not in uniform, you know, they're just in their robes, but they are sort of, they're armed and they sort of patrol – and he, thank God, had a radio and sat down and one of the goumiers sat in the sand and wound the handlers, and we got through to Fort-Lamy, which was the capital of Chad, and that was remarkable. Within two hours an aeroplane was on its way up from Fort-Lamy, an ambulance aeroplane. And we took Costa on-board and took him back to Fort-Lamy, you know, and the hospital at Fort-Lamy was absolutely terrible. They had no anaesthetic, they had to undo, he hadn't broken anything, but he had impacted about six vertebrae into each other and that had to be straighten. And that is incredibly painful and the French doctor said, 'Sorry, we have no anaesthetic, we're going to have to do this without.' So, it was not pleasant. And he said that his... he was in a ward and that was absolutely terrifying, because on the opening date the family would arrive and get around the patient, tear off his bandages and stuff right into his mouth, you know. And the nurses were completely untrained. I mean, it had been... in the good old French days, it had been a lovely hospital, but by now the whole thing had practically collapsed because the one French doctor left in despair. And anyway, the rest of us went back without him, sadly, and he was all right in the end. I mean, he was fine, he recovered completely.

When we got back to Tamanrasset they all went home, but I stayed on because I wanted to do and see the prehistoric cave paintings in the Tassili [n'Ajjer] and there happened to be a tourist group leaving the next day, so I joined them and stayed another week or so in the Sahara. They are most extraordinary, pictures of men with huge, round, what appeared to be sort of diving bells on their heads, you know, which makes everybody immediately say, ‘Oh yes, well, you know, visitors from outer space’, but it's very, very strange and there was this extraordinary feeling of suspension in time. I mean, I remember one day... one's always looking, of course, in the heat of day one's always looking for shade, of which there is virtually none. What we would do is we would string a piece of cloth across two Land Rovers and sit between them and have the shade that way. But one day, I remember, I was just sort of walking and saw... there was a very, very narrow little cave, I mean, a lot of rocks and mountains around. It's not all sand by any means. And there was this little cave and I suppose it was only about six-foot deep, if that, but it provided a little bit of welcome shade, so I went in there for a minute and saw, on the ground around me, lots of little, curious little white pockmarked pieces of shell. And I realised it was ostrich egg. There haven't been ostriches there for the last 3000 or 4000 years, but 3000 or 4000 years ago, a man sat in that little cave, just where I was, eating his ostrich egg and leaving the shell on the floor, still there. I was the first person in there since. You know, that's the sort of... it's a very strange feeling and, again, I wrote another book about that. That was, I think, the first book about the Normans had come out by then and then The Sahara. I loved writing the Sahara book, it was lovely. Again, it's got lots of pictures in and that sort of thing.

I made about a couple of dozen historical documentaries for the BBC. I can't even remember all the subjects now. I remember the first one was on the Normans, which I'd just written my first book about, The Normans in Sicily, and I think that was in 1966 and my agent suggested that I write a little précis of the story and send it to the BBC, which I did, and I heard nothing for quite a long time and thought well, that's that, you know.
And then suddenly one evening, we were having dinner, the telephone rang and the man said, 'My name's Ken Shepheard, I'm from the BBC, we're very interested in your suggestion. Will you come and have lunch with me tomorrow and let's discuss it?' So, we had lunch in Gerard Street and a week later I was in Sicily. I mean, it all happened very quickly. And in those days... I mean, this was very, very primitive television, really, 1966, it was black and white, no colour yet, and, of course, everything was terribly slow because we had to... every day we had to send the rushes off to London and stay put until we got the okay, in case we had to do the whole thing again. So, I mean, you know, the slowness was absolutely appalling and I think the equipment was quite primitive, too. I mean, I know that I had... my microphone had a long lead which went all down my leg and out around about 10 yards into the bushes where the sound recordist was lurking. But still, we made the film. We had a terrible time in the most wonderful place in all Sicily, one of the most wonderful buildings in the world for me, the Palatine Chapel in Palermo, which is covered with the most wonderful Byzantine, very, very high quality Byzantine 12th century mosaics, and with an Arab stalactite roof over a Christian church. I mean, most extraordinary.

There was a perfectly horrible man who was the sort of priest in charge of it called Monsignor Portino and Monsignor Portino said 'no' to every request we made. First of all, he hated us to be there anyway, obviously, but somebody above him had given permission, so he had to accept us, but he was going to make our stay as nasty as possible. Anyway, and so: no, we couldn't put any lights on the mosaic at all, because all the little bits would drop out of the wall if we put any lights on them. You know, I mean, we were only going to have lights on the 22nd, so they were 40 feet up on the wall, it was perfectly crazy, but anyway, nothing. Then we got out the tripod and he said, 'Oh no, no tripods, it scratches the ground.' We said, 'No, we've got nice little saucers into which we put the tripods, so it doesn't scratch.' Still, no tripod. At this time, hundreds of ladies in stiletto heels were going round every day, but no tripod, so the unfortunate camera man had to lie on his back, turn the camera on very, very, very slow and do what he could. I mean, he, you know, he achieved something, but we all hated Mr Portino and the director, Ken Shepheard, who was a darling, wonderful man, I loved, we made a couple of dozen films together, I think, over the years, he spoke quite good Italian and he... eventually he lost his temper with Mr Portino at the end, and to my horror, I heard him... I saw him pointing to me and saying, 'Do you know who that man is? He's a Viscount. He's a member of the House of Lords, and when he gets back to London he's going to report you to the House of Lords, and I'm here to tell you there's going to be big, big trouble, you know, you don't mess around with Viscounts.' Mr Portino turned and said, 'Io sono un marchese' – I am a Marquis. Game, set, and match.

So, that was the first one we ever did. That was the only one I ever did in black and white. The next one we did was in colour and that was The Fall of Constantinople to the Turks in 1453, the capture of Constantinople. That was great fun, because, you know, the walls of Istanbul are still there, looking absolutely wonderful, you know, battered, but still standing, bloody, but unbowed. And it's a wonderful story, the heroic story of one of the great sieges of history. And that one went very, very well and then I think, after that, we sort of rather got into the swing of things and the BBC wanted more. And we did... what else did we do? We did Cortez discovering Mexico. That was very, very good. That was 1968, I remember, because it was the end of the Olympic Games in Mexico. It was the only way the BBC could afford to have a camera crew there – it was there already, it had just done the games, and then it went on to do our film immediately afterwards.
And Mexico was a great success. We loved Mexico. So, subsequently, we did a second one in Mexico about the Emperor Maximilian, you know, who was sent out to be emperor of Mexico. He was Franzs Joseph… the Emperor Franz Joseph's younger brother and he was murdered. There was a sort of left-wing party who were going to take over the Republicans. And they just captured him and murdered him, but it's, again, it's a terrifying story and his... because his wife went back to Europe to get help and then went mad and they couldn’t get her out of the Vatican and she lived in Rome in a hotel room with hens tied up to the chairs and things because she was afraid of being poisoned and she went and got her own water from the Trevi Fountain every day, that sort of thing. And so that made a very good story and then we did Napoleon's Hundred Days, from Elba to Waterloo. And that was really a gift, because Napoleon, you know, when he went up to Paris from Elba, when he escaped from Elba, went up to Paris, he knew that the Royalist army was going to be coming down the main road of the Rhone Valley, and so he took the mountain road to the east, through Grenoble, Sisteron, places like that, Digne, and every building at which he stayed the night, all the way up, is still there with a plaque, so you can follow exactly all the way, and, of course, it was ravishingly beautiful country. There are endless lovely pictures of Napoleon. Beethoven wrote the score and, you know, it was there on a plate.

We ended up in Waterloo, of course, and about six months before that – I'd never been to Waterloo – about, no, I think more like two or three months before we were actually going to go and do the shooting, I was... at that time I was a Liberal member of the House of Lords and I was on a... I used to go to meetings of things like the Council of Europe and Western European Union and things like that in Strasbourg or Luxembourg or Brussels or somewhere. I did that several times and we were in Brussels and doing a thing about military strategy, about which I knew absolutely nothing. I knew I couldn't make any useful contribution at all, so I took the afternoon off, together with three other delegates; we were paired, two, well, they were one Labour and one Conservative and two… two Labours, one Conservative and me who was a Liberal, and we drove off to Waterloo. And it was a blazing hot summer day and we had a delicious lunch in Waterloo, and all around Waterloo, you get the very, very, very clear impression that Napoleon won, because there were pictures of Napoleon everywhere, hundreds of postcards, he's on all the plates, he's on all the glasses, he's everywhere. You never, never, never see a picture of the Duke of Wellington at all. And one got a very, very clear impression, you know, that Wellington really hardly mattered. I did actually find one postcard of him saying that he'd distinguished himself in India, but not mentioning Waterloo. And I remember, I think we must have got rather drunk, because the Belgians were terrible drivers in those days because it was the only country in Europe that didn't demand driving licences or if it did, I mean, you could get them at 15 or something like that. And they were all... it was a hot summer evening and they were all driving back, probably most of them plastered, and they were... I mean, I've never been so frightened by so many cars, and I remember leaning out of the window and shaking my fist and shouting, 'We won!' on the way home.
And then what else... what other films did we make? We made several in Venice about, I was by this time very much involved in keeping Venice or trying to save Venice from all the problems it has, and we made, I think, three films there, one about it and one about the measures which were being taken to preserve it, and then we did another one 10 years later seeing to what extent those measures had worked.

I remember the last time, the last film, we were getting out of the vaporetto and I just... as we passed it, I pointed out to the boys, it was a very nice crew, that that's Harry's Bar, the famous Harry's Bar. And they were all rather impressed, excited about the thought of the real Harry's Bar where Hemingway drank and everything. So I said, 'Well all right' – in those days it wasn't so expensive as it is now – I said, 'when we've wrapped up the whole thing, I'll take us all out to dinner in Harry's Bar.' So, great excitement about that and, you know, everybody, they don't have best suits if you're a cameraman working away, but they all tried to sort of make themselves look as respectable as possible, except Les, the sound recordist, who looked exactly like Ken Dodd with his hair sticking absolutely straight up and a horrible, extremely smelly purple jersey, which he never took off, wore it every single day, and I suspect every single night as well, with holes in the corners, everywhere, deeply unshaven and really, I mean, looking a scarecrow. And I thought, my God, I've got to take this into Harry's Bar, the smartest place in Venice. Anyway, there was nothing to be done. I'd promised to do it, so in we went, and Harry's Bar behaved beautifully. They took one look at Les and they said, 'Yes sir, we've got you a very nice table upstairs', behind a rather large column in the sort of corner where nobody could see us at all. And that was fine, I was deeply relieved, so up we went there. And then I tried to explain what all the items on the menu were and everybody chose whatever it was, except Les who said, 'I'll have egg and chips.' And so it was an HM Bateman cartoon, the man who ordered egg and chips in Harry's Bar, you know, and everybody going, 'Aargh!' like this. Anyway, Harry's Bar behaved impeccably, 'Yes sir, certainly sir', noted it down. Brought these two beautiful fried eggs with lovely little matchstick things all around the edge. Les sent them back. So it was then the man who sent back the eggs and chips in Harry's Bar. They were insufficiently greasy and he wanted, you know, he wanted real, good old, lorry drivers' rest things, which, of course, Harry's Bar couldn't produce. I didn't think I was ever going to be allowed in there ever again in my life, but eventually I think I was forgiven.

There was a terrible one, this was long ago with my dear friend, Ken Shepheard, which was sad. It was towards the end of my television career, such as it was, and I was asked to go and make a film about the antiquities in Ethiopia, which were... was a UNESCO project. So I thought, lovely, I've never been to Ethiopia, this'll be fun. I went off to the London Library, as I always did, and started mugging up about Ethiopia. A week before our departure, the BBC rang me up and said, 'I'm sorry, we've got rather bad news for you. We forgot to ask the Emperor for permission and we just have and he said 'no', so we can't do it. But everybody got, we've got camera crews there already, so we're going to do it in Iran instead.' So, I mean, you know, so then I had to go back and start doing it on Iran. I only had a week by then. And I didn't... Ken Shepheard was not available and they gave me a young man, I can't remember what his name was, Daryl something, I think, and who had never been abroad. I don't think he'd ever been as far as Boulogne, and suddenly he found himself in Persia, couldn't speak a word – I mean, in Persia French takes you more or less everywhere – couldn't speak a word.

So, off we went to Persia and I'd had a bad experience with a previous camera crew. I mean, they'd been very bolshie and unfriendly and refused to eat with us and that sort of thing, and I didn't want this anymore. And my friend, Jim Mossman, who was a BBC Foreign Correspondent for television, said, 'You ought to get my friend Erik Durschmied, who would be really fun and who would work all night and there'd be no problems. And you'll love him too because he's great fun.' And so I got onto Erik Durschmied and he said yes, he'd love to come. So, the director and I fly off to Tehran and when we get there, there's a message from Erik Durschmied to say that he's got meningitis and he's not going to be able to come, but he's sending a young Frenchman, who is very good, he's a great friend of his, he's only 18 and he's just come back from Vietnam. And he will take over. So, this is the last thing we wanted and anyway, the young Frenchman who couldn't speak a word of English and the director couldn't speak a word of French arrived and was used to leaping out of parachutes, I mean, leaping out of aeroplanes and parachutes and filming on the way down, as he descended into the swamps of Vietnam, you know. That was his thing. Ask him to do a slow, sensitive close-up on a 6th century Armenian tile and he was completely useless. I mean, he'd never done that sort of thing before. So, the director despised him and refused to speak to him.
And then, fortunately, about 5 days later, we really didn't know what to do. I mean, we weren't getting any stuff in the can at all. And then Erik arrived. I mean, he can't have had, if it had been what he said it was, he couldn't possibly have got back, oh, I don't know, gone off with a girl or something. I don't know what happened, anyway. He suddenly turned up, so we were able to wave goodbye to the young Frenchman, who left with, I think, to his and our enormous relief. And Erik took over and Erik was the opposite of the young Frenchman because he could sort of do anything, but again, he absolutely horrified our director. For example, when Persepolis went up in smoke, Alexander the Great, you know, set fire to it and all this, Erik would turn his camera on and hurl it up into the air, 10 feet, so the camera was doing this while it was on, you know, and he'd catch it again. And the... you know, the director would be so horrified. It was his own camera, he could do whatever he liked, you know. Anyway, we only had Erik for the last three or four... and he wasn't really very good at all those sort of technical things either. It wasn't his thing. I mean, he was a newsman. Anyway, we got back and looked at the rushes and I thought, this is absolutely terrible, we have not got a film here, we just haven't got a programme. And it's all my fault, because if I'd settled for an ordinary BBC camera crew this would never have happened, it's all my fault. What will I do? My television career is over. The humiliation will be very great. And then Daryl, who had been pretty hopeless all the time we were there... put him back in England in a studio and he was absolutely brilliant. And somehow he cut this into a programme. It wasn't a very good programme, it was, I think, the only programme I ever made which was never repeated, but we got away with it.

The other extraordinary story that I have to tell you about one of these programmes I made, it was actually the second one, The Fall of Constantinople, which I mentioned before, to the Turks in 1453, and England's perhaps greatest historian, Sir Steven Runciman, had just written a book on the fall of Constantinople. I knew him slightly and we met and it was a wonderful book and it told me all I needed to know to make this film. So I said, 'Steven, I'm so glad you wrote that book because I'm making this film and, you know, it's really all I need, it's wonderful, it's offering the whole thing on a plate, I'm so grateful.' And he said, 'Where are my royalties?' And I said, 'Well, you know as well as I do historical fact doesn't earn royalties, I mean, it's public property. You can't claim simply on historical facts.' And he sort of grunted and disappeared. And then he always fancied himself, and told everybody, that he was a witch, he cast magic spells.
And we... this film was made and it looked lovely in colour. Did I say it was the first colour documentary they made? The trouble is that nobody, none of my friends had a colour television in those days, so I wanted my friends to see it in colour and so I discovered that the RAC, the Royal Automobile Club, to which at that time I belonged, because I used to go swimming in the evenings after the London Library, had a colour television, a very big one on a sort of stand. And so I hired it for the evening that my programme was due to be shown. It was due to come on at nine o'clock and I invited my friends for eight and gave them a glass of wine and a sausage roll or something, you know, a sandwich, and at five to nine, went to check that the television was working beautifully, which it was, and then at two minutes to nine said, 'Okay, come along in everybody, this film's just going to start.' At that moment, the screen went white and we had a snowstorm, which lasted for the next hour and stopped dead at ten o'clock. So, I mean, after two or three minutes of hopeless, useless twiddling of knobs, I said, 'Look, sorry, this is a disaster, too bad, forget about it, go back, have another drink, I'm terribly sorry, but it's off', which is what happened. And about a fortnight later, my friend, Natalie Brooke, who was another old friend of Steven Runciman, saw him and said, 'Oh, Steven, I haven't seen you for such a long time. I hoped to see you at John Julius's film showing, but you weren't there, and anyway, as it happens, I mean, it was no good because the television refused to work.' And Steven said, 'I know.' That's the only time I've ever had a spell put on me.

I did quite a lot on radio at one moment. I was Question Master for My Word and My Word was a very, very popular programme with Frank Muir and Denis Norden, you know. It was a very, very popular programme here, but it was hugely popular in America and whenever I used to... subsequently, went on a lecture tour to America and was introduced, they always said, 'And for five years he was the chairman of My Word.' And people were far more impressed by that than my having written a dozen books or anything like that. My Word was the thing, and then all the questions afterwards would always be about My Word, not about my lecture at all.
And it was great fun. I got a bit bored with it by the end, simply because all my words were written down, really. Everybody else was allowed to improvise, but I would see actually written on the script, 'Oh, well done, Frank, that was very amusing', you know, which I was perfectly capable, actually, of improvising for myself. And the result of that was that I did start improvising for myself and I think I possibly went rather too far. And I did it for four years, I think, but then I was sacked. Very, very nice handwritten letter from the director saying, 'Thank you so much, you've been lovely, but we think the time had come to make a change.' So, Antonia Fraser, who used to have been, who used to be one of the members of the quiz, she took over the chair from me.

And then we did a thing called Round Britain Quiz, which turned into Round Europe Quiz, and Trans-Atlantic Quiz, which were sort of cryptic clues and there was a wonderfully funny man who subsequently became President of Trinity College, Oxford, called Tony Quinton, and he used to set the questions, but the questions, as he set them, were extremely long. They had sort of four or five parts which you had to sort of remember. And they were... I would've found them very difficult. Well, I did find them quite difficult, but there was a wonderful lady always with me called Irene Thomas, who looked like a tiny Mrs Thatcher and was always exquisitely dressed with her little white gloves put down to one side on the microphone, you know. And she knew everything. She became a great star of radio. Everybody knew her name. Everybody used to ask me about her for years, you know, 'Tell me about Irene Thomas.' And she was... you know, she sung in virtually every choir. She knew everything there was to know about music, everything there was to know about literature. She'd read every novel and remembered it and every poem and remembered it, you know. She was quite extraordinary so... and she and I used to sort of fire questions to each other to try and sort of give each other ideas and it eventually worked rather well. That went on for about 10 years, I should think, and I think that really, more or less... I mean, I've done quite a lot of other sort of radio things as well, but those were the only sort of regular programmes that I went on doing, you know.

My father died on 1st January, 1954 and about two years before that he'd been given a peerage. Before that, he'd been called Duff Cooper and that was it. Then they gave him a peerage and he became Lord Norwich and when he died I, naturally, became Lord Norwich, because in those days there were no life peerages. Any peerage you got went automatically to the son. But there was nothing I could do about it because I was in the Foreign Service, which I'd only very, very recently joined, and when you're in the Foreign Service you're not allowed to get involved in politics in any way. So, I mean, I had the title, but I didn't... I wasn't allowed to take my seat in the House of Lords. And it wasn't until I left the Foreign Office in 1964 that I was able to take my seat in the House of Lords and I thought well, here I am, I'm a member of this thing, I may as well try and do something about it, you know. And so... but on the other hand, I was never politically inclined. I wasn't really interested in politics as my father was, passionately. I mean, he'd asked me before... when he'd been offered his peerage he'd written to me – I was at Oxford – he'd written to me and said, 'Look, I've been offered a peerage, I'd quite like to take it because it means I can go and make a speech in the House of Lords whenever I want to, but if you've got any political ambitions at all, tell me and I won't', because in those days, a peerage was no good. I mean, you could never become Prime Minister or even, you know, if you were a peer. I wrote back and said, 'No, no, do take it, because I have absolutely no political ambitions in that direction at all.'
So, he took it and then I became Lord Norwich, but as I say, I wasn't allowed to do anything about it until 1964, which is... I'd been Lord Norwich for 10 years by then and only then could I go to the House of Lords. And I went and I made my maiden speech on the importance of the... abolishing the death penalty. It was the only time I think I'd really been frightened making a speech, I had real stage fright. Well, not stage fright, I was all right when I was on my feet, but before. I was determined to do it without notes, because my father always spoke without notes, and said, 'You know, it makes so much more of an impact and if you forget a point it doesn't really matter all that much because nobody will know that you've forgotten a point. They'll know what you say, but they won't know what you haven't said. So, just do it straight off the top of your head.' And I remember walking round and round and round the Houses of Parliament, for about two hours, saying it over and over again in my head. But there it was, it was a success and in the end, of course, we abolished the death penalty, so that was the great thing.

I'd started off, I never had a particular, any desires to be a Liberal or anything else. I suppose I'd have been a Conservative like my father if I'd been anything. But I wasn't... I'd say I wasn't really interested in politics, so I thought I'll be a cross-bencher. And then Lord Gladwyn, who had been a representative of the United Nations and had succeeded my father as ambassador in Paris, Lord Gladwyn, who was a strongly entrenched Liberal, said, 'Oh, you can't be a cross-bencher, it's crazy, it's no fun, it's so difficult, because every time you want to make a speech you've got to do all your own work. I mean, if you're a Liberal, they'll do all the research for you, the Liberal Office, you know, and they will make arrangements for you, get you a taxi. I don't know, it'll be so much easier.' So, I weakly joined the Liberal Party and then found myself with Lord Gladwyn, who was a completely humanist man, and not a very nice one, going off to these places like the Council of Europe in Strasbourg or Western European Union in Brussels or somewhere else in Luxembourg, you know, and we were going off regularly, and that was quite a good nightmare because, for example, Strasbourg, in those days, the Seat of the Council of Europe, had no airport. You could only get there by train and it was about five hours from Paris in those days, so what Gladwyn and I used to do, we used to go to Paris the night before and spend the night in the Hotel de la Gare de l'Est, which has a two-star restaurant, fortunately, and hop onto the train at seven o'clock the next morning and get to Strasbourg in time for lunch. And we did that several times, but he was not an easy man to talk to, you know. He quite liked being teased, I eventually discovered, and that helped a bit.

I remember one marvellous moment in Strasbourg, it was just after the Greek colonels had taken over Greece, remember, there'd be a coup where the military had taken over, and we had a meeting in Strasbourg at which we had to decide whether we were going to now kick out the Greek delegation since it no longer represented a free... freely elected government. And Gladwyn made just the sort of speech you would imagine about how the Greeks had invented democracy and now they'd betrayed democracy and certainly the Greek delegation should be expelled until such time as the good and free and noble Greek people had once again elected a free, you know, you can hear it all. And he sat down to polite applause and I couldn't resist murmuring into his ear, 'Gladwyn, you do realise that you and I are the only two people in this assembly for whom not one vote has ever been cast, I think we ought to keep a very, very low profile or we'll be out on our ear like our Greek brethren.' He couldn't understand it.

Well, I'll tell you a little bit about my father. He was, socially speaking, several grades down, theoretically, from my mother. I mean, my mother was, at least in theory, a Duke's daughter. In fact, as we all know, she wasn't quite, but she was meant to be and very much the high English aristocracy. My father's father was a doctor in Norwich, but he was a rather special doctor because, first of all, his speciality was the slightly unusual one of venereal disease and piles, and he became the top man in London in these particular afflictions. And as the top man, he therefore got to know all the top of the English aristocracy, nearly all of whom suffered from one or the other or both, including Kind Edward VII, whose surgeon 'in Ordinary' he became and whom he accompanied to St Petersburg on a state visit, as a result of which he got a knighthood, but... and made a lot of money and was able to bring up my father as a gent and send him to Eton and all that sort of stuff.
But he'd married very much, again, what would've been or should've been very much above him. He'd... he'd married the daughter of an Earl, the daughter of the Earl of Fife, Lady Agnes Duff, she was called. But Lady Agnes Duff unfortunately, by the time she was 30, had clocked up two elopements and a divorce, which was not considered right for well-born young girls in the 1880s and she was cut off by her family more or less without a penny and had to go and make her living as best she could. And she was a good-spirited girl, so off she went to a local hospital – well, actually, I think it was St Thomas's – and learned to be a nurse and there it was that she caught the eye of young Dr Cooper who married her, very happily, and they had four children, the youngest of whom was my father, three girls and a boy, and the two of them were said to know more about the private parts of the English aristocracy than any other couple in the country.

Then my father grew up, he joined the Foreign Service in 1912 and was therefore in the Foreign Service when war came in 1914. And the Foreign Service was known as a reserve profession, you didn't go and join the army because they needed you in the Foreign Service, so my father was stuck and it was, for him, very, very awkward and embarrassing. All his friends going to war and nearly all of them being killed while he was tucked up, warm in London. He didn't really like that a bit, you know, but in 1916... I remember my mother telling me that by the end of 1916 every man she had ever danced with was dead. I mean, the holocaust of young officers was absolutely unbelievable. And then in 1916, Lloyd George took over from Asquith and by this time there were hardly any young officers left, so he allowed other categories of people to go, be drafted, including people in the Foreign Office. So, my father then went and joined the army, but he only... this was only the end of 1916 that the law went through, and he then had, you know, I suppose, delays and then he had his training and all that, so he really didn't get to the Front until early in 1918. So, he had less than a year there. I mean, if he had four years, he'd have been killed and I wouldn't be here talking to you now, I've no doubt at all. But, as it was, he only had a short time, during which he distinguished himself to the point of being recommended for the VC. He didn't get it, but he got a very good DSO, which, for a young officer, is the sort of next best thing, because he'd advanced with a couple... a platoon, I suppose, behind him on this German army post, which were machine-gunning everybody, and he advanced and he got there, without having been shot, but when he got there, he turned around and he saw he was the only one of the platoon who had… all the other men had been killed. And he, all he could think of to do was to shout in – and he spoke a certain amount of German – to shout, 'Surrender!', and to his astonishment, 18 German soldiers came out with their hands above their heads. It was only him. That is his story, I mean, he may have been over-modest about it, but that's his version of the story. Anyway, this young lieutenant came back with a dozen Germans and having certainly risked death on his way to the thing, so there it was. And he then, soon afterwards, left the Foreign Office and wanted to go into politics. He had no money, it cost a certain amount to go into politics in those days, but fortunately, my mother started making a lot of money in stage and screen. I think I told you about that already. And so that financed his early steps in politics.

So, a few years ago I published my father's diaries. Some people were rather surprised that I should've done so because they were very frank about his innumerable love affairs, which, incidentally, my mother knew all about and didn't mind a bit. I asked her once if she minded my father's escapades and she said, 'Darling, why should I mind, they made him happy, and I always knew they were the flowers, I was the tree', which I think is an admirable philosophy. Anyway, I published my father's diaries. Sadly, there are one or two gaps, but it was not my fault. It's just that either he didn't write them or they somehow got lost, I don't know. There's very little, for example, about the abdication of Edward VIII and there's very little, really, about the beginning of the Second World War, which is what one would really love to have much more of. But he did write an autobiography, of course, which put in a lot of that. But anyway, they went down very well. I think it's quite an important document because, I mean, he was there in the thick of the whole thing and because he's writing about his private life as well, it's very nice to see what was going on really sort of from both sides, what it was like living through the war as well as what it was like taking the decisions that affected it.
And then, a few years later, about 5 years ago now, I decided to publish my mother's letters to me, or some of them, the principal ones, written between 1940, when I was basically 10, 9, 10, and 1950, when I was 19, 20. And my mother was an absolutely superb correspondent. They are marvellous letters. I mean, they're as good letters as I've read in the 20th century. They're extremely funny. They give a wonderful picture, again, of life in the war and her life in the war ranged from keeping a smallholding little farm on our 5 acres in Sussex, milking the cow twice a day and going and getting the swill for the pigs and all that sort of thing, making a cheese every other day, which she always said was the happiest time of her life. And then, going straight from there to flying all over the Far East with my father in 1941, which can't have been fun. She hated flying anyway, she was terrified of aeroplanes, but wherever my father went, she went, and it was no good the top brass saying I'm afraid we don't take women. With my mother, they did. She just insisted. And so she then flew all around the Far East. It was useless. The idea was to give a report on the defences of the Far East and the a) there were none and b) the Japanese were in long before anything could be done about it. And then she went back to her smallholding again and was happy again. And then in 1944 went off to Algiers where my father was made representative to General de Gaulle. So, I mean, it was a very eventful period in her life and she's written it... it's almost like a diary, I mean, these letters that she writes to me. They're wonderful letters. They're extremely funny, so I'm very, very glad to have been responsible for getting them out into the public gaze.

Conrad Russell was a great figure, both in my mother's life and in mine. He was a tall, very tall, thick white hair, always dressed in a Prince of Wales checked suit, and he was a farmer. My mother always called him 'the Gothic farmer' because he did somehow look like a Gothic saint. He fell in love with my mother, as so many people did, in, I should think, probably about 1930 or something. It never turned into an affair of any kind. I think Conrad was completely sexless. He didn't want it and my mother didn't want it, but they were tremendous friends. He had a nervous breakdown in youth, I think, and he'd been told to lead a very quiet life, so he'd bought a little farm at Mells in Somerset and there he lived as a bachelor and there he read voraciously. There was nothing he hadn't read and did the Times crossword every day and I think he was probably one of the most erudite men I ever knew. There seemed to be absolutely nothing that Conrad didn't know, but he also had a wonderful sense of humour and he wrote marvellously funny letters to my mother almost every day, many beautiful letters, some of them had been published. Not by me. It's probably too late now, but I should... I would love somebody, actually, to publish his letters to her, because they are marvellous.
When she started running her little farm, of course, he was absolutely invaluable to her, because she didn't know anything about farming and he knew everything about it, so he used to take the train from Mells to Bognor once a week and stayed for two or three nights and told my mum how to make cheese and show her how to cut the kale and, you know, all those endless things. So, he was very much a part of our lives in those days. My father was frequently there too, but quite often he was working very, very hard. He would stay in London during the week and only come back at weekends, in which case Conrad would just move in, you know. But, as I say, you know, in a completely sexless manner, I'm absolutely certain of that. And he was a darling man and we all loved him. He was a strange, curious figure, very lonely in a way, I suppose, but great fun.

And then Raimund von Hofmannsthal, well, he was very, very remarkable too, although he would've been the last person to say he was. He was the son of Hugo von Hofmannsthal, who was Austria – probably with Rilke – Austria's greatest poet, and he wrote all the librettos for the Strauss operas. He wrote Der Rosenkavalier, he wrote Arabella, and that was, really, I think how he made a lot of his... how he made his fame, and he wrote a play called Jedermann, which is still played every night during the Salzburg Festival in front of the cathedral. And anyway, he had a very, very, very high reputation as a poet and writer and Raimund was his son, and when my mother went to act in this great play, The Miracle, which lasted for 10 years, Raimund was there for quite a lot of the time and she was 30, he was 17, but he fell in love with her, as they all did, and she took him on as a sort of, I don't know, as a sort of cavaliere servente, you know, as a sort of a companion figure who would do her little jobs, which he was delighted to do. And he was an absolute darling and he in the 1930s then fell in love with my niece, Elizabeth Paget, who was probably the most beautiful girl of her generation. I mean, she was an absolute knockout. And her parents were far from pleased, you know, they thought she was going to marry the Prince of Wales. To have this Austrian, half-Jewish, bohemian figure was not quite what they'd expected or what they wanted, but in a very short time he became their favourite son-in-law. He wooed them magnificently, because they begged... my father was at that time, we're talking about 1936 or early '37, my father was at that time First Lord of the Admiralty and he had this yacht, the Enchantress, on which he was meant to go out and inspect the fleets and that sort of thing. And he was allowed to take... my parents were allowed to take their friends on it, too, as long as they paid for them there was no reason why they shouldn't bring them along. So, my aunt, Lizzy's mother, said to my mother, 'Look, do please take Liz on your Mediterranean cruise you're going to do, because it'll get her away from Raimund and maybe she'll meet someone else, you know, wouldn't that be nice?' But, of course, it wasn't as easy because every single port they stopped at there was Raimund on the quayside with a huge armful of lilies and he was very, very romantic and absolutely enchanting, spoke perfect English, but with a strong Austrian accent all his life. And just had immense charm, humility, I never heard him say a nasty thing about anyone. He liked gentleness and beauty and elegance, but he was, I mean, he wasn't a sort of prig about it at all. I mean, he was as light as possible in the hand and full of jokes and laughter. And I think he was an enormous influence on me. We knew him very, very well. I mean, he was my parent's... Raimund and Liz were my parent's greatest friends. I mean, when they came to London for the weekend from France, they were... on arrival, they'd go and have dinner with Raimund and Liz, you know, always. And at one moment I stayed in their house when I was in the Navy for a bit, in Connaught Square. And he was a great influence on me, merely because I think of his elegance and, I don't know, he sort of radiated a wonderful sort of gentle charm. And, you know, I mean, he loved Mozart, he loved poetry, and at the same time, you know, I'd say he was completely un-priggish, he was just enormous fun. But he hated anything to be ugly, you know, and I loved him very, very much, as we all... we all did, we all did. He died about 15, no, I suppose 20 years ago now. But his son... I still see his son who is around in London and I see him, he's a great friend.

So then there was, of course, Cecil Beaton. Cecil was, again, a very, very old friend of my mother's. I don’t remember a time when I didn’t know him, you know, and again, he was absolutely sweet. He was sweet to me, I remember, when he'd done the designs for one of those Oscar Wilde plays, I think it was Lady Windermere's Fan with Paulette Goddard who was acting in it. And he took me, just him and me, he took me down to Elstree to watch the filming. It was the first time I'd ever watched a film being made. And he was very, very good company, a very, very good raconteur, and, of course, a sensational, spectacularly good photographer, but he was also... I mean, he drew beautifully, you know, and he and Rex Whistler, I remember once, drawing each other. And Cecil's portrait of Rex was every bit as good as Rex's portrait of Cecil, you know. And he travelled around the world. He worked incredibly hard, produced God knows how many books, and he was a bit wicked sometimes, malicious, but for the sake of humour, but he was wonderful fun. Again, sadly, of course, he had a very bad stroke at the end of his life. One of the... one of the effects of which was that he couldn’t stop bursting into tears, which was very embarrassing. It's a known stroke symptom, I think.

Liz was a Paget, my first cousin, the daughter of my mother's eldest sister, Margery, who married Lord Anglesey and lived in a large house on the Isle of Anglesey, looking out over the many straits to Snowden, a wonderful site, always pouring with rain, but apart from that, marvellous. And the Paget family was composed of six girls and then they, the last effort was twins and the first twin to come out was a girl, but the second one was a boy, so finally there was a Marquis to carry the line down. But there were all these ravishingly beautiful girls. There was my cousin Caroline, with whom my father was very much in love. There was Rose, who lived and married a man called McLaren, John McLaren, and lived very, very close across the straits at a place called Bodnant, with a marvellous, marvellous garden and rhododendrons and things.
And Plas Newydd was a great sort of centre for us in some ways, where we used to go and stay. It was very, very comfortable and Rex Whistler had painted for it this immense and wonderful mural. I think it's the biggest single piece of canvas in England. It's huge, the whole length of the dining room, and then along two sides, so it really covers practically three sides of the room. And of a lovely, fantastic sea scene of the sort of fantasy that only Rex Whistler could do. It's beautifully reproduced. There's a book about him by the... Hugh and Mirabel Cecil which came out last year, which has a wonderful fold-out photograph of it which... it really does give you a feeling of the splendour of this thing.
And Rex was very much in love with my cousin, Caroline, despite her having very, very strong lesbian tendencies. And so Rex worked and worked and worked at this huge thing and never wanted to finish it, because if he finished it, he wouldn't be able to keep coming to Plas Newydd, so he would always say I don't really like that big Spanish galleon, let's take that away and put something else in instead, you know. So, there was quite a lot of that went on. But Rex was absolutely enchanting, I mean, he had a superb drawing technique. He drew very, very fast. I mean, he was one of those children, he drew monsters on the back of the table napkin, you know, or whatever it was, and his pencil or pen were really never still at all and it was a terrible, terrible tragedy – he insisted on going into tanks in the war. I mean, he should've been a war artist or, you know, I mean, or doing maps or something like that. He'd have been infinitely more valuable. But he insisted on going into tanks and was killed a few days after D Day at the age of 39. For me, one of the great tragedies of the war, really, I mean, considering what we lost, what he could've done if he'd lived, you know.

My Uncle John, who was the Duke of Rutland, had these two great houses. And it's quite a well-known thing, if you're interested in English country houses, that if by any chance a family has two, they're very apt to ruin the first one, the main one, but the second one they don't spend much on or do much with, so the second one is nearly always far more beautiful than the first one. There are several cases in point I could mention, but I think, perhaps, the most important of all, really, is Haddon Hall, because Haddon Hall goes back to the 11th century, the oldest part of it. It's set in wonderful country, in the middle of the Derbyshire Peak District. And the family lived at Belvoir, which is 50 miles away, which was a huge mock Norman castle built in the beginning of the 19th century, and huge and impressive and magnificent, but by living there, they neglected this lovely, lovely old house. The last thing it had done to it, a long gallery was put into it about 15th century and nobody had touched it since. And it's of magical, magical beauty.
And then when my Uncle John, who was a remarkable, he was an antiquarian, and he decided, when he married at about 1910, I suppose it must have been, and he decided that he would live at Haddon. His parents were living at Belvoir and he didn't want to live with them, he would move to Haddon. But Haddon had no hot water, it had no electricity, it had nothing. They'd just about kept the birds out, you know, and kept the roof on, but they'd done very, very little. It needed an enormous amount doing to it, not only to make it comfortable, but also structurally, for its own sake. And my Uncle John set to with a will, and he always said if you could see anything he'd done, he'd failed. Everything had to be invisible. And it's true, there's one huge great beam – there were three or four beams over the Great Hall – and one of them had to be replaced, but we still don't know which it was. They all look exactly the same. And it could never be a comfortable house because I mean, you know, in the 16th century people didn't know how to make comfortable houses, but it's of incredible beauty and it's got, I think, probably the oldest kitchen in England. It's got a 12th century kitchen, which is absolutely fascinating. It's got a huge great wooden chopping block, and then on the other side, the sort of working surface, it's just a thick shelf of thick wood, I suppose, about that thick, and at one end it's been scooped out into a sort of circular bowl just by hundreds of kitchen maids scraping away and, gradually, they've made a bowl out of it. And one day one of them went through the bottom of the bowl, so they moved a foot to the right and started a second one. And 300 years later, that went through the bottom too. They're now on the third one. And it's all there, it's all there, you can still see it now. It's absolutely fascinating. And my uncle, of course, was determined not to spoil this extraordinary survival, which meant building a new kitchen, but he didn't want to spoil the house, so he built a new kitchen about 200 yards away in the hillside, underground, with an underground railway bringing the food up to the house. The food, of course, stone-cold by the time it arrived at the house, but, for him, that was a small price to pay for, as indeed it was, I mean, for this wonderful kitchen which still remains. And it's a very, very romantic house and, of all the houses in England, I think it's the one I would most like to possess.

Nannies, as such, no longer exist. They were a species entirely of their own. In my day, they wore grey felt sort of bowler hats, white blouses, grey skirts, longish, grey skirts, and I think you could spot a nanny a mile off. And they did everything. I mean, they took over the child from the parents completely. And in those days, that was what was done, what was expected, what everybody did. You had to have a nanny for the children. Everybody had a nanny for the children and the nannies were totally, totally dedicated. Mine I think theoretically... she had a right to a fortnight's holiday a year, but she never took it and she did have the occasional afternoon off to go and do some shopping or something like that, but that was all.
And, of course, I saw – I slept in the same room with her – and I saw her far more than, I mean, my mother was a wonderful mother and from a very early age she spent a lot of time with me, but nonetheless, I mean, she had her life and when she was having her life, I was with Nanny. And inevitably, and I think this happens with all children until you're about seven or eight, you really love Nanny much more than you love your parents. People used to think that, psychologically, that was a very bad thing, but, in fact, you grew out of it. It was perfectly okay, and you gradually realised that it was much more fun being with your parents than it was being with Nanny. And there was far more going on. And Nanny would realise this, too. It was part of life and, you know, she would leave, perhaps, and take on another baby, but she would always be a friend of the old family and talk about it and come back for tea and that sort of thing, you know. And if it was her last post, she'd live in the house, probably, for the rest of her life and people would go up and see her after tea, you know. Nannies, they were a very, very important part of sort of upper-class English life, but I say they've completely disappeared now, there are none. I mean, now they ask for their own car, you know, they have to have every weekend off or whatever. It's a different world. The nanny had total, total dedication to her child. She really didn’t think about anything else at all. It was her life.
[Q] If there's more than one child, what happens then?
A good nanny could handle three.

Evelyn Waugh was always part of our lives. He used to come down from Bognor when I was about five, I suppose, and we used to call him Bo in those days. And my mother was very fond of him, but she was always a little bit frightened of him too, I think. He fell in love with her, again, no conceivable sex. Apart from anything else, he was far too religious. He wouldn't have dreamed of cheating on his wife or anything like that, but he did, he loved my mother as company. Rather more, really, I think, than my mother loved his, because she always, as I said, a little frightened of him. And he did have tremendous rows with my father. My father actually loved having rows, but didn't have, had very few, because very few people could take it, but he knew that Evelyn could. And I remember, I think Evelyn used, deliberately, to needle him in order to get him really going, into... into a good temper, and, or a bad temper, I should say, and I remember one evening, in the middle of the war at Bognor, and Evelyn said, 'I'd rather the Germans won this war than we won it on the backs of the Americans.' That did it to my father. He went absolutely puce in the face. I've never seen him so angry, great veins throbbing, you know. Evelyn loved it too, I think. My father enjoyed it enormously. But he was... he was not a nice man.
My mother... when he died, my mother was asked if she would do a little broadcast of her memories of him and she thought about it for some time and then she said no, she wouldn't, because everything she could remember about him was to his discredit. She couldn't remember any nice things, really, about him, and she had one particular story. She'd been acting in, I think it was  Glasgow or, no, Manchester, Manchester, and Evelyn had come up to see the play, greatly disapproved of the play on religious grounds to start with, but then after he'd seen it a few times he grew to love it. And he went to see it in Manchester and took my mother out to dinner afterwards and they were walking home to the hotel when they were accosted by, clearly, a very, very panicky little man with two, obviously rather heavy, suitcases, running in the opposite direction, terribly out of breath. 'Oh please, can you tell me the way to the railway station?' And Evelyn, without any hesitation said, 'Yes, just go up to the second lot of traffic lights, there left, first set of traffic lights, right, and you're there.' The man said thank you so much, and charged off. Evelyn had absolutely no idea where the station was at all. I mean, that's not a nice story and you remember the story which his son Auberon told, when the first bananas arrived in England after the war, and the children were allowed one banana each, the first ration, and there were seven children. Evelyn had them all round and watched while he ate all seven bananas.

He was possessed. It wasn't quite demonic possession, but there was a devil in him somewhere. I mean, at his great religiousness and his extreme piety, I think, were all in an effort to try and vanquish this devil that he knew that he had inside him. I remember when he and Randolph Churchill and Freddie Birkenhead were all in a cave in Yugoslavia in the war together and Randolph never, never, never stopped talking and Evelyn couldn't bear it and had a Bible with him, which he always had, so he bet Randolph that he couldn't read the whole Bible in a week and Randolph took on the bet. Well, it shut him up. He went back into the cave and just read, and read, and read. Occasionally they would hear great bellows going, 'My God, God's a shit', but anyway, they went on and eventually they all got out and Randolph, on his way back, went to Rome and went to see the Pope, which, of course, as the son of Winston Churchill he could easily manage to do. And he said to the Pope, 'You know, I've just been in Yugoslavia with Evelyn Waugh', and the Pope said, 'Evelyn who?' And Randolph said, 'Oh, Evelyn Waugh, you must know Evelyn Waugh', you know. And the Pope said, 'No, I'm afraid I don't know Evelyn Waugh.' 'That's funny', said Randolph, 'he's a Catholic too.'

He [Evelyn Waugh] and my mother were basically, of course, great friends and he put my mother into several of his novels. She's called Mrs Stitch and she drives this little car. My mother did drive a little car wildly all over the place and he actually has her driving it down into the Tube station and out the other side, and things like that. But he has lovely sort of pictures of her. She used to spend the morning in bed, but full of activity, I mean, not... not drowsy, sitting bolt upright, because bed was the bridge, bed was where she operated from. That was where the writing paper was, where the telephone books were, by the dresser, you know. This was, I say, her centre of operations. And he has a lovely sort of picture in one of them. I can't remember which book it is now, might be Scoop, of my mother in... in full action in bed in the morning, with me aged about five doing the Times crossword puzzle. So unlikely.

We used to see a lot of Randolph. Again, like Evelyn Waugh, but in a very different way, he too, I think, was possessed by the devil and I think that the devil got him, first of all, it would get him very, very drunk sometimes and get him to say really horrible things, whereas, in fact, he was a very, very, very nice man. If you knew Randolph well, I think you loved him. I knew him quite well. I loved him. One example, he was a tremendous admirer of my father and when my father died, Randolph collected all the obituaries in all the papers about him and bound them in a beautiful, full red Morocco and gave it to me. I mean, that must have cost him £100 even in those days, in the '50s when £100 was a lot of money. And it was Randolph who did it, you know, and he knew that my father collected his father's works and he was able to produce one or two very, very rare volumes or little sort of shilling paperbacks, you know, that had gone completely out of circulation, which he managed to find somewhere. And... but he could be an absolute nightmare.
I remember when I lived... when we lived in Beirut, the telephone rang about nine o'clock at night. It was during what was known as les événements, the Troubles. I mean, it was a curfew, the whole political situation was extremely fluid and nobody quite knew what was happening. And there was a curfew from eight o'clock in the evening. And at about half past eight or nine, my telephone went and it was Randolph at the airport, saying, 'These buggers won't let me go out of the airport. Get me into Beirut!' I said, 'Randolph, it's jolly difficult, you know, there's a curfew on, and quite apart from everything else, there were all sorts of these police posts who don't get proper instructions and even if you get permission, they might easily shoot you when you went through them, so, really, frankly, I'd recommend you to stay at the airport. It won't be very comfortable, but it's only one night and you can come in the morning.' Randolph wasn't having any of that. An hour later he arrived at our house. I don't know how he'd done it, but he had. Anyway, there he was and we had to put him up for the night, and two nights, and, I think, three nights. And we said, 'Randolph, tomorrow night we've got to go out to dinner, so we'll fix you up with something', and I said to the Embassy Number Two, Ian Scott, I said, 'I've got Randolph on our hands, he's not in a terribly good mood, but we've got to look after him somehow.' And Ian said, 'That's all right, I'm having a dinner party this evening, he can come.' So, that seemed okay. The next day I went into the office, no sign of Randolph, he hadn't come back that night. He was staying with us, but he hadn't come back. And I looked at Ian and Ian looked at me and I said, 'Well, what's happened?' and Ian said it was an absolute nightmare. First of all, he started screaming at everybody, he was frightfully drunk, he started screaming at everybody and saying, 'God, if these are the Arabs, the sooner they give Israel back, the sooner they give the whole Middle East back to the Jews, the better.' And that sort of remark, which you just didn't make in the Arab world, you know, particularly if you were Winston Churchill's son. And then he rang up the airport and they heard him screaming down the telephone, 'When is the next plane out of this goddamned place?' And he then, somehow – again, it was at night, there was a curfew – but Randolph got to the airport and took the next plane out. I got a very nice letter of apology from him about three weeks later, but...
