john.wheeler

John Wheeler, one of the world's most influential physicists, is best known for coining the term 'black holes', for his seminal contributions to the theories of quantum gravity and nuclear fission, as well as for his mind-stretching theories and writings on time, space and gravity.

						The first school I went to was in Washington, during World War I, with my grandparents, on my mother's side. And I remember their discomfort with the idea of everybody being required to take the oath of allegiance. They were not opposed to allegiance but they disliked the idea of swearing to anything. It sounded too much like a religion.

Did that result in your declining to pledge to the flag?

I did not get to the point, as I remember right, of declining to take the oath of allegiance, but I remember their discomfort with it. And discomfort later with any required tests.
					
						My mother's father liked to show me about algebra. If you add equals to equals you get equals. And these were elementary rules of algebra that had all the force of the seven commandments- or the ten commandments. It made it quite plausible. But the school in Washington also had a lot of training in writing. One had to make his letters all slope the same degree and be rounded and open. And in the end, it made writing easier and a pleasure.

					
						Working with my left hand probably came from the visit my mother's father and mother made to us in California. My grandmother was teaching me to use a hammer, and she used it in her right hand, and I, facing her, used it in my left hand. So I came to be using tools in a left handed way.

That would have been back when you were three or four years old?

Yes. And that was- I don't know how that dripped over into writing, but it evidently did. But I can't write a proper letter with my left hand.

					
						I was so lucky to have, as a teacher- this was in high school- in algebra, Lida F Baldwin. She was a soul of integrity and she told us all to put things together in a clear, clean, honest way. I was interested to learn that my later colleague, Marvin Goldburger, who became, subsequently, the President of the California Institute of Technology, went to the same high school in Youngstown that I did, and had her also as his teacher. And then a Miss Doerschuk, another mathematics teacher, had a wonderful scheme of giving out little pieces of paper, like dealing cards off a deck of cards, to we students, and there, on each piece of paper, was written something to be proved.  For example, that the bisector of an angle does this or that to the opposite side of the triangle. And she called on the students in turn to go walk up to the board, state the theorem and then provide the proof, which generally was extemporaneous, because one didn't have time to think about it very much in detail. This is marvellous training for anybody giving a course when he doesn't have time to get ready for the course in advance.
					
						Well, my mother could go to the grocery store and while the clerk was adding up, in those days before computers, adding up the cost of the various items, my mother, looking at the same piece of paper but, of course, to her, upside down, could come to the total quicker than the clerk could and check out what the clerk came out with. But I think my mother's spirit is shown as well as any in an incident that happened to her in school. She had to walk somewhere between three and five miles from her house to a school every day, and back, of course, at night. The teacher had something happen in class during the day, and she insisted that whichever student was responsible should confess. Well, nobody confessed. And then she said we'll all wait here until the person who did it, did confess. And the teacher kept the class after hours, and the shades of night came on, it got darker and darker. And one by one, the students gave in, and were released. But my mother wouldn't. And finally, at the end, the teacher had to give in, in order to go home, and so my mother could make her lonesome way home in the dark.

That was in Trinidad, Colorado, was it not?

This was- yes, at the frontier between Colorado and New Mexico, is where my mother lived. But, at one time, one of the cows got out of the ranch fence and got into the alfalfa. And drinking water, and having eaten alfalfa, is very dangerous, because gas develops, and the cow's stomach became distended. The cow would surely die unless my mother and her mother did something about it. So the two women- all the men were off, doing whatever they did- they had to plunge a knife into the belly of the cow to release the pressure and save its life. That's a little bit of experience of ranch life and of having to deal with a crisis by an act of courage. My father grew up in New England.  His father was a minister. He had a sense of fun. He, among the five sons of the Reverend George Stephens Wheeler, would sit in the front pew at church, Sunday morning, and at one point he saw his father particularly serious, at one point in the sermon, and the little boy looked at him with a wink and a grin, and his poor father was in real trouble about breaking down with laughter. He loved to have jokes at the dinner table. So he had the great pleasure, and to him it was a thrill, of meeting President Theodore Roosevelt, during the time we lived in California. And ever after he liked to cite Roosevelt's adage: do what you can with what you have, where you are. And I've found that a very useful guide. But he had a little additional point of his own, I guess my father had added, saying: there's nothing that can't be done better. You have to stop at some point.
					
						My parents treated me as anybody else. But I remember overhearing, one night, as I was upstairs in the bedroom area, my father and mother talking about what were they going to do to make sure that my mathematics and other abilities got developed properly. I can't recall whether they were talking about money or school, but I do know that this teacher, Lida Baldwin, came to see my father once, at his job as director of the public library, saying to him that something special should be done. But in later life we moved to Baltimore, and there the Johns Hopkins University was an open invitation. But how to get the money to pay the tuition and other expenses? You'd have to apply for a scholarship. But this particular scholarship, it turned out, could only be awarded if some ward politician gave his OK.  And my father took me around to call on this politician, who had, in his below street level apartment, all kinds of gifts around from this and that constituent of his. And my father introduced him and said that this boy was applying for a scholarship. That seemed to be enough to gain approval. I never had the slightest indication or belief that my father ever made any contribution in any other way.
					
						This one room school in Vermont, all the grades were together, and single teacher for those twenty-five or thirty students of assorted grades. And as the teacher was hearing a recitation from the students of, for example, the seventh grade, this boy could listen, and the same with other grades. So in the course of time, one could pick up a lot that way. And I- that's the only way I could account for being able to skip as many grades as I did in Vermont. But, of course, every day I had to get in the cows and feed the pigs, and that was a good routine.

It was more on your own initiative than having the teacher say John, I want you to move fast.

Yes, right. It was a- that poor woman, I wish I knew more about what kind of a life she had then and afterward.  


					
My dream always was to construct a railroad that would go around the farm. It was only a dream, I never had any likelihood of being able to do it. But toy railroads were a wonderful thing, and then toy guns, pull back a rubber band and that works a wooden plunger, and that drives a wooden bullet out. And then work up from that to a gun that is repeating, so you can pull the trigger over and over again, and bullet after bullet makes its way up through the handle to the plunger. But then, after reading the books in the library and looking in the encyclopedia for how guns worked, it was natural to turn to how safes work, the combination lock of the safe. But then, the terrible thing was there was a book that the family had, called Ingenious- no- Mechanisms and Ingenious Mechanical Devices. And there were all sorts of things one could do with levers. To me, making gadgets out of wood and putting in pivots out of nails and what-not was an absolute delight. Fortunately, around the house, I think, due to my great uncle's improvidence, there was a clock with wooden wheels, with teeth cut into the wood by machinery. And these wooden wheels could be meshed together and I could see the whole layout of a clock in a nice way. In New England of long ago, of course, metal cost money, wood was easy to come by, so it was natural to make a clock out of wood.

						In the- among the books on the farm in Vermont was not only this book of 'Ingenious Mechanisms and Mechanical Devices', but a book of the British writer and scientist, J. Arthur Thomson, called 'An Outline of Science'. And what fascinated me most there was the story about how electricity could flow from one place to another, and how the electron was essential in it. But then, there were two other books. Can I remember now what they were..? 

Did you grow up in a house full of books in general?

A house full of books. And my father was accustomed to bring home from the library that he directed, new books, in order to look them over for possible purchase by the various branches of the library. And he'd bring my mother into the discussion. Sometimes the discussion was not about the attractiveness of the book but whether it should be permitted in the library, whether it was morally allowable. So I got to see quite a variety of books. But they showed no particular concern about my reading some of these books of questionable character.
					
						I had a cousin who was on my mother's side of the family, Archibald Blake was his name. And he gave me a little insight into calculus. And he sent me a book of calculus formulas, which I found myself using yesterday to look up a formula. And here it was, given to me at the age of sixteen or seventeen, with his dedication at the front. Merry Christmas to John, from Archie, and wishes for easier calculus problems.
					
						The farm did not have a whole lot for a ten year old to do. I could turn the churn and separate the milk and the skimmed milk into cream, cream for making butter, to sell in the town ten miles away. But the skimmed milk we fed to the pigs. And the pigs, I found, were delighted when I poured this milk into their feeding trough. But I knew that the pig barn had also, upstairs, in it, dynamite and dynamite caps. And I had read with great fascination about explosives and how they work and what varieties there are, and about what TNT really is. This was being used, this dynamite, to make holes for a power line so that our farm and the neighboring farms could have an electric power service. But the dynamite cap itself, which you put over the end of the fuse, how did it work? Fulminate of mercury, something that goes off very easily. And I thought that would be fun to experiment with. So I took one of these out to the garden patch across the road, where I would not be so conspicuous, and I tried dropping it down onto a match.  Well, my aim was not good, it was not a good way to light the cartridge, so I got down closer and closer, finally it went off. But it took off the end of my finger, and there were hundreds of bits of copper from the casing of the cartridge that embedded themselves in my chest. Fortunately, none hit me in the eye. And my parents heard the bang and saw me coming in, looking in trouble, and they drove me into the village where the doctor was. The doctor had had a very busy day, and he put my finger into a bowl of hot disinfecting solution while he finished his supper. Then he proceeded to snip off odd pieces and do his best to put together what remained into a decent finger. So I even have a bit of odd looking fingernail. But that was practical experience with explosions.
					
						Well, how can you celebrate if somebody makes a discovery, unless you do set off a rocket. And you light the rocket, you put it on the floor, and it goes down the corridor, spewing out smoke and all the secretaries come to their door and see this smoke laden hallway, and go back inside. And the rocket gets all the way down the end of the hall, goes off with a bang. And you've really celebrated your friend's discovery. And I keep a rocket in my office, even now, in hopes that somebody will come in and tell me about some discovery.



What will it take to set off that rocket, what kind of discovery?



Well, I always liked those words of the philosopher of science; the importance of a discovery is proportional to the surprise it causes. So, I'm ready for any surprise.
					
						My son was not at a loss on one birthday what to send me for a birthday present. He put in the mail from Baltimore, where he was going to medical school, a postcard, to me in the state of Maine, saying, your birthday present is on its way by Railway Express, but when the notice comes from the Express office to pick up the package, don't go, because there another one that will soon be on its way. So, sure enough, soon there came another postcard. And I went to the Railway Express office, twenty miles away, and presented the notice. And here was this cannon. Jamie had found a junkyard in Baltimore that had about a half a dozen cannons left over from the Spanish-American War. The breach loading had corroded, so no longer could one open the back up easily. He picked one and had the back welded up and had a hole drilled in the side to insert a fuse, so one could convert a modern breach loading cannon into an ancient front loading cannon. But then the rest of the shipment was wheels, wagon wheels from Tennessee and kegs of gunpowder. The wheels were to mount the cannon on. We got the cannon set up. But then what with cannon, gunpowder and fuse, what were we to use for the projectile? We looked in the kitchen, all the cans were either too big or too small to fit. Then we looked in the refrigerator, in desperation, there was a can of beer just the right size. But who would want to waste beer by firing it out!  So we consumed the beer and filled the can with gravel, and put in the gunpowder and the fuse and some wadding, to make a better fit, and then the empty beer can with its load of gravel. Boom! Swwwwwt!  And it goes out into the ocean with a splash. Later on, a graduate student visiting presented me with three pictures, the first showed a sailboat out there, the second showed the cannon going off, full of flame and smoke. Of course, the picture did not show the noise. And the third picture showed the ocean again, but no sailboat.
					
						I think that probably my father having taken the job in Baltimore was, as director of the public library, was partly conditioned by the hope that in this way his children would be able to go to university at home. My dear wife, Janette, who went to the woman's half of Harvard, called Radcliffe, wishes I had gone to Harvard. But I am very happy I went to Johns Hopkins, because it had been, and still kept a lot of that tradition, of being the first research university in America. Daniel Coit Gilman, the president, who set the course of the university, brought together thinkers from around the country to advise on what should be the layout, how should it be set out. Gildersleeve, from England, Henry Rowland, the physicist from New England, and so on, sitting around in a room, day after day, discussing how it should go. And as the idea began to gel of a university which combined the development of new knowledge with the propagation of existing knowledge, as the idea began to gel, the enthusiasm was apparent. And Gilman grabbed the moment and he said, Professor Gildersleeve, if we set up the university along these lines, will you accept an appointment? Gildersleeve said yes. And-

And Rowland likewise?

And so on. This made the beginning of a great university.  And why didn't it stay equally great? The board of trustees knew that the stock was primarily in the stock of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, the endowment of the university. And they did not diversify. And when that railroad fell on hard times, the university really was hit.
					
						And then there was a surveying transit which my mother's father, my grandfather Archibald, had used in earlier times to survey. And I can recall the test of a surveyor. You go round a circuit and come back and see how closely you close up, within an inch if you can, otherwise more. And when I got to Johns Hopkins, it was at a time when the Depression was as bad as it could be. And I couldn't see any way of getting any work in the areas I was interested in, except in engineering. So I enrolled as an engineer in Electrical Engineering. But we all had our course in Mechanical Drawing, and our course in Surveying, and had to go around the campus of the university and come back and close up, if possible, within one inch. But the terrible thing, in the engineering library where I would go to look up this or that, data on the strength of this or that steel, were the- also the physics journals. And in those days, the early development of quantum physics was taking place, and the great journal of physics was the German journal, 'Zeitschrift für Physik'. Fortunately, in high school, I had fallen under the influence of Konrad Uhlig- U H L I G, who taught German. And he loved to give the feel for the pronunciation of German. "Uberall Verständlichkeit". Well, with that background in German, I could make my way in these journals and see the development of atomic physics, month by month. And I'm afraid at that, I came, in that way, to try to get into the physics seminar. The professor who ran that was Karl Herzfeld. He had been a student of Arnold Sommerfeld in Munich, who in turn had been a student of the great Boltzmann. So, I found myself going to the lectures of Herzfeld. Each one started out with a great review of all the physics and then specialize down to the particular field he was going to be talking about in that course, and go on from there into the details.
					
						At Johns Hopkins, the emphasis on research was such that somebody who started in the ordinary Bachelor's program, who got really going in research, could go on and get a Doctor's degree, and that could be regarded as the main aim and purpose of the education. Of course, it couldn't be done in the usual four years, but six years were possible.  But most people elected to follow the conventional course of four years and get a Bachelor's degree, and go out in the world and try their chances of getting a job. I went for the research business. But each summer was a little different experience. My first summer was working in a silver mine, which fitted my electrical engineering background, because I was given the job of re-winding electric motors that were down in the deep depths of a mine, to pump out water.  They get ground down, and it's too expensive to ship in new motors, it's much simpler to strip the winding off of old motors and put on new winding. So, I worked on that one summer, another summer worked for the National Bureau of Standards, in Washington, helping the great spectroscopist, William Meggers, study the spectrum of different elements and compounds. I had the great salary there of $30.00 a month, and I've recently looked at the Consumer Price Index, today that's equivalent to about $480.00 a month. But it was enough to get a room and buy meals. But later years, I acted as a student assistant, and I also did some tutoring as a way to get money to help me get through school. Later in life I realized how much I had learned by tutoring. So I knew the right answer when a student came in to see me, he said Professor Wheeler, I want your advice on a course I'm flunking. Well, I said, it's not a course of mine, is it? No, no, it's so-and-so's course.  Well," I said, are you the worst in the course? He said No, I think there's one other person worse than me. So I said Well, why don't you make a deal to tutor him? So he did.  And I learned later, he passed the course. The great thing about teaching is that you learn. But the poor devil that he taught did not pass.
					
Robert Wood was the great man in experimental optics. He was full of playfulness. I imagine very few people nowadays have seen his book, called 'How to Tell the Birds from the Flowers'. His fanciful drawings in which the colored object could be a bird or it could be a flower. Robert Wood liked to have practical jokes. He would invite somebody to swallow some liquid air- nobody volunteered but Wood himself would take some liquid air into his mouth. And the fumes of the vaporizing liquid air coming out of his mouth made a spectacular sight. And another spectacular sight was a smoke ring generator. You tapped the back of it after it was filled with smoke, and out would come a great ring of smoke which would go across the room. But he lectured us on how powerful the theorem is that the vorticity cannot break off, it has to continue all the way around the circle.  And after having emphasized that point, he ridiculed the mathematics, because he had never been able to pass the mathematics to get a Doctor's degree himself. He taught without benefit of a PhD. In order to ridicule the mathematics, he produced for us a smoke ring that was only half a circle. And what happened to the other half?  The other half was there in invisible air, just not any smoke to make it show up. But in addition to Wood, keeping on the tradition of optics at Johns Hopkins, there was Pfund, P F U N D, who made working with things optical an absolute joy. All kinds of gadgetry. Then there was a new arrival, Dieke, from the Netherlands, who combined knowledge of spectra, especially Spectra of Molecules, with the modern Quantum Mechanics, to describe the- and he was- had been brought in to modernize the curriculum in the physics department with more emphasis on modern quantum points of view. And then there was Joyce Bearden who worked at the other end of the spectrum, X-rays. Robert Wood was a member of the Royal Society and made annually a visit to England. And he was given the task of bringing back somebody who could teach something about the new field of nuclear physics. He brought back a quite young man from Rutherford's laboratory, Norman Feather. And the young fellows in the laboratory, the younger teachers, embarked with enthusiasm on a new scheme of providing a month of instruction, working in their own laboratories, with this or that student. So I worked for a month with Feather, for example, who went to the basement, sat there for half an hour in the dark, until my eyes adapted enough so I could see flashes when particles from radium hit a screen of zinc sulfide. These flashes of light you count, and count again some hours later, and see how the radioactivity falls off with time, from radon gas.  Nowadays, people make a great thing about the radon in people's basements, and trying to protect themselves from radioactivity, but here I was trying to measure it. And then, with Bearden on X-rays. Then I found myself trying to explain the penetration of X-rays. And we wrote a couple of papers together. With Dieke, I'm afraid my experience did not lead to any paper. I learned a bit about spectroscopy in the infra-red, but that was it.

						I'm trying to remember the name of the young colleague who was interested in studying Far Infra-red, and he made a device by winding wire around two spindles and off winding one piece of wire so that every other space was occupied, and then radiation could come in, come off this, and he could diagnose it that way. Well, this infra-red radiation that he was studying was something that was not then popular, nobody had found a good way to use it. But he realized that the patients in the Johns Hopkins hospital had temperature conditions which he could study in this way, without intervening or disturbing the patient. And in the depths of the Depression, he made this idea fly. He ended up as the director of a laboratory associated with the Yale University for the study of body conditions by physical means. But the Depression, that was something that's very hard to describe to people nowadays. There's a Depression day saying; I am a nobody, I come from nowhere, and I live on my nothing a day- part of the song. A neighbor next door killed himself because he didn't see how he was going to support his family.
					
It was a great joy to have, as a professor of English, Wardlaw Miles. He had us reading Shakespeare, and he would stand at the end of our long table, with us students sitting around the table, reading a passage, 'Othello' or 'Desdemona'. And at one point I remember he had such enthusiasm that he fell over. He couldn't keep him- his- upright because one of his legs had been shot off in World War I. He had gone out in no-man's land to bring in a wounded comrade. But- then there was a professor of French History, and he used to lecture on French history, in French, and we had to take notes on what he said. And then afterwards he would read and correct our French. I think my favorite subjects were French and Science. The professor of Mathematics, part of science, was an Irishman, Francis Dominic Murnaghan, who used to explain to us that the Irishman's way over an obstacle was to go round it, and he would show how to go round a mathematical difficulty.

						Somehow, there were student parties, graduate student dances, roughly once a month. I don't know how I got elected to be chairman of the committee, but I did whatever was needed to make it work. And one of the young ladies, I'd like to take was- I had a fascination with foreign languages, a new window on the world- one of the ladies was the daughter of the professor of French there, Lucienne Chinard. And Lucienne was able to tell me a lot about life in Paris. And then, there was another- I became even more attached to Signe- S I G N E Benzon- B E N Z O N, daughter of a Danish merchant. Unfortunately, I did not take advantage of knowing her to learn Danish, that came only later. But I recall, after we'd been at some swimming excursion on Chesapeake Bay, her telling me afterwards that my knees didn't appeal to her.  
					
Occasionally there were afternoon lectures, and once in a while my father could be induced to leave work a little bit early to go to one of these lectures, then I could get a ride home in the car with him instead of, as usual, taking the trolley. And at one of these lectures there was a young lady I knew, Janette Hegner. And I knew her sister better than Janette. But it turned out we could take her home in the car, drop her off on our way home. And after we dropped her out, he said to me, John, that's the kind of a girl I hope you'll marry. Well, as luck put it, quite apart from anything he ever said, we ended up that way. But I was the most foolish man in the world, not borrowing money to marry her a year earlier and take her to Denmark, when I went to work with Niels Bohr, after I had my Doctor's degree.  Because, in many ways, that was the most important year of my life, getting acquainted with the great problems, with great perspectives, and meeting the wonderful people from the world of physics who came every year to Bohr's little conference where there may be thirty or forty people from different centers. Each one of them had been, in the course of the year, distilling the problems around to pick what was most important. And then they brought these problems with them, as they came to Copenhagen, and then Bohr would distill from them the most important problem.

						Well, I suspect that I was guided by that philosophy of Theodore Roosevelt; Do what you can with what you have, where you are.  And I felt there must be some way to get a job. And I could recall writing from Denmark on a little battered typewriter I had, letter after letter to this or that chairman of this or that physics department, asking for a possible position. And none of them worked out. The position that I finally ended up with came as a result of having given a talk in Washington at the American Physical Society meeting one year. And it had attracted the attention of the new Head of the Physics Department of the University of North Carolina, Arthur Ruark. And Ruark asked me to come there as an assistant professor, after I had finished in Copenhagen. Well, that was quite something, for Janette to be willing to marry me. She was teaching at the Rye Country Day School, or had been teaching, at $2,500 a year, and I was going to get $2,300.00 a year. Why give up more for less? But she was willing to do it.
					
Well, the leaders of theoretical physics in America at that time were Gregory Breit and Robert Oppenheimer and John Van Vleck. Oppenheimer had written me a letter saying he would invite me, if I got a National Research Council Fellowship. But Breit attracted me more, he was more, I felt, in touch with the great currents of physics. And he was a slow decider, like me. Oppenheimer was all for a quick decision, after, without considering all the sides of a question, as more my spirit. So I picked Breit in preference to Oppenheimer.      And Van Vleck, was he a serious contender?    And I did not really seriously consider Van Vleck.     Just to get into a little bit more substance of physics; during that first year with Breit, you heard a December, 1933, lecture by Oppenheimer on Cosmic Rays and Elementary Particles. That was I think an important one in your thinking and development. Could you discuss that?    Yes, Oppenheimer claimed that the existing theory would go wrong at energies of 137 times the mass of the electron. And this packed lecture, one evening, where he made this claim, simply turned me off, because I couldn't see that that reasoning was justified. And, in fact, in the end, it wasn't. The behavior predicted by Quantum Theory at that time turned out to hold at very high energies. And to be an absolute central clue in unraveling the behavior of cosmic rays. Cosmic rays, that was a romantic word in those days. The two great men of experimental physics, Robert Millikan and Arthur Compton, had diametrically opposite views.  Millikan thought that the cosmic rays were some kind of electromagnetic or other radiation. And Compton felt that they were particles. Every Physical Society meeting where the two men were present produced, at some point, after somebody's paper, a debate between Compton and Millikan on this point.

						At that time, physics was, I would say, much simpler than it is today. Elementary particle physics was trivial compared to what it is now, with just a few particles and known behaviors. Condensed matter physics had not reached its present state of sophistication. Superconductivity still was to be explained. And the structure of atoms and molecules seemed a matter of detail, not of principle. No great principle had to be uncovered there. But the number one question at that time, to me, was nuclear physics; how did Neutrons and Protons in an atomic nucleus behave? This is something like condensed matter physics on a reduced scale; instead of the billions of particles in a solid area, you had maybe 100 or 200 or only four particles in an atomic nucleus. The forces were not so well known as those in condensed matter physics where it was simply electric force between an electron and a nucleus, but these neutrons and protons gave us a family of just two particles, and what would happen? Well, it was at this time that Artificial Radioactivity was discovered, inducing radioactivity by bombarding one particle with another. It was this time that the neutron was discovered. Already, while I was a graduate student at Johns Hopkins, the news came in about the discovery of the neutron. I feel very stupid because I gave one of the reports of our student seminars a summary of a paper in which something had been knocked on by something invisible. This was really the discovery of the neutron, but I didn't have sense enough to see that that's what it was. And neither did anybody else at that time. As soon as the neutron was discovered, all hell broke loose. I remember, my friend and graduate student colleague, Bob Murray, telling me with great amusement about somebody putting a source of neutrons in St. James' Park in London, and rowing away with a row boat and seeing if the detector could move faster than the particles. So nuclear physics, to me, looked like the doorway to learning new facts about nature. 



But you were-



But I didn't see any great point of principle involved. It was more a question of figuring out what the Law of Force was and using existing principles then to predict what would happen.
					
						I, somehow, had never been involved in building an accelerator, and to me it was a lot of money, a lot of expense and a lot of engineering detail, to get something that would give experiments.  To me, it seemed cheaper, easier and more promising, to use Cosmic Ray particles. To be sure, they're few in number but they're huge in energy.  So, after the war - no, I shouldn't jump ahead.  I had not, at this point, reached that conclusion.  



With Gregory Breit, you worked on Pair Theory, a theory of electrons and Positrons.



The creation of a pair out of electrons, one electron and one positron, out of empty space, by the collision of two Photons.  You would laugh at me, I spent all day yesterday just trying to find a paper by a Russian colleague, Ivanenko, on the production of a pair, one electron, one positron, by the collision of two quanta of gravitational radiation.  
					
						You once said that in the early part of your career you were animated by a vision, everything is particles. Expand on that concept.

Yes, that's- I'm- the only way that Fields of Force came into it was the law of force between one particle and another.  That was a shortsighted view of things, not regarding the fields as equally important. It was only later that I came to realize how many wonderful things there are in the physics of a field all by itself, whether an electromagnetic field or the gravitational field of force.  

Was there a second phase in which the grand vision was everything is fields?

I never quite got the feeling that the existing particles could be understood in terms of the existing fields. So particle physics had a richness all its own, and field physics had a richness all its own, and the two things intersected in one broad area, but there were regions of non-intersection.  

					
						I had heard Niels Bohr speak at the Chicago World Fair. I believe that was 1932. I realized that I didn't understand what he said and probably nobody else did. But later, when I saw other occasions when audiences had the same trouble in understanding what Bohr said, I came to sympathize with the organizers of the meeting in Geneva. They had interpreters for Russian and French and German to translate what the speaker said, but they'd added an extra one, one who would interpret Bohr's English in English that the audience could get. And the French, especially had trouble with his way of speaking. They used the phrase 'La brume du Nord'- the fog from the North. It was not so much that Bohr didn't know what he was saying, he did, but he wanted to be very cautious in what he said, and that's where the trouble came. People wanted something simple, direct, definite and positive. That's the last thing he wanted to do.
					
						Life in physics in those days was as it is today, one of trying to understand something, showing over to other people to help clarify it, writing up the results and getting the thing published, although it doesn't have the speed of e-mail of today. But I certainly sympathized with the editors of journals and their problems of dealing with the great masses of material that came in, getting it refereed and simplified to the point where it would act to the credit of the journal. John Tate, of the University of Minnesota, was a great conscience of American physics, and a lot of the credit for the prestige of The Physical Review, the American journal of physics, goes to him, his care in getting papers reviewed by proper reviewers. But one time, that policy came into trouble. Einstein sent in a paper and Tate wrote back saying- appreciate it, we're sending it as a standard practice for a referee to be reviewed.  And Einstein wrote back, he didn't want the paper refereed, he wanted it published. And he withdrew the paper and he published it in a different journal, the journal of the Franklin Institute.  It's a great thing to have in this world of science, this referee mechanism to sort out errors and mushy thinking and erroneous reasoning, and get credits right.  
					
						I would say Bohr was regarded as somebody who rarely passed judgment, although you had to be a little careful when a report had been finished at his seminar, and somebody would ask Bohr what his opinion was.  He would say "Beautiful" - well, that meant "OK".  If he said "Significant" - well, that was the beginning of praise.  But he was always very careful about not criticizing.
					
						Milton Plesset and I were trying to knock down an idea which had been put forward to explaining some experimental results. When high frequency gamma radiation, high frequency X-rays, hit lead, they were scattered back in much greater strength than anybody had any reason to think was reasonable. And we wanted to show that no process that could happen in a single atomic nucleus could do that, so we wrote a paper to that effect.  But, for some reason or other, Bohr sat on it and we never published it.  


					
						In those days, there were no air mail across the Atlantic, mail went by ship, and a typical letter would take two weeks from the time I wrote it until Janette got it, or two weeks from the time she wrote one till I got it.  So this made life complicated.  I recall my inexperience with life in another country, in going to the meeting in London, in the fall of 1934.  I stopped at the shop I'd heard of, called Liberty's, and there was a beautiful vase, and I bought a pair and sent them to Janette.  I hadn't realized there would be a duty when she got it the other end, and she was rather upset when the postman appeared and said "Here's a package for you, the duty is $35.00."  In time, I learned better.


					
						Sometimes some of my fellow boarders at the boarding house where I lived, the Danes, would turn on the radio in the evening, hear what Hitler said, ranting and roaring. But the most impressive sign of Hitler came to me when I entered Europe, taking a train from Antwerp in Belgium, where my ship dropped me, through Germany, to Denmark.  And I, sitting up all night on the train, got to Cologne, Germany, in the morning, and went to the station restaurant to get breakfast. The depths of the Depression, it hit Germany terribly hard. And I was the only one getting  breakfast. But as I sat there eating my lonesome meal, there was a storm trooper going up and down the end, with his clanking boots on the floor, looking at me suspiciously.  He never questioned me, he never intervened, but I felt there was Hitler. And as I got back on the train and went through Germany, I saw this gloomy picture of hopeless looking people wandering the streets, no jobs, no work, no money, and- no future. On the ship going from America to Germany, there had been a couple of Germans, and one of them was going back, looking forward to being in the armed forces of Hitler. To him, it really meant something.  
					
						In Copenhagen, the first of the colleagues that I met, coming out of Germany to escape, was Otto Frisch.  He was working in nuclear physics and he had an important part in getting the atomic bomb project started later on.  Then, a little later, called James Franck, a wonderful man, a hero to everybody that knew him, I think.  And he had been a hero in World War I.  He had an Iron Cross. He had gone in no-man's land to bring back wounded.  And, as I understand it, Hitler had said he could stay in Germany, Jewish though he was, because of his World War record,  but he didn't want to stay.  I remember in a long walk and talk he and I had one day, his telling me it would be fifty years before Germany would get over Hitler.
					
						Heisenberg was dynamic and sure, and somebody one could look up to. I have never understood why he didn't take a bigger part in the German atomic bomb project during World War II. Unless it's lack of motivation. I think motivation in science is everything, and thank the lord, he didn't have the motivation.
					
The institute sounds like a great place, with hundreds of people, actually there might be a dozen people there on any one day. One needs really a paradox or a problem or some 'unclarified' point to make progress, and that came up in the field of nuclear physics, through a visit one of our members, the Danish physicist, Christian Mueller, made to Rome, at spring time- at Easter time, to the laboratory of Enrico Fermi. And Fermi had been finding new things when he bombarded nuclei with neutrons, the newly discovered neutrons. Lots of new elements. And how could this be understood. Sometimes the atomic nucleus, in experiments of Fermi and his collaborators, sometimes the atomic nucleus presented an effective target area which was enormous compared to the size of the nucleus itself. In the end, that had to be understood as analogous to a radio receiver which receives waves from a region of the sky far larger than the size of the antenna. It's a feature of waves.  Although that was understood, what was not understood was why the nucleus did this, that or the other thing, after it received a particle. And here's where Bohr made use of an idea that George Gamow had suggested earlier, but in no such deeply thought out way. George Gamow had suggested the nucleus should be compared to a drop of liquid, and Bohr took that up quite seriously, the idea that this droplet could oscillate, and later, he and I came to deal with more violent oscillation where it'd split into two and undergo fission. But he showed how many things one could understand in this way, that the nucleus took up a particle, had vibrated, and what it did then depended on how much energy it had taken up, but not of the history that had led to its formation, so one could have many different outcomes from one single bombardment.

So this compound nucleus model gave a whole new simplicity to the subject of nuclear physics.  It was too simple for many people, but for those of us who believed in Theodore Roosevelt's motto: "Do what you can with what you have, where you are", this was a wonderful godsend to understand a great part of nuclear physics.  It was only later that the idea became clear that the structure is much more detailed than a liquid drop[let] model would suggest.      Later, in that revision, was Maria Mayer, who had been a teacher of mine at Johns Hopkins.  She was the wife of the physicist, of the chemist, Joe Mayer; he was a professor at Johns Hopkins, and she was not given any decent position at all.  Women didn't rate in those days.  But when the Nobel Prize came to be awarded, it was awarded to her, not to Joe.  She and Joe had given an engagement party for Janette and me in the four-day interval between my return from Copenhagen and my marriage.  So I always felt grateful to her.      ...And no time to change your mind!

						Well, at North Carolina, my first teaching, I had both undergraduate and graduate students in different courses.  The graduate students were all older than me, and so, instead of calling me 'Professor Wheeler', they called me 'Brother Wheeler', which I enjoyed.  Two students got their degrees with me, one was Hermon Parker and the other Katharine Way, but both in nuclear physics.  North Carolina had engaged me because they wanted to have modern nuclear physics, and it was thought it was natural that the research should be in that field.  Katharine Way's work took up the liquid drop[let] model, and analyzed how much magnetic effect an atomic nucleus could have through whirling around its axis.  And she found that if it had too large a whirl, it broke.  And so interesting that we came so close to Nuclear Fission except that in nuclear fission, it's vibration that caused the nuclear to break, and here this was rotation.  But although we could have foreseen nuclear fission, we did not foresee it.  Katherine Way went on to nuclear physics and she became the authority on nuclear data, nuclear energies, and Probabilities of Transformation.
					
How I got into that game went back to the London meeting in October of 1934. Two groups describe experiments where helium nuclei collided with other helium nuclei and got biffed off at an angle, how many got scattered on one angle, how many at another, how many at another, and how did this scattering probability depend on energy? That was what the data told. But from it, how could one unravel it and learn something about the nucleus? Well, it was clear that the key point was the temporary formation out of two systems, each of four particles, of the larger formation of eight particles. And that larger system, how did it break up into two systems of four particles? What governed the probability? And it became necessary to find what, in the words of quantum theory, is the probabilities for this, that and the other structure. To describe this point of view, which I found myself forced to adopt, I got a phrase from my friend, Edward Condon, whose place I took at Princeton when he went to become Director of Research at the Westinghouse Electric Company and left his position vacant. Before he left, I told him about these ideas, and he said- you always describe that as resonating group structure. Resonating meaning sometimes it's one way, sometimes it's another way, and group meaning that the particles had come together, formed various clusters, part of the time in one clustering, part of the time in another clustering. So, that way of description had to be translated into mathematics and carried through to get an interpretation of the experiments. I'd love to go back again, in the light of the latest  modern day results and see if there are any new conclusions one can form out of it.  However, the- struggling with this problem forced me to recognize the similarities between nuclear physics and molecular physics, where you have two molecules come together and interact and come out as new molecules. And how to describe that. Then it turned out the way to do it was to talk of a probability of this wave coming out or that wave coming out. And I condensed this point of view into a description called resonating- not resonating group structure but the scattering matrix. And the scattering matrix is now widely used in an even greater variety of problems, far from the original context of nuclear physics.  But this scattering matrix was- and the idea was independently conceived a bit later by Werner Heisenberg - so that I felt happy to have others come into the same road.

But then, this work at North Carolina, on the scattering matrix and on resonating group structure, left a lot of room open for what one said about the force between two of the elementary particles that made up the nuclei. Because, clearly, the interaction between two groups of particles was a consequence of many individual interactions between individual particles. What was the force between one individual particle and another? And that was, to me, especially intriguing, because I could see that the features in the interaction between two particles were in many ways similar to those between two groups of particles. But I had already recognized that in the interaction between two groups of particles, one could not imagine the description leading to a force alone that depended only on position between the particles, it must also depend on their velocities. And whatever was a feature of the groups of particles, I thought must also belong to particles themselves, so I introduced the concept of Velocity Dependent Forces. Well, we still have no significant drive from the experimental side, that forces us to conceive of velocity dependent forces between elementary particles, so that's still an open door.

I had known Teller for some years, having met him first when I went on the boat train from Copenhagen to London for the October, 1934, London International Conference.  And I kept in touch with him after he'd taken a position in Washington at the George Washington University. After I'd come to North Carolina, he was in- Edward Teller was invited to visit the Chapel Hill, Durham, North Carolina area, and give a lecture or two. And that gave opportunity to talk with him again, and we found ourselves trying to understand to what extent the rotation of a nucleus is like the rotation of a molecule. We concluded they are very similar. And we could estimate how far apart the energy levels are in a nucleus associated with different amounts of rotation. It was wonderful encouragement to find that there were indeed energy level separations like that. And nowadays, some remarkable cases of nuclear rotation are found. Somewhere, a nucleus rotates so fast that it changes from being a ball to being like a stick swinging around. But this paper of ours was written primarily by Edward. He has the gift for expression of ideas in simple form. He and I have worked together many times in years past. He's still, he- with a skip of the heart, I see and recognize his footsteps at a distance, because he limps so. As a young man he got off a street car in Budapest- where his home was- too fast, and his foot slid under the wheel of the street car and was damaged so much that he had to have an artificial foot extension.

						I knew about the Institute for Advanced Study. I knew how it had started, and I knew it was located in Princeton. But it had a tie to Johns Hopkins, my original university, in the concept, even though not in organization. The- Abraham Flexner had been one of the early students at Johns Hopkins and had observed the spirit of research, of a research institution. He later became one of the great teachers in America. But he wrote a book called 'Universities- American, British and European'. He compared and contrasted them and spoke of the need for a research-oriented university. I believe it was Mr Rose, R O S E, associated with the Rockefeller family, who read this book, and since he was counted on by the Rockefellers for advice about where to give money- no, I'm getting it mixed up, that was the Rockefeller Foundation- the person who read the book was associated with the families who gave money to the Institute for Advanced Study. Fuld was one of them.



Bamberger and Fuld.



Bamberger-Fuld Foundation. They started to negotiate with Johns Hopkins University to locate themselves there. But Johns Hopkins had been hit so badly by the decline of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad stock, that that didn't work out, and they approached Princeton. Princeton welcomed it, and Princeton made space available in several of its buildings to house professors of the new Institute for Advanced Study. So it's always a pleasure to show visitors the Princeton campus office that Einstein had occupied until the Institute for Advanced Study had a building of its own and could move there. A few days ago, I had the pleasure to take part, along with the president of the university and a few other friends, in a dedication of a tablet suggested by one of the Princeton alumni, a tablet to mark the pathway that Einstein used to take in walking from his home to his office. This went through an archway of Walker Hall, on the Princeton campus, and here now we have a little plaque that marks that spot with words to that effect. This young man, he was then a young man, said how great it was to look out of his window in the morning and see Einstein going by, walking to work. I told him yes, and later on, Richard Feynman and I used the same path when we would walk and talk on our way towards the Graduate College, and how we got to one point along the road where we'd say, "Well, that problem expressed in 'such-and-such' language is so complicated, let's translate it into the language of electricity and magnetism." So later we got to call the tower there, in the building, in the corner, Electrodynamics Corner.  
					
						And so I knew that there were fellowships, and with a salary at the great level of $2300, I needed money if I were going to come and visit. So I got a fellowship at the Institute for Advanced Study. And what did my office consist of? A chair in the library with a drawer where I could keep my papers.  But that was fine. And there was Hermann Weyl, the great man in mathematical physics, who give beautiful lectures that I could attend. And my friends in the physics department of the university knew I was interested in nuclear physics, so I found myself giving lectures in nuclear physics. And that led to an offer to come to Princeton. But Johns Hopkins at this time also wanted nuclear physics, and they offered me a position with a higher rank and a higher salary. But I felt that there were so many wonderful people in Princeton, it had such leadership in mathematical physics, that I should come here, and I did. That was the fall of 1938. I can remember my wife weeping as we left Chapel Hill in the car with our two children to come here, because we had so many happy memories of North Carolina, but we also had happy memories later, of Princeton.
					
						The disagreement between Niels Bohr and Albert Einstein about quantum physics has been told so often that one can ask himself what was it all about. I can recall Bohr's answer to a question of an old friend of his about where's the electron, where can the electron be said to be? And Bohr's answer- to be, to be, what does it mean, to be? And Einstein had the feeling that things exist out there independent of us, that no observation is required. It's one of the great disagreements of all time. And the Institute for Advanced Study had invited Niels Bohr to spent the spring semester of 1939 at the institute. It would have been so wonderful to have day-by-day, Bohr and Einstein arguing with each other, because it could not have helped to- it would have given a wonderful help to understand this greatest of all mysteries, the quantum. But it was not to be. Just as Bohr was leaving Copenhagen on this trip, taking along his assistant, Rosenfeld, and his son, Eric, he received a visit from Frisch, the refugee from Germany that I had met six years before, telling about the discovery of the Fission of Uranium. And Bohr immediately said- oh, how could it have been otherwise? Oh, what fools we've all been. Pacing up and down on the ship on the way over, thinking about nuclear fission. At any rate, I was down at the pier in New York to meet him, simply because of the happy times I'd had with him in Copenhagen. That was January 16th, 1939, when the Swedish-America steamboat, Drottningholm, pulled into the harbor of New York. And Enrico Fermi and his wife, Laura, were there also to meet him. Bohr and his son stayed overnight in New York, but Rosenfeld came down with me on the train to Princeton. That was a Monday, and Monday night I was in charge of a journal club that met at seven o'clock, from seven to nine o'clock every Monday, to talk about recent things in physics.  I had to get together three reports. And here Rosenfeld was telling me about this fission business.  I said- you've got to talk at our journal club tonight. And so he did. Caused great excitement. That was the first word of fission in America. The next day, Bohr arrived, he was very unhappy that  Frisch had talked about this- that Rosenfeld had talked about this because Frisch had not yet published his paper on the subject, and if he didn't publish it first, somebody else might scoop him. But Bohr was always anxious for the person who made a discovery to get the credit for the discovery.  
					
						That makes- reminds me- a digression- of how Bohr had discovered, back in his early days working with Rutherford, in 1913 to 1914, the Atomic Model. And he hadn't published it. And he's gone back to Copenhagen, he'd married, and he kept getting letters from Rutherford- Bohr, publish that paper of yours. And Bohr wrote back saying-It's no good writing a paper just on hydrogen, nobody will believe a story about an atom with one electron unless I could explain helium, an atom with two electrons, and all the other atoms and all the molecules. And Rutherford wrote back- Bohr, you explain hydrogen and you explain helium and everybody will believe all the rest. Well, of course, in the end, he couldn't even explain helium, the quantum theory at that point hadn't reached the stage of doing it. But he published. At any rate, Frisch had the result, this word quickly came out, the newspapers got it.  Such a shame that Rutherford, who'd done so much to pioneer the nuclear age, should have died at about this time, because it was a medical blunder. He would have been the great man of the field. I recall what the French scientist- who was it that discovered radioactivity?



Becquerel



Becquerel, what his son said about Rutherford.  The son had gone to London shortly after the discovery of radioactivity and met Rutherford there, who was then just a very young man. Ce jeune homme divine tout. This young man understands everything. At any rate, Bohr had been a disciple of Rutherford and he was hell bent to understand fission. And I worked in  nuclear physics, so that we found ourselves discussing the fission, day after day. Sometimes he'd come to my office, sometimes I'd go to his office, and they were only a hundred feet apart. Sometimes when he wrote on the board, he pushed so hard on the crayon that the crayon cracked and fell on the floor. The janitor would scold him, because the character of the people was not what mattered to the janitor, the beauty of the building, and it was a beautiful building. So, from then on, when Bohr left the office, he would carefully lift the rug and kick the chalk under the rug so as not to be scolded by the janitor.  But he'd sometimes come to my office, I'd go sometimes to his. And sometimes there'd be in my office, Ray Bowers, who was designing the house that he was going to build for us; Janette and I had decided that we ought to have a home for ourselves in Princeton. So this was two Bs, the struggle of two Bs, Bowers and Bohr, that made life interesting. But two months to the day, after Bohr's arrival, that is on March 16th, 1939, we were gathered in the office that had belonged to Einstein, that now belonged to Wigner. There was Wigner and Teller and Bohr, myself. And maybe two or three others.



Szilard was there?



I can't recall whether Szilard was there. We were discussing one of the projects for a bomb. And I can remember Bohr's phrase; Yes, a bomb could be made, but it would take the entire efforts of a country to make it. Well, of course, in the end, it took the efforts of three countries, Britain, Canada and the United States, to do it.  
					
The model of fission we had, I can compare to nothing better than the picture of a hill, and you're skating back and forth, and that corresponds to the vibration of an atomic nucleus.  But if you have enough energy in your skating, you could go over the hill and go down, and that corresponds to the nucleus stretching so far that it falls apart and explodes.  If you can get the 5 million electron volts of energy, enough to get over the hill, then you'll get 200 million electron volts of energy as you go down the hill.  That's nuclear fission, in brief.  That was our picture of it.  But that picture said the whole thing that governed fission was the height of this hill you had to get over to split.  You would call it the Fission Barrier.  It's a barrier you have to surmount to have split.  And this fission barrier, we had to conclude, would be lower in an atomic nuclei with odd numbers of particles than in similar nuclei with even numbers of particles.  Therefore, to be lower in Uranium 235 than in Uranium 238.  Uranium 235 is the rare constituent of uranium. And we concluded then that it's the one that can be split by lower energy neutrons, whereas the uranium 238 requires higher energy bombardment to split.

I'm one of these poor devils who can't understand anything unless they can draw a picture. And so I wanted a picture showing the height of the barrier that'd have to be climbed over to get fission as it depended on the number of particles in the nucleus. And from that it became clear that the barrier would be lower for uranium 235 than for uranium 238. And just at this time, the measurements came in showing you would get fission for low energy neutrons, and you'd get fission for high energy neutrons, but not very much for neutrons of intermediate energy. At breakfast, at the Nassau Club, where Niels Bohr was living, in Princeton, Placzek, a visitor, said- Your Theory of Fission with Wheeler is cuckoo, because you find this strange behavior. You can't understand it. And Bohr, walking back from the Nassau Club to Fine Hall where we had our offices, thinking about this, and he said- the answer is that it's U235 for the slow neutrons, and U238 for the fast neutrons. And when he got to the office, we drew the diagrams on the board, and I think Placzek ended up almost convinced, but nevertheless, he bet that I was wrong. And I bet him, to show my faith that we were right, I bet him the ratio of the mass of the proton to the mass of the electron, $18.35, compared to one penny. So if he lost, he would pay me one penny, but if I lost, I'd pay him $18.35. Well, the experiments were not fully available, on separating uranium 235 and separating uranium 238, at that time. But one year later there were experiments and I got a telegram in the mail, a Western Union Telegram Postal Money Order for one penny, with the word 'congratulations' from Placzek. But anyway, that was the route to conviction that uranium 235 is a special material.  But to separate it from uranium 238, for making a practical use of it, would be a terrible job, because they're chemically similar. But one of the things on this great chart that I speak about, that I insisted on drawing, was that there were other nuclei. And two stages beyond uranium was a nucleus that had not been named because it hadn't yet been discovered, but it had to exist, according to us, [U]239. And that would also be fissile, would split easily with neutrons. And not long later, Glenn Seaborg, at Berkeley, was making this element, and determining its chemistry. And the great thing about plutonium is that it's chemically different from uranium so that it can be separated from it if you could make it.

						So it was two years later, I was in the business of making plutonium with many friends and colleagues.  We were working at Chicago and at the State of Washington, the Du Pont company had been persuaded by General Groves to take on the project of building the plant to make plutonium.  In the old days, an alchemist was somebody who proposed to do a fantastic thing but couldn't.  But here was alchemistry on an enormous scale.  And Du Pont had to depend on these physics considerations to believe that the job could be done.  They accepted a fee of $1.00 for the work.  But the project, when it was finally turned over by Du Pont, after the war, and it was appraised, was something like $300 million.  
					
						One of the greatest mistakes of my life, not to have plunged in immediately, pushing this business of uranium and making a weapon and so on. But I was convinced that Europe would never be at peace until it was governed by one country or had one government, and this would never happen from any other source than the biggest of them, Germany. And terrible as Hitler was, I couldn't think of any other outcome that would ensure the future of Europe. So I was set to go on with understanding physics.  
					
						I had, at that time, a student who was working on exciting things with me, and that took all my imagination. Richard Feynman had been graduated from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and he arrived in the fall of 1938, as a graduate student. By some freak of fate or good luck, in his task, he was assigned for me as somebody to grade papers of the students in my courses. So every week, at a certain time, he'd come in with the papers graded, so I could give them back to the students, and we'd go over what the students' difficulties and premises were. And then we got off on other things. And I can recall talking to him about the idea, how unnatural it is that a particle that is jiggled here should lose energy only to a particle some distance away later, why not also earlier? Little by little, as we got into these questions, we found ourselves getting more excited. I recall sitting one day in the living room at home, on a Sunday afternoon, figuring on the back of an envelope; look, if a particle here radiates energy outward, and jiggles all the particles far away, what will be the effect of these Far Away Particles back on this particle? According to views then current, it couldn't have any effect then because the effect had to go out, that'd take time, a million years, say, and then another million years to come back. So this particle would never see the consequences until two million years later. But I said to Feynman- suppose, if the effect comes back before it starts, so-called Advanced Potentials, and I found that the effect was of the right order of magnitude to explain the observed loss of energy of this particle, the force acting on it, it slowed it down and took energy away from it, coming from the effect produced by these far away particles. That seemed a big contradiction to the normal order of time, but Feynman was happy to go along with this. But I came out with an answer off by a factor of two. Can you figure out what I did wrong? Well, he figured it out. And then we thought these ideas were sufficiently interesting, why not go round and see what Einstein could contribute on it. So he and I went round to 112 Mercer Street, and Einstein was kind enough to talk about this, things with us, and he told us how years ago he had written a paper with a German physicist, Walther Ritz.  To me it's the height of the ideal of science, two people considering a problem as carefully as they can, they come out with opposite views, but they write down what they agree on, what they disagree on, and what should be done to settle the disagreement, and here were Ritz and Einstein.  Ritz said the world was built so that forces only act later than the action. And Einstein said the asymmetry in time that we observe in nature is not due to the forces, it's due to statistics, the fact there are large numbers of particles out there, somehow or other. So he was sympathetic to the point of view that Feynman and I had developed. And that gave us great encouragement to go ahead and publish this.  
					
						Feynman had, in his community on Long Island, the acquaintance of a young woman, Arline Greenbaum. And he would invite her down to Princeton from time to time for dances at the graduate college, and we put her up at our house. That poor girl had very little money, so to get instruction in art, which was what her favorite subject was, she gave piano instruction by day and had art instruction by night. And this wore her out, and she had got what the doctors, with their blundering diagnoses, did not realize until too late, was tuberculosis. She kindly gave us a couple of her drawings but I don't know what has happened to them now. But against the advice of his parents, they married, but to give her a place to live, which would be better for somebody in her condition, he was happy to accept the offer to go to New Mexico on the atomic project, then she could be in the Tuberculosis Hospital in Albuquerque, New Mexico. I recall, having stopped there once, a week before she died, seeing her lying there in the bed with the tubes feeding oxygen in. But the car which Richard Feynman, from time to time used to go from Los Alamos to Albuquerque and back to visit Arline, was the car of Klaus Fuchs, who turned out to be a spy.  
					
I had met Fuchs in Los Alamos but never talked much of any- except the normal hello and so. I had no idea what he had done. But because of my experience during the war in nuclear reactors and their control and the safety devices, I was, after the war, put on the United States Reactor Safeguard Committee and served on that committee six or seven years. And at one point we met with the British group to compare notes. And we had reached similar assessments on how big the damage could be if a reactor got out of control and the radioactivity was carried downwind by the air, such as the Chernobyl accident happened in Russia.  And we in the American group had decided to put domes over reactors. Teller and Feynman and I, on the Reactor Safeguard Committee, had advocated that method of protection, so that today that's the symbol of a reactor in this country, the dome, but what the Russians did not have at Chernobyl. But in comparing with the British group, the damage that would result, we found that the meteorologists who study wind conditions agreed, they came out with similar predictions. Well, if the catastrophe could be so great, what was the chance of the catastrophe?  And I had looked into these probabilities, and I thought the greatest chance was the chance of sabotage. I'd collected the statistics on sabotage in World War I and World War II, many more in World War I when there was much more sympathy for the German side than in World War II. So I said- the thing you've got to worry about most is the chance somebody who comes in who's an expert, who's trusted and who gets by all the security guards because he's trusted, but who knows technically how to turn off these different safety devices, somebody animated by some strange ideology. As I was speaking, opposite me, in the British group, was Klaus Fuchs. And one month later, he was in prison, not because of any action of this committee, but because of evidence of his being a spy. But Sir Rudolf Peierls, who had hired him, went around to the prison to see him, he said- there's some terrible mistake, we've got to get you a lawyer. And Fuchs said- no, it's not a mistake." You mean, you were a spy? Yes. But how could you? Well, I meant to give control of the world to the Russians. But how could you? Well, then I meant to tell them what was wrong with them. Well, that was Fuchs.

						Well, Eugene Wigner had been closer to the design of reactors, how far apart the uranium rods should be put, than I was. So he would have been a logical person to be advisor to Du Pont. But he resisted the idea that any business organization should build this reactor. To him, that meant a give-away. The idea that a company could go into a business with proper motives was unbelievable. Of course, in the end, Du Pont got a fee, of $1.00, for running the project. But Eugene always referred to the people as the Du Ponts, every time. So, I think that Arthur Compton felt that I could at least get along with- knew about these things, so he assigned me, in the beginning, as a liaison with Du Pont. And after I'd been with Du Pont as liaison for maybe six months, then Du Pont said- you'd better join our staff, we'll take you onto the payroll at the same rate as before. But then you can move your family to Wilmington. Which I did. And then, as they- I would take once a month the train to go from Wilmington to the state of Washington, and once a week to go from Wilmington to Chicago. To make the project go, I think we were very fortunate to have them. In the other room there I have a stack of notes this big. The day-to-day notes made by Crawford Greenewalt, the Du Pont Head of the Work, of the decisions that had to be made, the people he talked to, and the considerations, the progress of the work. As they said, we have to keep careful records because if anything goes wrong, the suits- the law suits will never stop.
					
I had had the task of considering all the way things could go wrong, looking for things under the bed. And in fission you produce new atomic nuclei, and these nuclei might have unpleasant properties. And what could those properties do to their reaction, the danger of stopping the reaction or making it run away? And as a result of talking about this with me, one of the Du Pont engineers, George Graves, said- we'll make the reactors, the piles, bigger by 400 tubes than we originally planned, so as to give an excess capacity if we run into trouble from these possibilities you describe. George Graves had a lovely description of judgment, an awareness of all the factors in a situation, and an appreciation of their relative probability, and that's exactly what he had- good judgment. He made himself, by questioning me and others, aware of all the possibilities. And he had an appreciation of the chances that might happen. And, in fact, it did happen. When the reactor was started up, the first big production reactor, it went fine. The control rods could be pulled out to release the reaction. And then the water came out hot, from the energy released. Then, after a few more hours, it turned out that the piles seemed to lose reactivity, the control rods had to be pulled out further and further to keep it going, and after a while, there was no more further to pull them out, and the pile shut itself down, with everybody running around wildly. What was it? Was it something in the water that got into the rods? Or was there some unexpected chemical reaction? Or did the nitrogen in the air somehow get fixed in the pile? Nitrogen is known to have a neutron absorbing power that could slow it down. But after some hours, the pile recovered, began to operate again, and the control rods had to be put back in more and more. And it went fine for a while, then they had to be pulled out again to get it to go, and again, it shut itself down. Well, from the timing of these events, I figured there were two atomic nuclei involved. One, a mother of a poison, and the daughter, a poison. And from the length of time, I could- the mother must live so long and the daughter so long, I could look at the chart of atomic nuclei on the wall opposite my office. And there was Xenon and Iodine that fit the diagnosis perfectly. And, in fact, that's what was responsible. Well, to overcome that difficulty, all we had to do was put in those extra tubes that George Graves had insisted on. That was an exciting time, that xenon and iodine business.

Du Pont, which ran the whole proposition, was careful about keeping big pile-ups of people. And the start-up had Fermi and a few assistants of Fermi around, and Crawford Greenewalt, who was the Du Pont head man, later became President of the Du Pont company, but loved to calculate, with a slide rule, some of the formulas. At any rate, I wasn't out there at the start-up, I was in at the laboratory center.  But then I heard about the difficulties pulling the control rod out, the pile started up, fine, and got going better and better and so on. And then it died the death, and then came back to life. And I concluded that all these strange features could only be understood if there were two radioactive nuclei involved, one the mother, innocent, two, the daughter, poisonous to the reaction. The mother was formed in quantity by the operation of the pilot power, but it took several hours for the mother to transform into the poisonous daughter, and then that absorption of neutrons produced by the poisonous daughter slowed down the reaction and caused reactivity to disappear. But wait a few hours, and the poisonous daughter disappeared and the reactivity came back. But the lifetime for transformation from mother to daughter and from daughter poisonous to daughter dead, those two lifetimes have to be each one of several hours duration. I could look at the chart of nuclei on the board and see that there were only two candidates that would fit the bill. One was xenon, for the poisonous daughter, and the other, iodine, for the innocent mother.  Did that analysis all take place in the course of a single day?  Right. Fermi was always a great skeptic on everything, but when he came into the lab, and saw these calculations, he had to agree that that made sense.

I took it as for granted that the pile would operate, the first nuclear reactor, and to get on with the job, I wanted to stay with Du Pont because we were figuring out where to locate the reactor. And consistent with this idea of looking for all the ways things could go wrong, I had looked up a table of the thunderstorm days per year in the United States, because a thunderstorm gave lightning, lightning would possibly shut down the electric power operating the pumps keeping the reactor going. And therefore, I said we ought to cross off Florida, because it has the highest number of thunderstorm days per year in the United States. We had a list of sites and the site in the state of Washington looked the best. It's an amazing thing, this beautiful Columbia River flowing down from the ice fields of British Columbia, flowing south through the state of Washington, and then turning west to the ocean along the border between Washington and Oregon. Ice cold, flowing in desert country.  Why desert in the north-west? The answer: the Cascade Mountains between that Columbia River Valley region and the Pacific, and the moist air coming from the Pacific rising up over the mountain, gets cooled and deposits its moisture in the form of snow, so the beautiful Cascade Mountains, and that air, drained of its moisture, going down the other side, getting compressed and being re-heated by compression, to a higher temperature than it started with. That's why you have 100 degrees temperature, 100 degrees fahrenheit temperature, all the time there, in the summer, in the state of Washington.

At Chicago, in the beginning, in early 1942, it was a bit of a 'catch-as-catch-can' operation.  To be sure, there was a natural division for the organization between chemistry and physics, between chemistry of separating plutonium and physics of making a reactor go that would make plutonium.  But in the physics, there was a division between figuring the proper dimensions to get the most effective and the most efficient reactor, on the one hand, and talking about how to get the thing going on an engineering level with lots of heat pouring out of it and being taken away by cooling devices.  I can remember that so many of us felt that any fluid that could be used in cooling would take away from the reactivity, which we didn't know would be enough, and therefore we ought to insist on absolute minimum neutron absorption by the coolant.  Well the only thing we knew that had that property was helium gas.  Well, Eugene Wigner had enough vision to think that we could get the reactivity we needed to use as the cooling medium, water, which absorbed a significant number of neutrons, so-- as helium gas didn't appeal to him so much - but in the end that was the right route to follow.  But I didn't have his faith in getting the reactivity, and so I pushed for the helium.  And I can remember thinking of one bug, one problem that people had raised; won't the helium, as it goes through, erode the graphite and cause the system to fail?  So I got an experiment set up in the lab and we ran helium through bricks of graphite and measured a negligible amount of erosion of the graphite blocks.  But that was my first and only significant venture into engineering, pile engineering.  And, of course, when I was with the Du Pont people, I was very much the engineering side, and the control devices, all the different ways that you could do -- Cadmium rod, pull it out, or put it in; or, if you got into real trouble, had a lot of holes in the pile, then pour boron BBs down the hole.  Much harder to get out than to pull a rod out.  It would be hard for me at this late date, and state of my memory, to remember exactly what the division of duties was for some time.  But I know Eugene and I -- Eugene Wigner and I -- were occupied with the different problems.

						This business of interaction with the absorber, the far away absorber, as the mechanism of radiation, that I started with Feynman, I wanted to get written up and published.  And as in the life of most of us, deadlines are a great help, there was a memorial issue for Einstein to come out in 1945, a memorial issue of the Reviews of Modern Physics, and we thought it would be great to write this up for that.  But then we had some more ideas later on.  And fortunately, there was another memorial issue of the Reviews of Modern Physics, for Niels Bohr.  And we put another paper there.
					
						These particles -- this particle here acts and as a result a particle over there is affected, and let's leave out a count of what happens in between, that's the idea of action at a distance.  It's a boiled down way of describing what goes on, and it's appealing because it is boiled down.  My own feeling is that in time to come we're going to boil things down more.  But that's another story.
					
This idea that the whole world is just made out of electrons, or particles like electrons, is so attractive, and yet, why should there be two electric charges?  But then we discovered that if you have a particle going one way in time, and that turns around and comes backward in time, it behaves as if it had the opposite electric charge and was going in the normal way in time.  So that was the idea of electrons and positrons.  You might say if you have an electron here and a positron here, and they come together and annihilate, that's it.  But an alternative way to look at it; to say it's an electron here, that goes up and turns around and goes back here.  It doesn't make this annihilation business be so spectacularly different from ordinary deflections for particles.  That idea sounds novel; actually, the Swiss physicist, Stückelberg, had published an idea along that line, I found later, already.  And in later life I was able to go and call on Stückelberg -- he's no longer living -- and that was quite remarkable, because he's the only person I'd ever met who was a Knight of Malta.  Somehow that relic of the Holy Roman Empire still persisted and he had received this order.  A very unusual man, he lived in Geneva.

						How much can you build out of the very simplest building particle, just electrons?  You can have a positive electron and a negative electron going around each other, on this picture I was talking about a moment ago.  It's an electron that goes forward in time and turns around, comes backward in time, and these two, before they get up there, have a corkscrew.  But any rate, not only can you have one positive and one negative electron; you can have two positives, two negatives, and one positive, and more and more.  I call these polyelectrons.  So far, the most anybody has been able to go in making these things is two positrons and two electrons together.  A short lived object, but it lives long enough so that it can be compared sensibly with a molecule. And I call these things polyelectrons as a way to give a shorthand description of what we're talking about.  Fun objects, they don't prove anything very much except that if you compare your predictions with experiment, you can say, well, I must know enough to predict.




					
My friends in experimental physics had seen enough of big projects during the war to have dreams built up in their minds of building big accelerators. But I was not inclined that way.  My inclination was to think that the cosmic rays are already there, they're a cheap source of high energy particles, let's exploit them.  And we had, on the campus, a building that had been used during the war for work on shock waves and resistance of structure to explosion.  I managed to snaffle that building to take over for a cosmic ray laboratory. I think I called it Elementary Particle Physics Laboratory, because that was the object of study.  But one of the fascinating things about the cosmic rays is the presence in them of these mesons, and what happens when one of these mesons goes into a solid material and slows down, stops.  Well, it goes into orbit around the nucleus.  And it's the Law of Competition.  It's more effective than the electron in wangling its way close to the nucleus in a region of strong attraction.  So there's a Bohr Orbit of the meson around the nucleus, so I figured that it would be natural to study the properties of such a - what I called a Mesic Atom.  Well, some of the boys in the lab who had got interested in these things set up equipment to detect the mesons coming in, or rather the radiation given out, of the meson, dropped from one Bohr orbit to a closer, tighter, more strongly held Bohr orbit.  And the energy given out we could predict and check the predictions.  This was a great insight into the coupling between a meson and a nucleus.  The chap who did the experiments was W Y Chang.  He had been in the physics department during the war, the university.  He had been originally sent over from China, and he was married to another Chinese physicist, who worked with a colleague in Michigan.  And here, W Y Chang and his wife would meet, generally in Indiana, once a month, see each other and go back to work at their separate places.  They were very loyal to China, so after the war, despite the terrible conditions in China, they went back to their native country.  And she taught physics in Peking  and he managed a nuclear physics laboratory there.  But he was assigned, for a time, to the Russian laboratory at Dubna, outside of Moscow. And once again, they would have to meet at some intermediate point, she from Beijing and he from near Moscow.  I don't know how important a part he took in any Chinese nuclear weapons project.  I certainly never talked about such things with him, and I had no indication that he was interested in such things.  Pure physics was what brought us together, and this cosmic ray work, particles stopping in lead, and other nuclei.  That made a fascinating study.  I would have liked to get that radiation called the Chang Radiation, but the word never took, unfortunately.  But in my mind, that's what it is.

John Toll was a graduate student at Princeton, and he and I got interested in this game of what you can predict about a system from the fact that you can't get a signal to go through it faster than the speed of light.  And this says - and two Dutch physicists, Krämers and Krönig, had shown this - that the absorption of the light in the substance, and the speed of the light through the substance, must be connected in a certain way, if Causality is to be upheld.  What does causality mean?  It means really that no signal should come out of the device before it goes in.  If you apply that simple argument, you can draw a lot of conclusions about the connection between the absorbing power of the material and the speed of conduction of the material.  And John Toll got into that, and was writing it up for his thesis.  Why did I go to France to do my work?  What was my work anyway?  This fellowship I had applied for, I wanted to trace out this idea of action at a distance, further.  Feynman and I had worked on Electrodynamic Action at a distance, where we swept out the electromagnetic field between the elementary particles and talked through the action, directly from one particle to another.  I wanted to sweep out the gravitational field between one particle and another and talk directly of the action, one on another.  What is the gravitational field? Well, it's space-time structure, so I want to sweep out space and time from between elementary particles and have just direct action.  And I thought I could get some helpful insights from Niels Bohr, so I made various visits to Copenhagen.  Why hadn't I gone to Copenhagen in the first place?  Well, I would have if it weren't for my children, but I didn't think that learning Danish would be, for them, so useful as learning French, so I put them into a French school about a block from where we lived, in Paris, and they made out very well.  But in Copenhagen, on my visits, the Bohrs were kind enough to put me up in their house.  And Bohr did not particularly take to this idea of sweeping out the space and time between the elementary particles, that was not his kettle of fish, that was fried by myself.  But we talked to Bohr about nuclear physics, and we started writing an article about a unified view of nuclear physics.  There's that lovely room in Bohr's house in Copenhagen where there's a Pompeian Court, a set of columns, arranged in an arch and water, maybe a foot thick, between them.  And then a walkway around, and we'd [go] round and round that, talking, and then we'd go into the little work room beside the place, where usually Bohr would dictate and I would write down.  He would dictate the result of our discussion.

Right, the fall of 1949 or the spring of 1949, there came a call from Washington, right in the midst of dinner with all my French colleagues around.  It was Harry Symth, a former chairman of my department here in Princeton, who was a member of the Atomic Energy Commission by this time. He said that the Atomic Energy Commission wanted me to return to the United States and go to Los Alamos and help on the H-bomb project, that it was really urgent and that all the people they tried were immovable.  Well, I said something to the effect when I saw Bohr at Copenhagen; I was torn whether to stay on my fellowship in Paris or go back to Los Alamos.  This was at breakfast.  And he said to me "Do you imagine, for one minute, that Europe would now be free of Soviet control if it were not for the American atomic bomb?"  Now, he didn't advise me one way or the other, but that was his way of putting the central point.  And when I got back to Paris I talked it over with Janette, with the children around, agonizing, and finally decided to give up what I was doing and go back to Los Alamos.

						Bohr and I had been writing together on nuclear physics.  An idea about particles going around inside of the nucleus, as well as the nucleus being like a droplet, that it could be deformed.  And on the train back, I realized that the particle going around inside could actually do the deforming.  That same idea came to two of my American colleagues, James Rainwater and [Aage Bohr] the son of Niels Bohr, in New York.  And they promptly checked it out and published a paper on it.  And I was very pleased at that.  But it just shows how ideas can get floating around. I wouldn't be at all surprised if the ideas that I'd come to on the train had not come from Bohr, and that he had also conveyed the same idea to his son.  Anyway, I left the family behind in Paris and went to New Mexico. I didn't feel we ought to break the children's school year.  Poor Janette was left with the car, and when, at the end of the school year, she had to sell it, she found the French would not allow her to sell it because the title was in my name.  So I had to get an official document made up in Los Alamos, with the help of a Los Alamos lawyer, Ralph Carlisle Smith, and then it had to be sent to New Orleans to be stamped by the Consulate of France in New Orleans and then sent on to Janette in Paris so she could sell the car.  And Ralph Carlisle Smith said "You want to limit this transfer to just the car, because otherwise her [your] bank account, her [your] house, everything, she could sell."  As if I didn't trust her.  But he had been through a divorce, apparently, so that's how come he reacted that way.  But anyway, I didn't change the document, the document gave her power to any of these things.
					
I had somehow the idea that the H-bomb was conceptually as clear as the A-bomb.  That is, all you needed to do was bring some material together and it would go off.  Well, it was nowhere near as simple as that.  And as I went around talking to people, I saw that the key factor that was missing was a good idea.  It took some time before that happened.  One of the things that was so hard to realize was the overpowering effect of Empty Space.  Empty space could sop up so much heat radiation that there's no energy left over to do what needed to be done in the way of making thermonuclear reactions take place. How to prevent empty space from sopping up energy.  It took a while to realize that that was the central problem and to find a way to overcome that problem.  So I can't say that I felt very effective in the first months.  But it was a great help to have you, Ken and John Toll there to talk things over with.  And after a while, when we realized that it was not something that was going to be done in ten months but it was going to take a much longer time. Then, even more important than the nuclear side was the human side.      It seemed to me we were going to have to find a way to have people involved in this over a longer term than we had been planning for.  I think I had gone unconsciously with the idea that it'd be one or two years at Los Alamos.  When I saw it was stretching out, or would stretch out for some indefinite number of years, I just didn't see where the people were going to come from to push it there.  That's when I came to the conclusion that we'd have to find a way to have a substantial number of people take part who would not be willing to move to Los Alamos but who would be willing to move to a place that was a normal research center.  And Princeton was the place that obviously met that requirement in my mind.  Try to get people to come to Princeton who would not be willing to go to Los Alamos, then they could mix defense work with their normal research work.  I tried this out on some of our Los Alamos friends, they seemed to approve of the idea.  And I tried it out on some of the Princeton colleagues, and they didn't fall over dead either.  It helped that Harry Symth, the Chairman of the Princeton Physics Department was still a member of the Atomic Energy Commission, which had taken on the responsibility of pushing this thing through.  And I could put it to him "How would you push it through if you didn't do some of the work at Princeton?"

Well, back and forth it went until it ended up in a written proposal which could be sent by Los Alamos to the Princeton University administration.  Naturally, the administration, in this case, Shenstone, the chairman of the department in the absence of Symth, wanted to check with Oppenheimer, who by now was Director of the nearby Princeton Institute for Advanced Study.  And Oppenheimer was favorable.  This is quite something considering the fact that he had been opposed to the H-bomb effort.  But I think it meant something to him to have something like this nearby where he could keep touch with it.  His arguments were a bit odd to my mind.  H-bomb couldn't be done, or if it could be done it would be too heavy to be delivered by a plane, or if it weren't too heavy, it would be too dangerous to deliver.  But the very first point that had to be overcome was his point it couldn't be done.  We had to give a plausible scenario.  And that meant calculating the course of an explosion of a hypothetical H-bomb, calculating the course of explosion all the way through so one could see the flame propagating and the energy being liberated.  That's what we set out to do.  Fortunately, we had you, Ken, and John Toll, Louis Henyey, from the University of California, Larry Wilets from the University of Washington.  We had a total of around twenty.  I, every once in a while, get out the picture of the Matterhorn Gang.  We had called it Matterhorn at the suggestion of Lyman Spitzer, who felt the word was symbolic of the kind of climb that we were going to have to make.  And in keeping with that, one of our members brought along a big coil of rope, so we, in making the photograph, to symbolize the climbing we were going to have to do.  We were fortunate to have a place to do our work, which belonged to the university but was pretty well separated from anything that might get tangled up with security work.

						The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research had had two installations, one at Princeton and one at Rockefeller University in New York.  And the board of trustees had decided to concentrate it all in New York, move it away from Princeton.  And that left buildings vacant.  The Rockefeller Institute wasn't about to give the property to the university because, philanthropic though it is and was, that would have meant too big a slice of its endowment going for purposes other than the medical research.  But they did make an offer to the university of a price for the property that was well below the commercial price.  Could the university raise this money?  Well, this was about the time that James Forrestal, the Secretary of Defense, a former Princeton man, had committed suicide.  And his friends and admirers collected together and put up the money to buy the place.  I remember so well that group of friends assembling at what came to be known as the Forrestal Center, on the day of celebration of the transfer of title from the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research to the university.  We were so fortunate, as you know, to be able to use the building that seemed most appropriate.  It's not often that somebody can go round, look at existing buildings, designed for research and empty, say "Well, I'd like this one and I'd like this one."  But I guess it was security reasons that made us think that the Rabbit building would be as good a building as any to start with.  This was a building which had a metal outside wall and metal inside. In-between the two was some insulating packing to keep the cold outside from seeping in to the inside.  But security demanded that the doors be welded shut except for one door that could be supervised.  So the welders were around one day, and that welding operation heated our metal sheet to a point where it started a fire going in the insulating packing.  We didn't know about that.  But Janette, at this time, and the children, were still in Los Alamos. I was still going back and forth between Los Alamos and this new site.  So I was having to have a place to sleep and had a cot there in the Rabbit House.  And also John Toll did there too.  Well, in the middle of the night, we were awakened by the smell of smoke, here was all this smoke in the Rabbit House, and naturally, we called the fire engine.  Well, the poor devils that came with their hoses didn't have any place to direct the water, no visible flame, because all the burning was going on in this invisible space between the metal sheets.  But obviously they needed help, and what kind of help did they get, they called other neighboring fire departments, so pretty soon we had the Hightstown Fire Department and the Princeton Fire Department, the Pennington Fire Department, and these poor devils, with their hoses, not getting anywhere putting out the fire.  And finally, we saw them attacking the metal with their axes, chopping it open so they could get water in.  
					
Computing the progress of a thermonuclear combustion presented quite a challenge, because there was not the simplicity of geometry that one had in the A-bomb.  This was quite something.  We had the helpful advice of Marshall Rosenbluth, who is still, even now, a leading figure in thermonuclear physics.  He had had a lot of experience in computing and advised us on the kinds of formulas that would be of the most use.  But where to get the computing done?  We didn't have any computing engines. And we called on the IBM people in New York, John Sheldon there was wonderful.  And the computer people at the University of Pennsylvania, with John Mauchly, and we were also using the National Bureau of Standards computer.  Here it was, using the substantial fraction of the computational facilities of the United States for this work.  And I still feel like a 'piker' when I think of how I never put in these thirty-six hour stretches that so many of the lads did, getting their calculations done.  But John Sheldon proved the value of that training at a later point in his life, when he drove from Florida to California, across the country, without stopping to sleep.

This work had to come to a head with some definite prediction.  And we wanted to show the progress of the burning front.  The Atomic Energy Commission had its so-called General Advisory Committee, of which Robert Oppenheimer was the chairman and most influential member.  And it had had a meeting in May of 1951, and I think it was Building E of the Institute for Advanced Study.  We met in a room on the ground floor, which is the size of a small conference room.  And I found myself giving account of what we were doing, the analysis.  And I told about the calculations that were  under way, but I couldn't report any results at that moment.  But then there was a tap at the window, and there, right outside the window, was you, Ken Ford, and there was this roll of computer output, all charted up, plotted.  And you  handed it through the window, I unrolled it, stuck it to the blackboard, and it showed dramatically how this flame worked forward.  And that was when Oppenheimer concluded that he would change his mind, instead of regarding the H-bomb as impossible, it was, as he put it, technically sweet.  The results of our calculations and not only for the original design but variations in the design, we reported by trips, usually every month, to Los Alamos, and the design group at Los Alamos altered their plans accordingly.  Finally, we approached the great date of the test, November 1st, 1952, the so-called Mike Shot, Eniwetok in the Pacific.  And I'm sorry to say that I was the only one in our group allowed to go out to the test.

November 1st, 1952, was scheduled for the Mike Test.  Unfortunately, I was the only one in our group who got the OK to see the shot. At such a shot in the Pacific, typically ten to twenty thousand people present.  People making measurements, safety people, people setting up the devices, people recording every detail of pressure, temperature, radioactivity.  I understand that the British were shocked at how big the population was at such shots, so they tried to cut down the people at their own shot to one thousand, but it didn't work, they ended up with just as many.  The device that was being tested could hardly be called a deliverable bomb.  60 tons of equipment.  But it was a proof of principle, I would say.  It was located on one of the little islands, the Eniwetok Atoll, like most coral atolls, is a cluster of islands in the form of a rainbow or a circle.  It had been occupied by the Japanese during the war, and they had toughened their military people by having them go round the islands, swim from one to the next, to the next.  I didn't think I would want to do that myself after I flew over the water in a helicopter and saw all the sharks down below. But there were coconut logs there which the Japanese had piled up on the bank to shelter them against fire at the time this was taken over, captured by American Marines.

We knew that the explosion would, if it succeeded, develop pressure so great that none of us on any of the little islands could possibly survive it.  I was actually on a battle cruiser about thirty miles away when it went off.  We've all read the descriptions of such a thing, but I hadn't realized what a slow motion picture it would be.  Black cloud opening up, this blaze of light from the center.  And then that blaze of light gradually being covered over by the debris from the little island and all this going up into the sky  I came to realize, though, that even the energy of an H-bomb,  huge as it is, is less than the energy of a hurricane or an earthquake, the Earth is still ahead of us.  That island, on which the 60 tons of equipment had gone off, called Elugelab, disappeared in the explosion.  Of course, its top was cut off so it's really down underwater now.  Edward Teller did not go out to the shot.  He was smart enough to realize that the earthquake, if there was one, and if the shot was successful, would go through the Earth, and he could  pick it up on a seismograph nearby, where he was, in California.  And sure enough, the signal came through and he could report success to Los Alamos sooner than it could hear that news by the normal channels.

I've forgotten how much later it was that I had the pleasure of meeting the two leaders of the Soviet H-bomb project, Yakov Borisovich Zeldovich, and Andrei Sakharov.  We never discussed the gadget at all.  We were interested in questions of principle in physics and questions of peace in the world.  Sakharov, as many of us know, was a man of deep principle.  He, for speaking up as he did, was exiled to the city of Gorky.  And later, after he was released from exile, a few months afterwards, I had the pleasure of dinner with him at his apartment in Moscow, and I learned about how the release had come about in December, at eleven o'clock at night, there would come a knock on the door of his apartment in Gorky, it was the Russian secret police, the KGB.  They had told him they were going to install a telephone. They had received orders from Moscow to do that because an important personage, as they put it, was going to call Sakharov in the morning.  Well, Sakharov was all ready when the call came through, from Gorbachev, at eleven o'clock the next morning.  He didn't wait for any politenesses.  "Professor Sakharov, this is your Chairman calling."  "Oh, Mr Chairman, I have to ask you for your help.  There are six people in the world of physics who have been put in prison in this past week for their political opinions.  It's a disgrace to science, a disgrace to Russia, disgrace to the world.  They should be released."  "Well, Professor Sakharov, we're making arrangements for the head of the Soviet Academy to come to Gorky and take care of your move back to Moscow."  Not a word of thanks from Sakharov, he immediately replied "Oh, Mr Chairman, there are over 500 people in prison now for their political opinions, they should be released, Mr Chairman." and he hung up, like that.  No more... sweet nothingnesses.  Well, here he was, I was talking to him in Moscow, and it was quite something to see his apartment that he had only just moved into, here on the floor was a heap of letters, maybe so big around and so high, letters from people all over Russia, poor people asking him for help getting somebody free, or otherwise putting a burden on him.  And the poor man, a man of great conscience.  His father had been a priest in the Orthodox church, so he had the bringing up as a matter of principle much in his background.

						I suppose that was hard to work off my childhood background. I had, while I was still in my last year in high school, been given a book of lectures [The Problems of Modern Physics, Relatively and Quantum Theory] that Lorentz, the great man of European physics, had given at the California Institute of Technology in 1927.  And these lectures dealt with the quantum and with relativity.  I couldn't ever break away from my fascination with the two issues he brought up.  
					
Well, I thought I understood quantum theory, but relativity, it was something that I had not worked in, Curved Space.  And the best way to learn something is to have to teach it.  So I asked the permission of the chairman of the physics departments, Allen Shenstone, to teach one course, a graduate course, beginning in the fall.  That was a wonderful learning experience.  And little by little, the material that came out of that and subsequent courses went into the making of a book.  And Kip Thorne and Charlie Misner, who had been in that course at one point or another and had given similar courses themselves, helped translate that idea of a book, into a book, which today is so thick that it's popularly known as "The Telephone Book".  But, to boil it all down, I put out a much shorter book a few years ago called "A Journey into Spacetime and Gravity", where I put the whole theme of it in these simple words:  Space-time tells mass how to move, and mass tells space-time how to curve.  Well, I wish I could say quantum physics in equally simple terms. I have not now the opportunity to give a course because I have reached the age of being a 'dodunk'.  But I've agreed to do an article, the deadline of which has already passed, but I'm still hoping to get it down and published as a first crack at quantum theory.  But someday, I hope that the idea can be said equally simply.  If I had to confess, under torture, right now, what I think the simple idea is, I would say it's that we ourselves generate the world, the world is self-generated, but it may well be absolutely wrong.

Radiation, a pencil of radiation carries energy with it, and energy has mass, and therefore, a pencil of radiation must exert some attraction on things beside it.  What about getting a pencil of radiation curved into a circle so the light goes around and round, then the attraction it exerts is concentrated as if at the center.  So what is it that bends this pencil of radiation into the circle is the gravitational attraction of the pencil of radiation itself.  That was the idea of the geon.  Actually, if you think of different possibilities for the size of that geon, bigger or smaller, you find that if it's very big, the energy is low, to push the radiation together requires energy.  And you climb a hill like the hill of a volcano until you come to a maximum energy, and then, if the pencil of radiation becomes any smaller in size, the energy starts to go down and the thing collapses.  So a geon is really an unstable entity.  It either blows up into a cloud of radiation traveling away in all directions, or it collapses into a totally collapsed object, something that we today would call a Black Hole.  But that stability analysis I didn't have in mind when I first published this work, only later did I see that that's a feature that's dominant.  But nowadays, I'm attracted with this idea that this pencil of radiation going around in a circle does not have to be light, it can be gravitational waves.  And you can have gravitational waves imploding to make a black hole.

A spherical geon is, in principle, possible too, where some radiation is going round one circle, other radiation going around another circle, and these various circles with the various items of radiation, these circles are added at random.  So you end up with a smooth, spherical distribution of energy.  But, again, unstable.    Did you hold out the hope that when quantum theory was brought into the picture that it might provide the necessary stability?    Yes, I didn't see how to use quantum theory in the whole story.  But it would be marvelous if quantum theory had led to some structure that would keep this thing from collapsing.  But I don't see now any likelihood that that is the case.  But at the time, I was hoping that this would be a model for elementary particles.  Why dream up something new out of which to make particles when you already have in front of you electromagnetic radiation and gravitational radiation?  But we are still struggling with the ultimate constitution of particles today.  So I would not want to bet.  Dealing with gravitation, I must say that it seemed to me the whole subject fell into order in a new way.  There were no great mysteries except at the interface between gravitation and quantum theory.  Quantum theory says that a physical system has a certain probability to be in this configuration or that configuration or another.  But how would you talk of the probability of a space that's curved like this and a space curved like that, and so on? Where would you be standing when you were pontificating about this geometry?  In which geometry would you be?  It's a ticklish business.  Fortunately, we could talk about these things in a seminar and I had a colleague, Valentine Bargmann, who had been an assistant of Einstein at one time.  And he saw into some recent work by a colleague at the University of Rochester, saw enough to give some guidance into this.  And another student of mine, named Edward Fireman saw how to operate at the semi-classical level, at the level where you almost can use classical concepts.  And that was a step on the way to translating this question of the quantum theory of gravitation into a 'doable' form.  It ended up with an equation which looked mostly symbolic.  My Texas colleague, Bryce Dewitt, found a way to translate that symbolic equation into quite concrete mathematical terms, so today it's called a Wheeler-Dewitt Equation.  But it's one thing to have an equation, another thing to solve it, and so another thing to interpret the solution.  A colleague at Pennsylvania State University, Abhay Ashtekar, has found a lovely way to solve this equation.  But we still haven't got a full insight into what the solutions mean and how to speak about them.  That's a continuing enterprise.  It's strange that the two greatest developments of theoretical physics, the quantum theory and relativity, should take so long to come into a union.

Oh well, one tries to see what qualitative features there are.  And nobody who deals with radiation or molecules can be unaware that in a molecule, say a hydrogen molecule, with two hydrogen atoms, even at the absolute zero temperature, those two hydrogen atoms are not sitting quietly at a fixed separation from each other, they're 'wiggle wagging'.  The so-called zero point energy, a minimum, irreducible energy that can't be got rid of.  And that same feature of minimum, irreducible activity, obtains for the electromagnetic field through space, and the gravitational field, this 'wiggle waggling' all the time.  What we think of as smooth, simple space, is really a 'wiggly' business.  I don't know any better image for it than the look of the ocean as one comes down from a plane high above the ocean, that seems to be a perfectly smooth surface.  You come down closer, you see the waves, and as you get still closer you see the waves breaking and you see foam.  I think it must be the same in the geometry of space, for all our everyday experience, the geometry of space is smooth and flat.  But as we examine it more closely, it must show oscillations.  And still more closely, it must show foam, a foam-like structure.  And that means that down at the very smallest distances, this idea of before and after really lose their meaning.  Very small distances means what?  It's so interesting that Max Planck, the great German physicist who had done so much to understand radiation and set us on the track to the quantum, had, in the study of radiation, recognized a new constant of nature.  And that constant, combined with the known constants of nature, the speed of light and the constant of gravitation, define a certain standard of length, certain standard of time and certain standard of mass.  Planck's notation is not quite in tune with today's, but you tune it into accord with today's notation you find yourself led to a length and a mass and a time which I called the Planck length, the Planck Mass, the Planck Time. And it's at that enormously small scale, fantastically small scale, that space must have this foam-like character.  Will we see any evidence of that in time to come?  We surely will, but I'm not bright enough to see where the first key test will show up.  I like the idea of Planck and of Karl Popper, the philosopher of science, Popper saying that the test of a scientific idea is: a) its surprise, and b) its success in surviving tests.

						One of the problems that is attractive is what happens to a collection of mass when these masses are put together?  And anybody who likes to makes drawings finds himself attracted by the idea that the spherical region of space around a particle or a mass must have an influence on another mass and the spherical region of space around it.  If you bring the two together then you have to think of a plane between the two which is halfway where the two influences balance each other.  That's all right on one side, but if you bring another particle by, at another plane, and these plains can be arranged to be sufficiently numerous and sufficiently regular so as to approximate, in themselves, a sphere.  So although we started out with a sphere, and bit by bit we got away from this sphere by bringing other masses nearby, in the end we could come back to a sphere by having these masses planted around sufficiently uniformly so that this polyhedral surface is a good approximation to a sphere.  This gives one a new way to analyze the approach of particles and the collapse of matter into a black hole.  
					
Our friends in the world of elementary particle physics had a conference which was called The Rochester Conference, typically once a year.  It used to be at Rochester, but then it began to move from one place to another.  I went to one and there I met a young chap I was told was a very good, able, graduate student at Rochester, named Tullio Regge.  And I got into conversation with him.  And a year or two later, I was at the University of Leiden, and I wanted to analyze what happens around a black hole when there's a disturbance that takes place.  What happens to the disturbance?  How fast does it move in or out?   And so on.  So I wrote a paper in which I left slots for the mathematics, and I just gave the ideas and the conclusions. And I sent it to Regge, with his name and mine on it as authors, to see if he felt that he could fill in.  Well, he, on his way from Rochester to his native Italy one time, stopped in to see me in the Netherlands.  And he had it all filled in, so we could send in this paper for publication.  But Regge had a disease, an infirmity, that had been inherited from his father.  That infirmity is, as life goes on, to become more and more crippled, less and less able to stand up on one's own feet.  And I saw him in May of this year, in Rome, and he is in a wheelchair now.

Regge, because of his physical infirmity, realizes more than most of us that life is limited.  He wants to squeeze as much as possible into it.  So he has, among other things, designed a special kind of sofa cushion, which is artistic as well as comfortable, and some manufacturer makes it now. And he also got himself elected to the European Parliament.  He had to run... he ran on the ticket of getting ramps for people with wheelchairs and all kinds of special helps in buildings so that the handicapped could get around as much as other people.      The party that would back Regge on his proposals turned out to the Communist Party, so he became a Communist delegate. That was some years ago.  When I saw him in Rome, in May of this year, he said that he's resigning from the European Parliament, he's giving up being a delegate and his activities all going to physics.  But another thing he did was to act as co-author of a book with the great Italian writer, Primo Levi.  He, in that, he tells coming to visit me in Leiden, there's not very much in it about this paper that we were working on, but he tells about the fireworks that I had succeeded in getting hold of and about how I could set them off in the grounds of the institute when we were working there, on a Sunday.  But we didn't realize all the furor we would cause.  The police force arrived, after we'd set them off.  We had to convince them that we were not terrorists.

It's for me very hard to think of parts of the world that are taking part, acting, go to a place where they can't be seen or show anymore.  The physical world is one would be my way to put it.  But it's reconciled me a little to that to realize that what we're talking about, in the formation of a black hole, is in some ways the reverse of what we talk about when we talk of the Big Bang in which the universe was born.  A lot of physical activity coming out of a region where there is no physical activity to begin with.      Well, we're very far from being able to deal with these ultimate questions in a truly satisfactory way now.  I would put the question in its largest form this way: how come existence?  How come that there is anything at all?  And the black hole is a standing invitation to consider that issue, because you get something going to nothing, well, then, how do you get out of nothing, something?  How do you turn it around?  Here we're skating at the frontier between physics and philosophy.  I always say that philosophy is too important to be left to the philosophers, but it's one thing to say that, it's another thing to see what philosophical idea will carry us through this new frontier of mystery that faces us now with renewed force. Renewed force because we study the evidence for the big bang ever more fully in astrophysics, and we study the evidence of crunch to a black hole ever more in the cores of Milky Ways like ours.

There was always this question about a star, whether a star would crunch.  Well, you pile on more and more mass, you shovel more and more gravel onto the surface of the Earth, you make it ultimately massive enough so it will crunch.  Can you do anything to stop it?  Well, what resists collapse is rigidity, but there's a limit to rigidity, because rigidity of a piano string governs the pitch of the string, rigidity of a steel rod governs the speed that sound will travel down the length of that steel rod.  But we knew there's a limit to the speed of light, and therefore there must be a limit to rigidity. And if you factor that line of reasoning in, you see that you can't have a material rigid enough in the interior of a star to keep it from crunching, if you pile on enough mass.  So I didn't see any way to escape the idea of a star crunching to a black hole.  I've been impressed with my Dutch colleague, Jan Oort, he's no longer living, but he was the dean of astronomers while he lived.  All through his life one theme stood uppermost, where is the mass that keeps going?  Where is the mass that holds the stars together in the Milky Way?  Where is the mass that keeps stars circulating around in tight orbits near the center of the Milky Way?  Where is the mass that holds the universe together?  And that search for the missing mass is one that goes on today.  I'm fascinated by the recent work of our Polish colleague, Bohdan Paczynski, on Gravitational Lensing.  He said maybe there's a lot of mass out there in space that we don't see.  Stars may have burned out and become dead, they may have collapsed to black holes or maybe just cold, dead stars.

Anyway, I was having to give a lecture in New York at the joint meeting of The American Association for the Advancement of Science, and the group of people known as the Society of Sigma Xi, so I - well, actually to give a survey of the frontiers.  I talked there about a variety of objects that we know about and can expect to see, that we haven't seen yet, and among them I talked of a completely collapsed star, something we might call a black hole.  Well, that was the first mention in print of the subject, but I had come to that term a couple of months earlier at a meeting in New York where we were considering this fantastic finding of Jocelyn Bell, the Cambridge research student, working with Anthony Hewish, where they had clothes lines hanging out, they put wires out, radio antennas, to pick up signals and they found a regular pulse, pulse, pulse, pulse, with a regularity that surpassed that of even the best atomic clocks.  The source of the pulses coming from space, one could laughingly say is sign of some advanced civilization out there.  But more seriously, one looked at all the things it could be, and in this meeting we considered rotating Red Giant Stars, vibrating White Dwarf Stars, Rotating Neutron Stars and I argued that we ought to consider also the possibility they came from completely collapsed objects.  Well after you get through saying "Completely collapsed objects" six times, you look for a short cut and that's when I found myself using the phrase Black Hole.

Richard Feynman, objected to the phrase that seemed to me to best symbolize the finding of one the graduate students: graduate student Jacob Bekenstein had shown that a black hole reveals by nothing outside it what went in, in the way of spinning electric particles.  It might show electric charge; yes, mass; yes, but no other features - or as he put it, "A black hole has no hair" - and Richard Feynman thought that was an obscene phrase and he didn't want to use it.  But that is a phrase now often used to state this feature of black holes, that they don't indicate any other properties other than a charge and angular momentum and mass.

						The Chinese records back as far as 1054 give us information that we don't have recorded otherwise. They had spotted a Nova, a new star, in one region of the sky, and that region nowadays is the center from which we get pulses - but where does the light come from that we see there?  This cloud of gas thrown out, why should gas continue to radiate energy? - because the energy has to disappear.  Well, it seemed to me that it was reasonable to think of the source of the energy as contained in rotation of a star left behind in the explosion.  I should have followed that up by looking for pulses of light coming from that object, but that was subsequently observed, I think if I remember right, thirty pulses a second, the indication that there is really a rotating object at the center that powers the surrounding mass of gas.
					
This business of dropping things into a black hole and having everything disappear has some ramifications that aren't immediately obvious.  I thought of the Second Law of Thermodynamics, it says that everything degenerates to a uniform temperature.  You put a hot tea cup next to cold tea cup and they come to a common temperature.  That makes me unhappy.  I have contributed to the entropy of the universe, the degree of disorganization of the universe by putting two together.  But I said, when Jacob Bekenstein came in the room as a graduate student, Jacob if a black hole comes by I could drop both tea cups into the black hole and conceal the evidence of my crime."  Well, he looked uncomfortable but he didn't have any positive objection then, but he came back in a few months and he said "You have not avoided the entropy increase, you've just put the entropy increase in a new place.  The black hole itself is entropy."  Well, it turns out that the amount of entropy a black hole has is proportional to its area, and he gave a formula which only the numerical constant was missing.  But an artist who illustrated this book of mine, A Journey into Gravity and Spacetime, was working with a friend of his to make a picture, entropy proportional to the surface, and he was drawing little boxes all over the surface and he put a black or a white dot on each box, and his friend was tossing coins all the time, telling him "Okay, it's heads up.  Put a black dot. Head's down, white dot."  And this degree of disorder shown on the surface, it gives a pictorial representation of the entropy of a black hole.  Well, you remember that when Bekenstein's paper came out the whole argument seemed so implausible to Stephen Hawking and his friend [Brandon Carter] that they decided to write a paper to prove it was wrong, and ultimately they came to the conclusion it's right, and that this nature will show itself up in another way, that a black hole is able to evaporate electrons from its surface.

						So, on this [Hawking's] picture the geometry is jiggling at the surface, this is this irreducible zero point energy, and that jiggle is enough to make it possible for an electron now and again be raised out [of] a negative energy state into a positive energy state, which in physical terms means able to have a production of a positive and a negative electron pair, and this is Hawking's famous Pair Production at the nuclear surface - not at the nuclear surface, at the black hole surface.
					
						A typical physical law like Conservation of Momentum, that is practically an absolute in today's view of physics, but if mutability is indeed a universal principle, then there will occur events in which articles collide and momentum is not conserved.  One can very well say "Point out please such an event" and I can't, but if the Principle of Mutability makes sense, there must exist such processes --Extremes, as in the atmosphere of black hole, momentum conservation will take on a new character, momentum will be taken up somehow by the black hole. You can say it's not so much that the conservation of momentum is violated, as it's transcended, it goes into a new form, a new agency takes up momentum, the black hole itself.  So it's in that sense that I regard the principle of mutability, the physical laws as a useful guide in recognizing the existence of the processes that might otherwise be overlooked.
					
						In particle physics when we have particles collide, we may have strangeness, we may have parity, we may have charge, we may have a Baryon number, a Lepton number - we have a variety of numbers which serve to characterize particles and help keep track of what can happen in a collision, to find the commonality between the particles that come out and the particles that went in by saying the strangeness is conserved, or parity is conserved or not conserved and so on.  But mutability is the argument that there is nothing that can't be 'un-conserved' if we look hard enough at processes that are extreme enough.  Well somebody might very well say "What about electric charge?"  Yes, we don't know any process that violates the Law of Conservation of Electric Charge, so if one believes in the principle of mutability, you'll keep looking for a process where electric charge is not conserved.  I'm not immediately animated to go on a raging tearing search for such a process because I don't envisage it right now.




					
Oh, it was so interesting to read Mach's books on mechanics and his ideas, his influence on physics.  He was an utter skeptic on atoms.  He thought that atoms were a creation of insane intellect, but mechanics, why should a particle put up a resistance to being accelerated, accelerated with respect to what?  Well, Newton said Absolute Space, and for Ernst Mach absolute space was nonsense.  If a particle put up resistance to being accelerated, it's accelerated not with respect to absolute space, but with respect to the matter out there in space.  So inertia in his view of mechanics, inertia here arises from mass there out in space.  That's such a simple slogan, but how to see it?  And... maybe I can tell a little story about Kip Thorne and Charlie Misner and I taking a twenty minute break once while we were writing our book.  We were using by the sufferance of the institute at that time, a room in the Institute for Advanced Study, and so I said "Let's walk around the corner and call on Gödel."  So neither of them had met Gödel, so I knocked on the door.  It was a glass door which looked out over a pond and trees beyond.  A beautiful warm spring day, but from the glass door we could see inside Gödel with an overcoat buttoned up around his neck and an electric heater going on the floor.

I knew the stories about Gödel being concerned always about his health.  I knew from his friend Oscar Morgenstern how Gödel would never take a pills prescription from his doctor without getting out a big medical book and studying up on that pill himself to make sure that it was okay.  But I didn't realize how far his dreams went, because I had failed to resonate to a talk he gave in 1945 at the symposium held in honor of Einstein's birthday.  In that talk Gödel had described what he called a Rotating Universe, a universe where all the galaxies turn the same way, and where the geometry is such that you keep on going living your life and you come round and come back and can live it over again; 'Closed Time-like Line' was the magic phrase to describe it.  So you didn't have to worry about the pill because you come back and live your life all over again.  Well, after I'd introduced the two I said "Professor Gödel, we'd like to know what the relation is between the great Heisenberg Principle of Uncertainty or Indeterminism; and your famous proof that every significant mathematical system contains theorems which cannot be proven, your theorem of Unprovable Propositions."  Well, he didn't want to talk about that.  It turned out that later that he had walked and talked enough with Einstein to dismiss quantum theory. He didn't believe quantum [theory].  All he wanted to know is what we were going to say in our book about the rotating universe that he had described.  Well actually, we weren't saying anything.  Well, this bothered him and he wanted to know what the evidence is today, at that moment, about whether galaxies do rotate in the same way.  We said we hadn't studied it.  Well it turned out that he himself had taken out the great Hubble atlas of the galaxies and page after page had opened it up and looked at each galaxy, determined the direction of its axis.  He made a statistics of these numbers and found there was no preferred direction of rotation, so they couldn't all be rotating in the same way.

						We found that Gödel had himself taken down the great Hubble atlas of the galaxies and on each galaxy he'd put a pencil to indicate its direction, and he made a measurement of the angle and he made a statistics of these numbers, and concluded there is no preferred direction of rotation, so that our universe does not match up with his model of a rotating universe, and therefore our universe is not a universe which will give closed time-like lines where you could live your history over and over again.  But about a year later I was in my office, rather in the office of  my colleague James Peebles, talking cosmology, when the door opened and a student came in and he put something down on the table in front of us, and said "Professor Peebles, here it is."  So I said "What is it?"  "It's my thesis."  "What's it about?"  "It's whether there's any preferred sense of rotation of the galaxies."  "Oh," I said, "Gödel will be so interested in that."  "Gödel?  Who's Gödel?"  "Well," I said, "if you call him the greatest logician since Aristotle you're downgrading him compared to his true measure."  "Are you kidding?"  "No."  "Where does he live?  What country?"  "He lives right here in Princeton."  So I picked up the phone and called him up and I told him about the work, and pretty soon I got to the point where I couldn't answer his questions and I turned it over to the student, and finally it got to the point where the student couldn't answer and he turned it over to his professor, Peebles, and when Peebles finally hung up he said "My, I wish we'd talked to Gödel before we did the work."  But it was about a year after that, that I was at a little cocktail party at the place of Oskar Morgenstern, and there was Gödel and half a dozen others.
					
						A year or so later I was at a cocktail party, half a dozen or so, and Gödel was there and I could ask him why he was unwilling to talk about the Uncertainty Principle, and I learned that he had walked and talked with Einstein enough to have been brainwashed out of any interest in quantum theory - to me a great tragedy because Gödel's insight might be the key thing.  To me the quantum theory is the great mystery that we will some day unravel and understand "How come?" And the answer to that question will at the same time be the answer to the question "How come existence?"  I can't believe that they are separate questions.
					
						Einstein to me was a model of what a search means, and I'm using his own word "search", for a completely harmonious account of existence.  It's almost theological in his character.  And I recall the great theologian, Hans King, the great Professor of Theology at the University of Tübingen, telling me that that was the part that appealed to him in Einstein, his theological bent, and his admiration, Einstein's admiration for Spinoza.  He told me that it affected Einstein's view of cosmology, that Spinoza had been excommunicated from the synagogue in Amsterdam.  Why excommunicated?  Well, because he had denied the biblical account of creation - a big bang, you might say, day one, day two - the various days of creation.  Because where would the clock sit in all the emptiness before creation to tell the universe to begin?  That was Spinoza's argument and that really impressed Einstein.
					
						There was a limit to how far I would go in imposing on Einstein, but I recall going to tell him about the work that Richard Feynman was doing on quantum theory.  I outlined the general idea in half an hour, and at the end I said "Don't you think that's beautiful, Professor Einstein, and doesn't this make you ready to believe quantum theory?"  "Oh," he said, "I still can't believe God plays dice."  But then he added one more sentence; "But maybe I've earned the right to make my mistakes."   So he was very much a man who pursued his own course undeflected by others.  I don't think I ever saw him deflected by anybody else.  I'll have to go back and look up a paper that he wrote with Pauli, Wolfgang Pauli, I think it was about at the end of World War II; it was a paper where they talked about an orbit of a particle going round a center of attraction -- could it keep going and going for ever?  I think that might have been designed as an escape from capture from a black hole without ever mentioning the word[s] black hole and without ever mentioning the word capture.  I want to see what the motivation of the paper was, if there's any clue to that.
					
						I had, at the last days of Project Matterhorn, been giving this course in gravitation and I produced notes there. But my biggest drive to produce notes came when I was giving lectures at the University of Kyoto, because I realized that my Japanese friends would not all understand English equally well, and therefore each day I wrote out in advance what I would be talking about and had these notes mimeographed so that everybody had a set of notes to look at, and that became a help in producing a book.  But Charlie Misner and Kip Thorne also had their pushes to produce notes, and one time we were talking and we said to each other "We ought to make a book out of these things" - and we ended up in essence signing a treaty that we'd make a book.  And Kip Thorne was a great organizer and he pulled these things together and we were very lucky to have a publisher who had good ideas how to put it together.  We split the pages into easy things where one could quick get a view of the subject and we marked these with a big black-- visible from the corner of the book, and the other pages giving more technical detail.  And we had an illustrator, a Japanese American - I'm trying to remember his name right now - but he fulfilled my ...

He went by the nickname 'Ishy'.

Yes, Ishikawa.  I can't understand anything if I can't make a picture of it, and if you ask me to do - how I would make a picture of something so ephemeral, so strange as the idea of this being a self-generated universe, I would put a luminous pair of arrows like this pointing toward the future, and another luminous pair of arrows pointing toward the past.  I don't know what the diagram means, but it's just an encouragement to me to have a diagram like that to help think about what it would mean to have a picture of how this universe is self-generated.  Well, this book has a lot of references at the end, I think a thousand references, and thanks to the good sense of Kip Thorne we engaged somebody, who was good at looking up references, to get all these references.  I wish I had his services day before yesterday when I was looking up unsuccessfully a paper by the Russian scientist Ivanenko on the collision of two gravitons to make a pair of positive and negative electrons.  I never did succeed in finding the reference, but I know if I go hard enough at it, I can find it.

					
						To take a book of so many pages, if I remember right, twelve hundred pages, and translate it into any language is an enormous enterprise.  The Russians did this, thanks to our colleague, Braginsky and his friends in Moscow, but poor Braginsky, he put 100 copies of it in the library of his research center, and he had a couple of copies himself, and the last I saw him he told me sadly that they've all disappeared - the 'People's property', after all.  And the people went away with it.  But the Chinese, to translate it into Chinese would be something of a real enterprise, but the famous dissident Fang Lizhi and his wife [Li Shaxian] now live on the campus of the University of Arizona at Tucson. He's teaching, and she, who used to teach physics in Beijing, to contribute to physics decided that she would translate this book into Chinese.  But no publisher in mainland China dares do it because of the fact that Fang Lizhi was a famous dissident.  So she's getting it published in Taiwan.  Well Taiwan is great, there's a lot of good scientists there.  I confess I did not volunteer to check the translation, but when I saw her last, some months ago [1994], she was sending through her husband the last bit of manuscript to Taiwan. She'd checked the last proof, and I said "Will this ever reach mainland China?"  She smiled quietly at me and she took out a paper napkin and wrote on it: "In two years begin smuggle."

					
One colleague, who has my respect, Engelbert Schücking, wrote a review recently of the book of Ciufolini and mine of gravitation and inertia, and he said "If they believe," referring to Ciufolini and me, "if they believe that mass there governs inertia here, let them try to prove it.  Let them try to move the stars around and see what happens" - as if it was nonsense.  But this idea that mass there governs inertia here has a very close bearing on an experiment that's now being prepared, it's taken twenty one years so far to prepare it and a couple more years before it's ready for launch in a space platform.  For instance, Everitt at Stanford University was the person who initiated the project.  The idea is to check whether mass there governs inertia here.  If the whole universe started turning, then we wouldn't recognize it was turning because our inertial frame would go along with it and we would think it wasn't turning. But suppose that part of the universe turns, and we have a part right under our feet right now, it's the Earth itself spinning, and that must contribute to inertia, and since it's turning it must drag with it a little bit the inertial frame of reference.  But it's a tiny effect and to observe it is not easy, and for instance Everitt was to have a gyroscope spinning in orbit going round, staying near the Earth, and therefore able to respond to the Earth, and that gyroscope should not keep pointing always to the same point in the distant universe because the Earth is part of the universe and the Earth is turning and so the frame of reference ought to turn slowly; therefore the gyroscope ought to turn slowly, a tiny amount, but enough to be detected with the sensitive instruments he's been devising.  And I would say one of the great things about the Stanford enterprise is this; that it's the developing instrumentation, methods of measurement which will have their pay-off in time to come in other fields of endeavor.  But at least there's a definite possibility of checking.  So when I see Schücking on Friday afternoon, I'm going to tell him this is my response, Francis Everitt's response to his challenge to get something and make it move.  The Earth is free and it's moving.

						It's so wonderful to be kicking something around with friends who share the same interest, and I don't know how to make progress except that way.  To go off in a lighthouse with nobody around would be not my idea of making progress, although surely some periods of absolute isolation are good.  If you can't kick a thing around with your friends then it doesn't take shape, it doesn't gel.  But that's part of it.  That's forming an idea.  But getting it put together in a closed form demands some sort of a deadline, a deadline of a talk, a class lecture or a paper.  But I confess my principle is generally: first you say it, and then you write down what you wish you'd said.
					
The phrase that expresses my feeling about gravitational radiation is that today we're in a position of being like the savages on an island in the Pacific who are not aware of all the music and sound and messages going by in the radio overhead.  We know that in the deep and secret places of the universe, like the inside of a big star, things going on that are producing gravitational waves.  They're going by us all the time, we're not reading out their message.  I think we must find out, and tune in, tune in on the universe - that would be the way I would put it.  In the year I had the good fortune to be at the University of Leiden I had a colleague, Joseph Weber, who had done a lot on electromagnetic radiation towards the eventual production of laser.  But he got interested in this problem of gravitational radiation and came up with the idea of a bar which would be set into vibration by the passage of gravitational radiation, and then you'd put at the end of the bar a little detector and pick the motion.  And he's had such a thing going for a long time.  It's so easy to convince oneself that it's got something when it isn't there that we've now come to the point where we are afraid that Joe Weber has not detected any gravitational radiation.  But California Institute of Technology and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are collaborating on a big enterprise to detect gravitational radiation, not by using a bar and its vibration, but by putting a couple of mirrors a few miles apart and watching how the distance between the mirrors changes with time.  And they're not gambling on failure either, gambling on success.  Because what does it mean to gamble on success  here? Well, you want to have several detectors at different parts of the Earth's surface, so that if radiation comes in from that Supernova going off up there, you'll know from the timing of arrival at these separate detectors, you'll know from that timing that it really was from that direction and not some other direction that the pulse came.  I'm very pleased that one of the detectors is at the place where I lived for a year and a half, Richland, Washington - the place where the plutonium was made.  It's simply that there are a lot of technical people there and there's a big, good, undisturbed area.

Someone has said that you transformed relativity from a discipline of mathematics to a discipline of engineering. How do you react to that description?  I'm very proud if somebody says that, because I confess that in the beginning general relativity seemed to be a paradise for advancing mathematics, and now you go and look at one of these detectors being built and you feel "My, that's really impressive.  These things must be real, these gravitational waves, even if we haven't got the direct evidence."  We have wonderful indirect evidence.  My Princeton colleague, Joe Taylor, and his younger associate, Hulse, have found that in a double star going round the loss of energy causes the two components to spiral together, and they measure the rate at which they're spiraling together and find that it corresponds to the loss of energy by gravitational radiation the Einstein's theory predicts.  So indirectly we have proof, but that's one thing to have the proof that energy is taken away, but that's not quite the same thing as seeing the radiation really move something in front of your eyes.

						What do you feel is the likely range of black holes in the universe, from smallest to largest?

Boy, that's a lovely question.  The smallest black hole - I suspect [can] be made from the collapse of a neutron star that picks up some matter and by picking up this matter becomes more massive than the critical amount and collapses.  I'm afraid I'm not being as imaginative as I could be in thinking of a way to get small black hole, but a mass of the a neutron star which is maybe two times the mass of the sun. And what's the biggest one. Well, how big would such a thing be?  Well such a thing, a black hole would be about that big.
					
						It would be about this big, the smallest black hole, and I base that on the fact that the gravitational mass of the sun is about 2 centimeters and this is a little more than that.  But then at the other limit, what's the biggest black hole?  I recall the first Texas symposium on relativistic astrophysics, Ivor Robinson, my imaginative Texas colleague at the University of Texas at Dallas, dreamed up this lovely title: Relativistic Astrophysics, to combine his love of relativity with something that was down to earth, practical, real observation - astrophysics.  At this meeting the real eye-popper was a report by Maarten Schmidt of the discovery of what today we call Quasars.  It was a newspaper reporter who was there at the meeting who dreamed up that short cut way of saying what Maarten Schmidt had been calling a Quasistellar Source.  Today these bright spots at the center of some distant galaxies can only be understood as arising from the presence of a black hole which has enough broken down stars in orbit around it to give enormous luminosity.  And how much mass are we talking about?  We're talking about 5 million solar masses.  So five million times this size.  But if that's the biggest black hole, then we'll have to do quite a lot of looking before we know which of these quasars is the biggest.  But in time we will have a reasonable guess.
					
						Why did I go to the University of Texas?  My colleague, George Sudarshan, from Texas was with me at a conference in Brussels, the Solvay Congress, shortly before that time and he said they were looking for getting another person there at Texas and would I be interested, and I knew that at Princeton there was a retirement age beyond which one did not teach, and if one didn't teach, then how could I ever learn anything?  So I was very interested in this idea of Texas and went out to Texas for a visit and found the department lively and attractive, and I accepted after discussing with Janette.  It gave me a chance to go on and keep teaching.  I stopped teaching at age seventy-five because I thought it was a bit disgraceful for students to have to listen to somebody that ancient, but also I had had open heart surgery and I thought I could start again.  And then the most important factor was that my wife and I had been very poor parents.  We had never succeeded in teaching our children that there is any such place as Texas.  In eleven years, not one of them had settled there, and we decided that if the mountain was not going to move to Mohammed, Mohammed would have to move to the mountain.  We moved back east where our children were settled.  But those eleven years in Texas were a great treat.  I sympathize with the view that somebody once expressed, that if this country gets into trouble again it'll be Texas that will save it.
					
						One of the most remarkable features of nature is that a Quantum can pursue two different routes, through two different slits, come together and manifest itself as a single quantum.  But nothing prevents one from saying that the quantum might be a photon, to speak of quantum of radiation, or it might be an electron, to speak of a particle.  A quantum can go both routes or it can go a single route.  And it's possible to choose which.  After the particle has already made its travel, you choose - after the particle has decided whether it's going both routes or one route, and after it's got through, you yourself decide which it shall have done.  You seem to intervene to change the past.  But quantum theory says it can be done.  And I had the pleasure to spell out some of the features of such an experimental arrangement.  My University of Maryland colleague, Carroll Alley, made changes in the experiment, but without changing the principle, and carried it out.  And it checked, so that we now know it is indeed true that one can decide, at the quantum level, whether an object shall go two routes to get to its final point or just one route.  You can make the decision after it's already made the trip.  That sounds like a contradiction, but it works.
					
						And that concept grew out of a student seminar you had in Texas.

I think it did.  I can't recall all the details of it.  But I do know that an active participant in that seminar was Wojciech Zurek.  And he and I later put together some of the key papers in the quantum theory, measurements, in order to make it available to the wider community.  And that continues to be popular.  It was more difficult getting permissions from authors and publishers for the re-printing of those articles than it would have been to write a book ourselves.  But the variety of opinions would not have been matched.  The biggest difficulty, maybe I mentioned, was with a French publisher.  His publishing house was more interested in its arts books that its science books.  And the fact that this was done by two people, both dead, gave them no voice in what would happen to their paper.  I'm sure they would have liked to have seen it appear in English translation.  I had known both of them before they died.  I had very high regard for them.  But why wouldn't he give permission?  I got a French colleague to go and talk to him, and -- Cecile Morette -- she received the answer from him  "Yes, I'm sorry to deny you permission.  I've denied many people permission, but you're the first one I've been uneasy about denying permission to."  "Well, why do you deny permission?"  "Because I'm a son of a bitch."  It turned out he was an illegitimate child, and he was taking it out on the world, what the world had taken out on him.  

					
						I'm afraid I think the theory is so firmly established that I can't see any case where firm predictions are not possible.  Firm predictions about the nature of the outcome.  The outcome may be either this or that.  It may not necessarily be one of the two, but whatever one sees, I think one can predict.  



Does that mean that you would say the doubtful part of quantum mechanics is not what it predicts but what it rests on?



Yes, where does it come from, what deeper principle does it arise from.  That, to me, is the real puzzle.
					
If I say that the laws of physics did not exist forever but they came into being, along with the big bang, then there ought to be some microscopic fraction of a second in the earliest days, when those laws haven't quite got hold, when things could come out contrary to the laws as we see them, in their firmly established shape of today.  I can't be specific on that, but that is at least my present-day answer to your question, can they be violated?  Yes, in the very beginning of the world; yes, in the very end of the world.  What about the collapse to a black hole?  Isn't that something like the end of the world, on a small scale?  And could the laws of physics be violated there?  That's a fascinating question.  I'd be hard put to it to name any concrete case where there would be a violation that one could look for.  But I think it would pay several days of vigorously looking over all the conceivable experiments for something that would be outside the scope of a[n] iron-clad quantum mechanics.    When you speak of the laws coming into existence at the time of the big bang, that's what you sometimes refer to as 'law without law'.    Yes.  I don't see any other route for the laws to come into being except out of the act of coming into being of the universe itself.      And if someone were to ask you the question, "Professor Wheeler, what was here before the big bang?" what would be your answer?    There was no before, before the big bang, would be my answer.  The very concept of time made no sense then.

						It's a picture to inspire thought, it doesn't record an experiment or a formula.  There's the letter 'U'.  The U starts with a thin stem, the beginning of the universe.  At the beginning, the universe is small.  This stemmed U gets fatter as we go up to this side of the letter.  And at a certain point it's terminated by a big circle, and there, there's an eye sitting and that eye is looking back to the first days of the universe.  We ourselves can get radiation today, and do get radiation today, from the very early days of the universe.  But in so far as the act of observation has anything to do with what we do when we ascribe reality to what we see, then we can say, this observer who was brought into existence by the universe, has, by his acts of observation, a part in bringing that universe itself into being.
					
						Such an interesting point about what it is that brings an elementary quantum phenomenon to a close so you can say the definite result.  It's a little like a trial or a title deed after it's all written out and printed: that's it.  If the observation that you're making is registered in an indelible form, then that is really the completion of a quantum phenomenon.  But if it's only in a temporary form, there's always the question whether it will disappear and whether what you thought was a result will not be undone.  So, Bohr was very careful to talk about a phenomenon brought to a close by an irreversible act of registration.  My wonderful colleague, Eugene Wigner, used to ask, in his Hungarian version; 

"What means irreversible?"  And that's a matter of degree rather than [of] kind, as we see it today.  
					
Our colleague here in Princeton, John Tukey, is the one who, while working at Bell Laboratories, coined the word "bit", as an abbreviation for Binary Digit.  And today, every computer user knows what the bit capacity of his machine is.  The telephone lines, so many bits per second. But what has information to do with reality?  Well, what do we mean by reality except as judged by our colleagues and ourselves.  Observation, or in the sense of Bohr, irreversible acts of registration; and most of us know how hard it is to erase a registration on our memories, something that's happened.  But is there any other reality in the world except what we get by these acts of registration?  If not, then how could one expect to build a theory of the world on anything but acts of observation?  That's where I think one has a doorway to the future.

It's a -- the world is a crazy place, and the way it's organized is surely crazy, but we have to be crazy enough to see what that way is, if we're really going to understand this physical world.  It's not just a matter of nice simple formulas, there's some ideas out there that are waiting to be discovered.  I have in Maine a little stone that my son and his wife brought back from a visit to Athens.  They walked in the Garden of Academe, where Plato and Aristotle walked and talked.  And this little stone, I have in my mind's eye, the vision of a machine one could put the stone into which would un-peel the acoustic memory, and someone could hear the conversations between those two men in the Garden of Academe, Plato and Aristotle, the great thinkers of long ago.  But I would put Parmenides in as another I would like to hear.  It's so hard to recognize that it was another Greek, Democritus, who told us that the world is composed of atoms.  And he was two thousand years ahead of his time.  Plato and Aristotle may have one or two other surprises for us that need to be unwrapped and looked at and bowed down before.

						I hate to think of what I do as speculation.  But maybe all I'm doing is giving an elaborate definition of what speculation is, looking at all the conceivable ways to understand a situation, sizing them up, comparing one with another and looking for a concrete way to knock down this, that or the other, so one's left with a battle-tested scenario at the end of what's going on.
					
I should think of Bernoulli, with his -- the original Bernoulli, with his picture of gases colliding with each other and temperature having to do with the speed of the molecules.  And Voltaire ridiculing that idea.  It did not really take off again until at least a century later.  But at that same time that Bernoulli gave this idea of the properties of a gas arising from molecules, Leibniz was proposing ideas which gave more occasion for Voltaire to ridicule.  There are very few people whose considerations require a whole book to ridicule them, but Voltaire devoted the whole book Candide to ridiculing Leibniz's idea: this is the best of all possible worlds.  They began, of course, with the tidal wave, which overcame Lisbon, and it resulted in so many deaths, and it goes on to incident after incident.  But Leibniz was the great thinker and great universal man. If one goes into the building of the academy of sciences in Berlin, as one used to go into it, during the time of East German rule, there was Honecker, the President of East Germany on one side, but opposite was the portrait of Leibniz.  He was the one who advocated the idea of a network of academies of science in all the great countries that could keep in touch with each other and forward science.  But what was his greatest idea?  My colleague, Oskar Morgenstern, told me about the enterprise under way to re-print the works of Leibniz, the enormous history, mathematics, science, inventing the calculus, understanding so much of the principles of physics.  Even if Newton did not resonate to Leibniz, the rest of the world did.  But my colleague, Oskar Morgenstern had the feeling that Leibniz may have discovered the magic principle by which anybody could discover truth, but was something of such great importance and strength that it could only be taught to people of the highest moral character, otherwise it would give too much power to the wrong people in the world.  Well, it will be fascinating to see, as the work goes on in studying the writings of Leibniz, if there's any evidence there of his principle for discovering truth.

I can recall Hugh Everett's thesis, and how I spent most of a night with him, going over [it], trying to word it in a concrete way.  But the ideas in the thesis were so strange to many people that they provoked strange names.  And particularly, produced a strange name, the Many Worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.  A certain probability that such-and-such happens and will be in a universe where we see that happening.  Or there's certain probability that something else happens and we'll be in a universe where we see that happening.  Well, isn't that obvious, you could say.  Well, in Everett's mathematical formulation, these possibilities were coexisting and could come together and be extinguished.  It was only when what got to the point where one had an irreversible act of observation that one of these became materialized.  If there's anything designed to confuse somebody about what quantum mechanics is all about, this does it.

						A bus comes up to a fork in the road, it can go to the right and the passenger in the bus sees it going to the right, or it can go to the left, and the passenger will see it going to the left. But what about the coexistence of these possibilities?  Quantum mechanically, the idea of these coexisting, has negligible observational weight, although in theory, one can think of them as going on in parallel. 
					
						His idea was that in the world of nuclear weapons, safety would only come if we had complete openness, so people could travel freely from one country to another, talk with one another.  And have full disclosure, so there would be no surprise that one country would spring on another.  An open world, for him, was the necessary condition for a peaceful world.  And he thought of it as a world, also, where each country could exert itself, contribute to the common welfare of everybody, by new inventions, new medicines, and so on.  I'm afraid I'm not as optimistic as he was.  He sent his letter proposing the open world concept to the United Nations at an unfavorable time, when the Korean War had just begun and people's attention was taken up with that and took away from the impact of his carefully drafted open world proposal.  I'm afraid I have the feeling that the nuclear weapons that have been developed make it inevitable that there will develop a world government.  How that comes about may lead through many a tragic valley until we get to the mountain and the peaceful world.  
					
My colleague Edward Teller has been vilified by many colleagues because he supported the idea of ballistic missile defence, otherwise jokingly, disparagingly referred to as 'Star Wars'.  I don't see any possibility of proper defense without ballistic missile defense.  I think of this every afternoon about four o'clock, at my place in Maine, these big' four-engined' planes fly out from the naval air station at Brunswick, fly out over the ocean.  I know that the mission of such planes in the past was to pick up signals from devices planted in the ocean, aiming to detect foreign nuclear submarines.  And I know too that a submarine has only to surface and ten minutes firing time, flight time, from the missile submarine to the major city on shore.  The idea of ballistic missile defense as a single idea is a crazy idea.  There are at least seventeen different kinds of threat, each of which demands its own kind of answer.  But if that demands vigilance on the part of this country, it also demands vigilance on the part of NATO.  I have always found it especially interesting to have been present at the third conference of NATO Parliamentarians in Paris, at which we answered the Russian Sputnik surprise by coming up with plans for scientific collaboration between the NATO nations.

						Jefferson used to say, as our First Secretary of State, that America would be threatened if all Europe ever fell under the dominion of a single power.  That was the time that Napoleon was threatening and we could not afford to let Napoleon win.  So although we had just ended a war with Britain with the help of the French, we took action against the French. But today, we think of a union of Europe as friendly to the United States, and we propose to stay friendly.  
					
						We met on the sidewalks of New York -- of Washington, rather -- I can't recall just how we knew where we'd meet.  But he was with his son, Aage, who had gone with him to Los Alamos.  And he told me about his meeting with Roosevelt.  "How can such a man as I," he said, "talk to the leader of the greatest nation in the world at a time of the greatest war in the history of the world."  But he said "I simply put it to him, as man to man, how could we deal with this problem of nuclear weapons except through openness."  And Roosevelt was evidently much affected by that, because at the time of his death he was writing his speech, which he never got to deliver, in which he was proposing exactly the concept of an open world as stated by Benjamin Franklin, where a man could travel anywhere, as if in his own home country.
					
						John von Neumann was one whose talents reached so widely, I could talk to him about the puzzles of the geometry around what we today call a black hole.  He was close to getting a solution to that,  but he had not quite got it.  A younger colleague here, Martin Kruskal, got the solution, and I converted it, naturally, into a drawing, because I can't understand anything without a picture, and got Martin to publish his result with a drawing.  But John von Neumann talked about the geometry around what we call a black hole today, I'd get him to help review the possibilities of nuclear weapons.  The project Matterhorn, as you'll recall, we put together a summary report, PMB, 1932, was it?  Or was it 1931?  Anyway, John von Neumann had gone over that and made various suggestions, which we fed into the text.  John von Neumann had designed the lenses which were used in getting a good implosion at Los Alamos, to make the bomb work.  He was entranced with the Quantum Theory of Measurement and what quantum mechanics means and implies.  Although I can't say that there's any insight he gave there that I have been able to capture and make much out of.  I was at an after-dinner party at the home of our friend - I will remember his name in just a minute - the chemist - unfortunately he died just a few months ago, here at Meadow Lakes -- but he, in the after dinner discussions, got things going along the idea of how a computer might be in the future.  And von Neumann joined in that discussion vigorously, and at the end of it all he said "I think I'll go and look into this some more."  And von Neumann, by George, he was one of the great men of the computer world.  




					
						But the route to a practical computer is often associated with another individual, John Mauchly.  He was a fellow graduate student of mine at Johns Hopkins.  He was one of the few who was married, and I can remember his telling me that if you dropped a penny into a pot, every time you have relations with your wife, for the first year, and then from then on you took a penny out, there would still be pennies left in the pot at the time you died.  Well, John Mauchly, like all of us at that time of the Depression, had a tough time getting a job.  He got a teaching job at a small college in the outskirts of Philadelphia, Ursinus College, and that's where he developed his ideas for a computer, which became known as the Maniac -- no, the Eniac. The Eniac.  And later was the foundation for the Remington Rand Company position in the computer business.  


					
						But John von Neumann had a marvelous interest in history.  He had read the Cambridge Medieval History, [the] Cambridge Ancient History, and he had a phenomenal memory, so he could recite whole paragraphs from the Cambridge Ancient History and tell me about the Council of Nicea, for instance.  But to become a member of the Atomic Energy Commission, I'm sure he was very useful, but it was so far removed from making use of this marvelous scientific imagination of his that I keep wondering if we made the best use of him.
					
						Eugene Wigner had so much nuclear physics.  I can recall that when Niels Bohr and I were considering nuclear fission, and what the chances that a vibration in the nucleus would go far enough to go over the potential barrier to fission. Eugene was in the hospital. He'd eaten some bad oysters and had hepatitis. I stopped in to see him and told him what we were thinking about and he said you should look up the paper of -- I'll just remember it in a minute -- Polanyi, Michael Polanyi.  Yes. Eugene had worked on the Theory of Molecular Reactions with Polanyi, and Polanyi had a formula for this.  Bohr and I could translate that formula into the corresponding formula for nuclear physics.  And it made the probability of fission proportional to the number of channels that lead over the barrier.  The Channel Analysis of Fission.  And that later proved to be a good guide to experimental work in the field of fission physics.
					
After the war, the great defense contractors slowed down a bit, and the slow-down was provoked in good measure by a cut of the government budget.  I think that some people felt that Eisenhower had been responsible for that slow-down and for what was called a gap in the missile defense.  But as things turned around and there was an upswing, John von Neumann was drawn in as an advisor on an advisory committee, and he recommended that every defense contractor allot a certain percentage of the contract to advanced research. So here were these defense contractors, and I found myself asked to be a consultant to Convair and to general dynamics, and I've forgotten what else.  But at any rate, the Convair group was steered by Marvin Stern, an imaginative and dynamic young man who later wrote a book with George Gamow called One, Two, Three, Infinity.  But Marvin Stern knew that the Korean War presented special problems.  And he thought that a committee should do a study on a doctrine for a limited war.  So he got together Morgenstern and Chalmers Sherwin, who had been involved in airplane design, and Henry Kissinger and me.  We met a day and a half, every month and a half, for a year and a half, in southern California, and we came up with this report on a doctrine for a limited war.

The idea was very simple, a limited war is one where the two sides are trying to reach a balance, an equilibrium, put in a little bit on the scale, put in a little more on that scale, to get equilibrium.  But an all-out war is a matter of survival for one or the other.  How do you signal that you're in a limited war?  Well, the Chinese signaled that the Korean War was for them a limited war by calling the troops they sent in not regular troops but volunteers.  And they signaled their limited war intentions on Taiwan by shooting missiles only on certain specified days of the week and at out of the way harbors.  Well, the report as we wrote it, and Kissinger wrote most of it, was never published, for the simple reason that the Convair company did not want to be tarred with the brush of merchant of death, the brush that had been used to discredit other defense contractors after World War I, merchants of death.

I acquired a tremendous admiration for Kissinger, he's a hard driving person.  And I think it's through his influence I was put on the president's General Advisory Committee for Arms Control, Disarmament and World Peace, a commission established by Congress. So we were not only appointed by the president but had to be confirmed by Congress.  Well, meeting around the cabinet table with Nixon presiding, seeing him in action with Kissinger at right hand, made me realize that if I ever got myself into some huge law suit involving money and defense problems, Nixon would be an ideal lawyer to have on my side!  But I can recall also, after he had to leave office, how we all had to resign our offices because we'd been appointed by the president. Then, when Gerald Ford came in as president and re-appointed, once again take the oath of allegiance to become an active member of the committee, such a variety of people that I was not accustomed to -- I. W. Able, the retired head of the steelworkers' union; William Scranton, former Governor of the State of Pennsylvania; John J. McCoy, who had been U.S. High Commissioner in Germany after the war, in the American zone of Germany.  And Dean Rusk, who had been Secretary of State.  And William J. Casey, who had been head of the CIA, he was fun to talk to, and to him, life was one great adventure.  General Gunther, who had been Supreme Commander of NATO.  But after Ford came in, and we assembled in the cabinet room around the big table, I could see Ford in the neighboring room being briefed by some assistant.  That person, his first name is James. And that person, his name is John, so when he came in the room he could greet each of us, shake hands, "John, nice to see you," and so on.  The perils of being a president.

						I'd be willing to have this arm cut off if that way I could understand how come the quantum.  If I could understand how existence comes about, and the relation between the two questions.  I think that's the most exciting thing.  I think it's a thing which is outside the bailiwick of lots of people.  And yet I think stands the most chance of giving a really dynamic impulse to the whole scientific enterprise.
					
						I am making use of a secretary now to finish a paper up.  But my secretary is going away for a week to visit her daughter in Greenwich, in Denver, Colorado.  And two days ago, one of the students who was a junior, came around and asked me if she could help me on this paper on the subject that we're talking about, of how come existence, how come the quantum.  And I look forward to that as a way to make headway.  Yes, no student: no progress.  No deadline: no progress.
					
						I'd like to express thanks to the people that never get recognized enough, the little people; the secretaries, the assistants, the shop people, that make the world go around, who establish a level of cooperation that makes this world go.  It makes one proud of the human animal to know those people.
					