jonas.mekas

Jonas Mekas (1922-2019), Lithuanian-born poet, philosopher and film-maker, set up film collectives, the Anthology Film Archive, published filmzines and made hundreds of films, all contributing to his title as 'the godfather of American avant-garde cinema'. He emigrated to America after escaping from a forced labour camp in Germany in 1945.

I was born in Lithuania in a small village of 20 families. When I was like 10 years old, I counted how many people there were, and when I counted there were 98 people in that village. In the north part of Lithuania, about 60 miles south of Riga, which is in Latvia already, and I was born on December 24th 1922, though in my passport it says 23rd December, because I never... where I come from, nobody pays much attention to birthdays. This is some kind of further Western kind of idea, Western Europe and etc. We never celebrated our birthdays and it never, I had problems of remembering, so when first I had to tell my birthday, I said December 23rd, and though, you know, it's the 24th. So in my passport it's 23rd and I don't want to correct it because if I ask them to correct it, they may send me back to Lithuania, or something like that, which Lithuanian immigrants now, there are students and artists who come, they consider that the worst punishment to them would be they would be sent back to Lithuania! In any case, in a small village, farming my, on a farm and that's where I grew up with, in a family of father, mother and five, five of, six of us - one sister and five boys.

I grew up very much in Nature because we... somebody had to take care of the farm and somebody else, some younger children always, have to take care of the cattle, that is cows and sheep and, during the summer, so we would have to get up very early, like 6:00am, when the sun rises, we get up and take the cattle into the fields and when the sun sets you bring them back into the barn. So, I spent usually like four or five months every year in the fields and outdoor, so it's very, very well in the field, the outdoor, Nature is very well, very much in me and that's when we come to Walden, of course.
[Q] Where, which... you were the youngest child, the oldest child, the middle child, or what? 
I was the fifth. Adolfas my brother is the sixth and the last one, so I was one before the last. So, my older brothers already had to work, do the fieldwork and I had to take care of my younger brother - Adolfas is 3 years younger - and the cattle, the...
[Q] And what kind of school did you go to? 
I went to the school where... the primary school, which was like 4 km from my home. I think I was nine when I went to school because for at least two years, my family could not permit me to go to school because somebody had to take care of the, of the cattle.

First, I began... the primary school like 1 or 2 years later than anybody else.  So, when I finished the primary school, the first six grades that is, I was... became too old. They had the limit of age for the high school of the gymnasium, and I was too old by a couple of years. So, the only way to get into it was to take private teachers and jump a couple of years. The gymnasium and Lithuania at high school is 6 years, so I did that and I jumped over 4 years of, instead of 1 or 2; I jumped during one winter over 4 [years]. So I had only 2 instead of everybody else going for, sitting there for 6 years I just had 2 and I had no, no, no problems. I still did very well in it, but I had only one winter to go through 3 years of... yes, 2 years of French and 2 years of Latin and 4 years of mathematics and I... had to do that.

I started keeping a diary when I was like four years old, drawings... drawings. Then, when I started learning to write, that was before I went to school, I started writing, very simple, you know. 'My father took the cow to the bull' or things like that or, you know, 'it was raining today, my father went to the market' – my diary was very down-to-earth. It was not young Anais Nin diary.
[Q] Did you, I mean, did you read any diaries, did you, I mean where did the idea of doing that come from?
No, no. My older brothers, two brothers, were interested somehow in a strange farmer's way, in literature and in poetry and when they went to the primary school the tradition... they introduced a tradition which later I continued, to publish like a, at least twice a month, like four-page little newsletter, like a... in which the school news, local news and poetry, a lot of poetry that they wrote was published in that little newsletter. So, as a child I was watching them writing, it's all done by hand, by hand of course, and like maybe edition of ten, or something like that, each one reproduced by hand. And I think that may have been an inspiration, sort of, the idea, that I'm not so sure, I am not so sure at all where that came from.

The teacher took us to the next... to the city, which of course was just a town, and that's where I saw some kind of melodrama that I don't remember, but I remember a Disney cartoon very well and that was the first introduction to cinema.
Later, when the Soviets came in 1940, they erected tents in the villages and they showed propaganda movies and also films like Chapayev and that was already in 1940, so my entrance into cinema was very, very late. And, of course, even when I was already after the war in Germany in the displaced persons camps, during the war, I mean, the forced labour camp in... near Hamburg, I saw a lot of German, you know, German, usual commercial cinema and then after the war, I saw mostly what was sent to the army. Sort of a lot of Westerns and comedies, and there was nothing of great interest. So, only when I began studying at the University of Mainz and that was in '47, and that means I was already 23 or something, when I saw the first films of any, of some importance, like I saw, Beauty and the Beast and the post-war, the post-war French cinema. And that's where we, and also, the post-war German cinema, which was quite exciting, not perfect, nothing great was produced, but the... backgrounds were the post-war Germany, there were very new, you know, really, new realistic and that was that imagery of reality in the background, the place like Helmut Kautner people like that, Staudte, was very, very refreshing and very, very exciting to see the real, or the post-war reality there on the screen. That's where myself and Adolfas, my brother, we began thinking that, hah, there is something here.

I think I was about five, when I got into some kind of telling to my father in the evening going through like sing-songing like some epics, very realistic about life in the village, very so, like my father sending the, telling what my father did, how he went to the mill and... I was so involved in it and so concentrated and so obsessed with it, that I... can put myself into that mood, into that memory whenever I want. I can turn back to it and it had the mood and the shape which later in some of my poetry cycles, returns, that mood and that, I consider that whatever I was doing now in cinema is, can be reduced, retraced back to what I was trying to sing out, to tell when I was five. So, it's like nothing new, I'm just perfecting what I was already wanted to, to sing out when I was five. I'm just polishing now and trying to return, trying to get it somehow, again, and I still keep trying to do it. Because that's when I was the best, I consider.

That sing-songing was what I picked up from my mother who used to always sing for herself, I think I picked it up from my mother. She was always singing for herself, whatever she was doing. So, it's a combination of that.
[Q] And did a lot of people sing?
Oh, I mean, they get together and drink a lot of beer and, of course, they sing, they sing. And our house, was next to the cemetery and whenever anybody died they, the gravediggers usually come with the barrel of beer to our house, they're waiting for the whole procession to come, the coffin and the singing the hymns and they were singing right there, drinking and singing their own songs and, oh they're coming already! So they drop their glasses, leave their glasses on the table and they go to take care of all that in the cemetery. Yeah, there is a lot of singing; there is a lot of singing. I still know, I still know, I think, hundreds and hundreds of songs. When I went to Lithuania for the first time, I went back in 1971, I knew more songs, more folk songs than they knew already because between 1940 and '70, during those 30 years already, and the song culture, they knew how to sing the new Soviet songs, but the folk songs were on their way out. I still knew them and I still know them.  We sang here about two days ago, my friends sang Lithuanian folk songs.

There is this whole... my whole joke about languages because we, I, spoke local, my village had its own dialect, my village, there were like five or six or ten villages. Then when I had to go to the primary school I had to speak, to learn the official, literary official Lithuanian which differed, mostly in dialect, not so much in its... not only, also in its spelling and, and many other ways. Then when I went to the gymnasium or college, I had to, you know, I had four years of Latin and three years of French. Then the Soviets came in and French is no good, Latin is not necessary, now you learn Russian. So we dropped French, we dropped Latin and we learned Russian. So I had like a year-and-a-half in Russian. Then Germans marched in, said Russian is no good, German is good. So, we all learned German. Then, I ended up in Germany, in the forced labour camp, and I lived with French, Italian, Yugoslavian war prisoners and there I was in Germany. I said, ah, this is my chance now to improve my German. Then I discovered that the area, the area in which we were, they spoke what's known as Plattdeutsch, which is very special German dialect, not even Germans themselves don't understand! So I said then at least we can learn Italian from the Italian prisoners so, of course, we began to learn and, and you know, try to speak. Then another group of Italians were brought in and they are like officers, they speak pure Italian They said, 'What? What are you doing? They are not, those other Italians, they're gypsies, they're from Sicilia, they don't speak Italian, you're learning, this, what you're learning is not Italian'.

That's where the cinema comes in. We thought, maybe we should drop all those languages because we speak all of them and we speak them badly, so now it's cinema and the cinema is a language that everybody, you know, you can talk with the cinema to everybody. And that's where the joke continues. As the joke goes, we are there, we pick up, now we come to New York and now we begin to learn cinema, we get a camera and we meet other friends who make films and we begin to show our films to each other and then people come to us and say, 'What is this? We don't understand you'. We said, 'Oh, we are making movies, you know'. 'No, but this is, what are you doing? This is not... we don't understand this kind of cinema'. And that is where we understood that we learned the wrong language of cinema, the language of the avant-garde, it's not Hollywood. And that's where the joke ends.

During all my school life I never missed a single day. I feel sick or not sick, no matter how sick, I went, nobody could stop me from going to school. And I always got only the highest... very, very, very seldom... the system there was from one to five; I always went through all the schools with fives, maybe through the whole school period I had maybe three or four times when I had five minus or four plus. That means I was a very, very good student – I don't know why. But it was very easy for me because I had read already everything that they were teaching me there in school, that I read before. It's... in a strange way, now Sebastian, my son, is doing the same because he has read and done everything before, you know, he went to Cambridge and Cornell and he's zooming like it's nothing to him, and again with the best grades and nothing else. It is, it is maybe this obsession with... with... when I was already in... like in the second grade, I had read third and fourth grade, you know, I went through that so it was like nothing and that's one of the... yes, I was... I was very good in school, so what can you do about that!

My athletic activities began with, already when I was like 17; I was in very poor, miserable health and until Year 12 or something. I don't know what diseases those were, but I spent, when I was five, six, seven or eight, I spent weeks and weeks in bed and I remember well, you know, vividly, the village women sitting, old women looking at me and they were very, very, how to put it? They had no pity. They, 'This poor boy, I think he will die', like, I used to get so angry! What are they talking? You know, I will show them.
[Q] Were you very thin? 
And when I went to school, to the primary school first grade, they used to call me 'skeleton'. So, when I was already 16, 17, with my brother we got a book on Jiu-Jitsu and we studied, read it and we practiced everything in Jiu-Jitsu and we started also, and then in '33, after the Berlin Olympics, that was, I was 11, 12 we began practising all the, all the things that happened in Berlin. But what we really continued was the running. We did one, we marked up one kilometer and we, usually in the evening after all the work and everything done, we used to run and all the neighbours used to look and say, they're crazy, running. And I think that that, activity, that special running gave me, my body a certain kind of strength in any case, something that is still sustaining me today. I don't... for the last time, you know, it's been many years that I had to go to a doctor was when I got married, because they required that you go to the doctor. And after that, I never went to the doctor. I had to, you know, go in the last two years, I have some problems, but I would say that I'm in very good health and, which some of my friends envy.

In the village next door there was an old 100-year, at least that is what everybody said, that he is 100 years old. He used to come and visit my father and he said, 'I will now, give me a ladder and I will climb on the roof and I will stand on my head on the chimney,' and he did that! He used to climb and stand, it wasn't a very big tall house, and he used to do that! That impressed so much that I had to learn, and I began standing on my head on everything that people, you know, you would provoke, including on the back of the horse, riding home from the fields and standing on my head.
So, that's part of my... sort of... You get so, even now sometimes it comes handy. Just last year, with my drunk friends, we were, you know, attacked, attacked in our practically, we were so drunk that we were being thrown out from the mafia run bar, and so before I know, we are in the streets, my, one of my friends already, there are four younger mafia defense team of the restaurant, they're all Korean or Chinese. but they're all, you can see that they can chop you to pieces. And Sheila my friend she's right there on the ground and blood then my friend Julius want to fight back and stop and I made my movement and they step back and go, what! They did not know, suddenly I got them confused for, 'Who is this guy, he's challenging us? This guy?' and they sort of stepped back enough time for me to grab both of my friends and try to go and pull them out and at that time I must have made the right move and they're all, it's automatic, you know, it's an action, reaction. So, that was in the Italian... on Mulberry Street, it's a year ago. So, I may have saved them, they really could have damaged them.

Lithuania is a Catholic country by that time, at that time in 19... when I grew up it was 100%, that is 99.95% Catholic. The other half percent was in my area where I was born and grew up which was Protestant – Reformed Protestant left over from Radziwiłł. Lithuania was Christianised by Jagiełło, in 14th century, and then there was a backlash when the... Luther came from the West and there was Protestantism. Radziwiłł family chased the Catholics out and he transformed Lithuania into Protestant country in 17th, 18th, 17th century. And then Catholics decided to counterattack their established Jesuit Catholic university, and Jesuits managed to push Protestants out and again Lithuania became again Catholic with a very small area of... and that is where I came from which remained Protestant. And the Protestant tradition which does not exist in Catholic tradition, families, is that sometimes three or four families some evenings get together and they sing religious hymns and they used to come - my father was the one, it was our house where they used to gather so I used to hear a lot and see my neighbours, you know, sing in the evening and my father used to try to interpret the bible. He reads and make his comments and, you know, what he thinks. That was a part of my early childhood.

My mother's brother was a Protestant pastor in the city, one of the three that there were because there were not that many Protestant families.  But my, but he was very important to me, that is... he's my uncle? My mother's brother, what? My uncle?  Because he had a very large, when I went to gymnasium, what is it called there, or college or high school, here, would be the equivalent of a high school – it was already not in the village, but it was in the city of 6,000 people – and I stayed in my uncle's house and he had a tremendous library in... not only in Lithuanian but in German and French. And when he studied in Germany and Switzerland he became, he befriended Spengler, so he had all his writings there and he kept... spoke to me about Spengler. So, that library was like one of my sort of mini, early mini universities, I would just, of course, zoom through it. I zoomed through all the libraries that I could put my hands on. In the village there was one neighbour who had his own little library and when I, that I exhausted it, I zoomed through that library when I was still, you know, watching the cows and the sheep. I always held two or three, you know, behind my shirt and they were all full of sweat, those books. Later, of course, the Soviets shot him. He was too educated.

I never went to church. And then I went, you know, sometimes just to keep company, so if my mother came I went to church. But then there was also a Jewish  Synagogue... mosque, synagogue. I used to go there and then I went to Catholic – probably with my grandfather – to Catholic and the churches because I was interested in them all. And then there was a, one day my uncle called me, said, 'People are wondering why you... you go to other churches and we don't see you that often in our church'. So, of course, I had to explain it that I'm real interested. That was a scandal a little bit, because, especially my uncle, I'm his... okay if he's my uncle then I'm to him, what?
[Q] His nephew. 
I'm nephew? I cannot figure out. If I'm the nephew of the priest; we're going into synagogue... what is this? But I was interested... but I was not, I was never religious, I was never for organised church but I'm very much interested in religious texts or mysterious religious texts. And certain persons, personalities, the saints, I'm very much interested in the saints. And people... where there is something very concentrated, some very concentrated energy which is not easy to explain and not easy to see or to know how far it goes and what it means, I'm interested, I was interested and I'm still interested in it. And actually, so much at some period that I had to almost restrain myself, ok, at the age of 16, 17, I was going too far in reading, you know, all those texts and, and I... I mean, that I could... I could tell, you know, that somebody's coming, I could tell what's happening around the corner and I thought, where, what's happening, where is this going, you know, like I'm leaving the realistic, down-to-earth, the ground, this is affecting me and I... I stopped like, until later already in the displaced person camps when I again picked up reading various texts on astrology and all these mystic – and again happened the same! I would see that... I see that there is somebody who was, I see blood – somebody has been run over around the corner there and then two minutes later they come and tell that a truck just killed this, you know, person. Or I see... I'm leaning on the wall and I can see a cyclist being also run over on the other side of the wall I'm standing. 'Hell', I said, 'this is... this is going too far'. And so I again abandoned the reading and concentrating on certain aspects of the experience with the exception of texts like St Augustine or St Theresa, which is completely something else. So, there is... danger lurking there; I have to sort of keep checking myself not to go. I like to be up front, to be on this earth with my Bolex because they, people don't realize that, you know, since I have gone through it and know that that exists and you can fall into it and it's no, not, not fantasy. I mean, even today I save a lot on telephone calls if I want, you know, to call somebody, you know, and in one minute or even in seconds that person calls me, so I still save a lot of money on telephone calls. But there are also dangers so...

The first books with reproductions of art, I saw in the fifth, sixth grade. The teacher pulled out some big books from the bottom of the closet there in the classroom. They were all in, from Renaissance, that period, somewhere there, I remember and they were all in black and white, no color. But they left me a great impression that, on very, on very bad paper, very badly reproduced, in black and white, but there was still strength and mystery and, and something there that you, that came through despite all that bad paper, bad ink, bad, no color. And later, many years later, I saw originals, some of them, and the originals did not impress me that much more than when I saw them in those miserable reproductions when I was 14, 15 years old. And that's the, one of the, you know, argument, arguments is, you know, argument that one could... it's a subject that when we talk about original film or film or the same film on video you see, to me, that no matter how you, if something is really good then you cannot destroy it, no matter what you do to it, it's still something comes through. Not all of it, but there is some aspect that is still is, remains there and comes in a factual and it does something to you.
[Q] When you say they were basic illustrations of renaissance paintings? 
Yes, some reproductions, I do remember the Durer, those I can see, and I don't exactly remember now but some of them, more known of course Leonardo Da Vinci and Michelangelo, you know, that's what they showed to schools.
[Q] And then? 
And then we jumped from those reproductions because there was nothing that you could see in Lithuania, only, after the war already in Wiesbaden, when the American army collected some of the plundered stolen works and the... from the... Europe's museums that Germany, German, Hitler's Nazi Germany had done and they exhibited them in '47 in Wiesbaden in a huge, huge space that you could see a lot of original, original art from all of the periods where, for the first time, I could see some of the originals.

The politics were very down-to-earth and sort of survival kind of politics into which I, you know, immediately, or like students, not immediately, got involved and I worked in... already as soon as the Soviets marched in 1940, and of course, that was when I was 17, we already, we formed groups and worked in the underground published newsletters which really pulled me deeper and deeper. And by the time the Germans came in, I was so involved with that, finally I had to... I was in danger of being arrested, and that's when myself and my brother, I persuaded.... he joined me. We deciding that it's time we, we cannot stay because we were told by those who were more connected and had fingers in the German's secret police, they knew that we should disappear, that we may be arrested. That was in '44, summer, spring of '44. So, having said we had to... and, where can we disappear?
We were pretty naive so we said, okay, let's go to Vienna and maybe we can, join the university, you know, attend university, we will tell that we are going... if they stop us we'll tell that we are going, you know, students going to the University of Vienna which we did, but, of course, we never reached Vienna. We were taken by the German army and placed near Hamburg in a forced labour camp together with war, war prisoners, you know, French, Italians. So, the politics were, you know, survivalist. In our newsletter, in the one that I had to type, my function was... they wanted it typed, typed it and put it together, there were some people who were listening to BBC and writing down whatever we could, so all those news were, it was mostly news that were not available in any other way and the locals know what the Germans did there and there and there or there before that or the Soviets did there and there and there. It was information which were distributed then though... in little batches to friends and, um, I used to carry always some in my cap, in my hat under... things like that.

I don't think people in the United States can even imagine what... that oppression and fear that had descended on those countries as soon as the Soviets marched in and... everybody knew what happens if you say... I mean, when you walked in like three months or so after Soviets marched in, I walk into my classroom and one third is gone so. I mean, really that's reality, that's not, it's not a game so we knew that what we were doing was not a game.

Each high school had assigned, was assigned a political... like a supervisor connected the party, seeing that nothing in the high school would take place that is against the communist party and the Soviet Union. So, and in our case it was a... woman, a Jew, a Jewish woman, about 40 years old and... Anything to drink?
[Q] No. 
Water?
[Q] No. 
One needs a lot of strength sometimes to....
[Q] I've never seen you do that. 
We never talked much.
[Q] Yes. 
But there are some things that are very difficult to talk about.
[Q] So shall we... 
In any case, so there I am in the coat room where, you know, students leave their, you know, coats and hats and we have our names there and so I hang up, I put my cap there and there comes this, what are they called - politruk, this woman - and, of course, they know, we were, you know, in any event, of course they know that, where to look for hidden materials and that somebody may be, because they have, you know, they've sent many to Siberia, to jails for, they know all the tactics so she picks up my cap and looks in and finds the little news, the underground and the Soviet publications. So, she puts it back and she said, 'Burn them'.   And she never reported me.

How can you join the communist organisations or groups if your friends have been deported to Siberia, if one third of your classmates, friends, have been arrested and deported with their parents, and I knew their parents and I knew them and I've... and they have done nothing, so how can you then support or join in? So, of course, immediately, and I think that was one of the main mistakes made, you know, history and all the books tell that, too, of the Soviets, of the communist tactics at that point and that... those countries, that they deported people without, I mean, just because they were maybe doing better in their lives, in their farms, in their businesses and their work. Instead of leaving them there and promoting, you know, communist ideas and, you know, as soon as you begin deportations and arrests and, for no reason, just for political, for total reasons, immediately you set the population against, and that's what they did and all, and that was the beginning of the downfall of the Soviet Union. So it was just very, very simple, practical, down-to-earth kind of reaction to what was happening around us.

Germans took over Lithuania like in one day and there, because their decision I think of the... Stalin's decision was to fight somewhere deeper to permit Germans to, you know, they knew that they couldn't hold back the first wave of German attack, they could not hold, so they retreated. At that... at that point the Lithuanians thought, ah, and the same happened with Poles, that they could maybe now regain their independence, and so the Germans encouraged that idea, though of course, they knew that they will be in... it's like Iraq at this point. They are free and they're not free so that was the same situation. We were free and we were not free and so, it was clear that, you know, again from the information coming what Germans are doing in other occupied, you know, areas or, they tolerated the Baltic states sort of... more because it was agricultural area so and they needed farmers to be in... to continue producing food, you know, which Germans, the German army needed. So, they, they comparatively from the Germans situation, the Baltic countries suffered less than Poles that were German, the Germans insisted that certain areas of Poland really belonged to Germany and they sort of wiped out millions of Poles. I am not talking about Jews, I am talking about Poles. So it was a slightly different situation. We knew that it was only temporary and eventually they will do the same to Lithuania as what, you know. So it was, the politics were based on survival, it's no, not ideology at all, it was survival, either you live or you die.

In Lithuania... Lithuania had one outstanding theatre director.  His name was Miltinis.  He studied, he was roommate of Jean-Louis Barrault. He studied, his education came from Paris, and then he returned to Lithuania in maybe '33 and not  '34 and rejuvenated Lithuanian theatre actually. And when the Soviets came in he became really their number one theatre director practically in the Soviet Union. But he came with his... the independent Lithuania before the Soviets took over he created his own theatre in, not in the first kind of city, not in the capital, but in the next sort of larger, largest town or city in Lithuania. And it became the best theatre that Lithuania had.
So he came, I was already writing, writing for the local and editing the local paper when he came to our town and I met him there and I reviewed, the... it was, I think, Pirandello, something by Pirandello that Henry IV or VI or something like that.  And I also met him during the intermission and he asked me, I was, you know, the punk, local punk, and I was what, 17 or something, or 18? And I started instead of praising started criticising him and he was amazed. So later he calls me already when after, you know, I would like, 'Why don't you start a theatre in your own town?' So I thought why not? So I get together some of my friends there and he sent some of his actors to teach us and we created a local and new theatre in which I, you know, I was one of the actors but we only did, you know, two plays and then, you know, I had to, to move out of that town. And that was it. My brother was in it also, but he was much better than I, and I was not sure if I wanted to be an actor but I want... I was not sure.
So then in the displaced person camps, there was another theatre director, he came from Stanislavsky School and worked with Stanislavsky, Theabortask was his name. And he started to, you know... he cannot live without theatre, so he started a little theatre group and that was in Kassal, in Germany, and he insisted that I join the group, so my brother joined and I joined and, and then I decided I don't... I don't want it, but he... I said a smart actors as usually  you had to be ready to adopt rules and... disconnect the mind and that was my understanding that you are wrong, you're wrong. The best actors have always been also the smartest, you know, you look at Olivier and Gielgud and other or Barrault, they're also very intelligent which a stupid actor... you cannot make them into great actors if they're stupid, you just...  In any case, that's how it was this argument to persuade me to go back. I never went.

We ended up in Elmshorn, which is about 20 miles from, it's like a suburb of Hamburg. It was during the period when, that was in July '44 when the British and American air force... they were bombing main cities in Hamburg, especially because it was a port, every day, sometimes two, three times every day, so we witnessed the destruction of Hamburg.
You could, you know, practically for miles, there was nothing, it was just, because we were permitted to go to movies, from then to work, we had assigned factories in the forced labour camp where we had to go to work and we could go to movies and we could go to Hamburg, if we wanted to, but we had to be back at a certain hour at the camp. So, we sometimes, with Adolfas, went to, because there was one area in the, in Hamburg, as destroyed as it was, an area near the railroad station, an area known as Altona, where there were still some book shops left. It was an area of... obviously, it was an area like New York, 4th Avenue between 14th Street and 4th Street, was in 1960 when there were book shops on both sides from 14th Street to 4th Street. You have some memory of some of that.  Okay.  So that was, you know, obviously book, and there were still some left, so we used to snoop to, we had to go and snoop through those, that was, there was nothing else which, of course, later caused us a lot of trouble because we collected so many books that we could, well later we had to leave the camp and run away and everything we could not carry we had to leave them, sometimes we leave them on the roadside. Adolfas has a very funny story about the, about how he left on the roadsides because he could not carry any more, complete works of Goethe.

Nobody knew when the war will end and how long it will last. So, here we are, slaving and we had a friend who was a Lithuanian, but... and he was with us in Elmshorn, with us for some... for about two months, that he was a medical, advanced, like, medical student and Germans needed medical people. So he was taken out of the camp, and he was given a job in the hospital, but he also had quite... He had studied in Sweden and Denmark and he was very connected with people there so he knew, he told us that in Denmark, and he knew exactly where, the specific place, where we can contact some of his friends who had boats and we could escape to Sweden. So, I said, let's take... and this is also very naive, of course, we were naive, we took our chances. So I said, why don't we ask our, the factory to transfer, the fact... the... Germany was already beginning to run out of steel and materials and they were reducing hours in the factory, so I said, why don't you transport us to Kiel, which was another town closer to Denmark and where, you know, they had more materials and they knew that. So, they said, okay, if we want that we had to be there in the... they said, 'We will transport you to a prisoner camp or forced labour camp', they didn't call them forced labour camps, in Kiel. So I said, fine, so they gave us papers to go to Kiel and we crossed the canal there of Kiel and instead of reporting to where we had to, we continued to Denmark. We destroyed our papers and we were sort of caught before you enter Denmark; they stop you. So, we declared ourselves just as refugees from... there were already at that time, thousands and thousands of refugees coming from the eastern parts of Germany, that they... nobody could control. So, we mixed with the other refugees, genuine refugees  and if we could not... by mistake we took a wrong train, instead of going to Denmark and took us back to, towards Hamburg, but the next station we got out and we managed to find a place on a farm where they needed workers to work on a farm and that's where we, the end of the war found us, on a farm working as farmers for a German farmer. We did not, never managed to go to reach Denmark, but we escaped, you know, and the heavy bombardments of Hamburg and Elmshorn.

We have to go south and... so, we moved slowly and that's, you know, it's described in my book, I Had Nowhere to Go. Our journey from Flensburg, the border of Denmark down to the south to the Bavaria. It was a long and, I mean, trip to the post-war, immediate post-war Germany when Nazi was running. We only saw the ruins and disaster and that's when we settled in Wiesbaden. And that's where we stayed for some time and, and joined... already it was an American, what they call it, an American zone and then we signed up to study at the University of Mainz which was across the river Rhine, right next to Wiesbaden and that's where our university, that's where, like a break, complete different life begins. That's, I consider that my university was post-war Europe, was Germany and that when I came here it was already my... beginning to work. My childhood was in Lithuania, my university was Europe and because those four years in displaced person camps... four years... was my university where we could read. There was a lot of time, we read everything we, you can imagine that between the Soviet occupation, the German occupation, the whole war period, nothing was available from the west, from, nobody, we were so thirsty and like a dry sponge drinking everything that we could find after the war, you know, the whole American literature, the French, it was an incredible, incredible rich period for those who want, who were ready and wanted it. And of course still, when we came in the fall of '49 to New York, that was another, another treasury, another that you could not even find in post-war Europe which was, you know, still post-war Europe. And here, you know, there was no, no post-war, it was just America, just New York.

We signed up on a boat, cruising, with [USS] General [RL] Howze, France, and Sydney or Melbourne, somewhere there, and while we were waiting for to be called on the ship, somebody in Chicago, who knew us from Lithuania, and then, up there made papers, because you had to have, for anybody from displaced person camps to come to United States, somebody had to guarantee that they will give a job, that they will support you, etc. So, without us knowing even, they prepared papers for us and then we just received, you know, from the camp's office that we could go to United States. There are papers for you. So, okay, what, why not? I mean, makes no difference.
So, we came to New York, and it was sponsored actually by the United Nations Refugee Organisation. So, we were not, we were really actually correctly speaking, we're not immigrants, we are... we were brought in here and dumped by United Nations Refugee Organisation. And you know, knowing how... the way I see it, and I, you know, have said this many times in other, on other occasions, that if one is really very much rooted in one's place like I was in, I mean, in Nature, in the country, there, in that, in language, in the songs in Lithuania, then once you are uprooted then it makes no difference where you are, absolutely no difference. No my, usually, anecdote is that if you drop me in the desert and come back three days later, I will have my roots already in the desert, all over. Because it makes no difference because you're not home, because you're always there and it doesn't matter where you are. It's not the same with the, let's say, Italian immigrants. Italians, they were not uprooted, nobody deported them to America, they need to earn money for their families to send back to their families. So, they come on their own free, by their own choice and their countries are still there if they want, they can always go back, of course they miss it, and mothers cry, but they can always go. So it's, it's a completely different situation.

I was technical editor of the weekly newspaper of this town, of 5000-6000 people, and the editor was one of my friends of my own age. And he was one day arrested by Germans and taken into the army, and so I was there then to replace him and to run the newspaper which I did for like a year until I had to leave. But, not exactly actually, my writings, sort of were noticed in the other, in the higher places of Lithuanian literary community, already in Vilnius and...  you know, and they thought that I am too good to be with this little local newspaper, that I should go to some more important newspaper, so they drafted me to another city where there was a weekly literary newspaper with some other pages for news, but it was both very much literary weekly, where I again ended up by practically running it by myself because the chief editor was always somewhere else, and that is really, there, from there that I... and at the same time as I was working underground and I had to leave, you know, I decided to leave for Vienna because I was about to be arrested.
But already my, sort of literary reputation was growing and for one... very strange reason was that, I had read, I had just zoomed through all the libraries that I knew existed around my region and my town and the, this other town, and some of those libraries besides books contained also volumes of the back issues of some journals and magazines, and I had read them all, so whenever somebody was doing some article on something, on something and they did not know where to find it, they used to call me because I knew where to find it. I knew in what book, in what journal. So, that was the beginning of my sort of literary activities; I was writing also poetry. So my first poetry appeared in Lithuania and my first essays appeared already in Lithuania when I was 20.  My first poem was published when I was 14 in one of the publications.

We land on the pier at the end of 23rd Street somewhere, and there was some elevation that you could go a little bit up and have like a little view of the city. So we walked up there. I get our papers... a paper before going to the train. So let's go up and see it, and we looked at New York, and said, 'It's New York! that would be stupid not to, we are here in New York to go now to Chicago. You can't go there, we'd be really stupid'. So, we had a friend, one of our friends already was in New York in Brooklyn, Williamsburg, so we called him and said, please can we come and stay with you, we're staying in New York. So, of course, we stayed in New York. We did not go to Chicago and, of course, it was not easy. We had to, you know, find jobs and find apartments, but the second evening, already, we went to the New York Film Society run by Rudolf Arnheim...
[Q] Who was my teacher at Sarah Lawrence.
... and we saw Epstein's, The Fall of the House of Usher, and Dr Caligari. And that was New York. And from there on there was no evening that, sometimes we had no money, that when we had no money we went to opera. Opera House is on the Orchard Street and 7th Avenue. We always missed the First Act because after the First Act they opened the side door and everybody goes in to smoke, and when they go in we go in. And we always, we saw most of the opera, repertory... repertoire of the first two years by missing the First Acts, but it was for us, because you could always stand in the back, or some people left their seats, so you know there were tricks to get in which we had mastered, and we did not miss any film opening, any film screening any... any  ballet or music or theatre event... opening, we saw absolutely everything because we had... we were craving, we were so dry we needed it all, so for like  two or three years it was very very intense.

It happened so that the mayor of our town where I was studying in Lithuania ended up also in New York with his daughter, and his daughter liked... liked me very much. So she suggested to her father that she... he lends money to us. Instead of lending actually, he gave, to put a deposit on Bolex at Peerless store on 34th, 32nd Street, which we did. And so that we got, it wasn't yet, not a purchase, it was a deposit, but we had the Bolex like already two or three weeks later after we came to, and we started. The footage at the beginning, the very beginning of Lost, Lost, Lost, is our very first footage that we took in Brooklyn on Lorimer Street. And there were trees in front of it that, Cullers [sic], what's her name, the writer, A Tree Grows in Brooklyn.  She wrote... her trees are also on Lorimer Street and those trees are still there. Cullers. C-u-l-l-e-r-s, I think, A Tree Grows in Brooklyn.

After seeing really The Treasure of Sierra Madre, I know exactly the moment when we saw the film and went, 'Ha! Maybe there is something in cinema'. And after that we saw some of the new German films, you know, with the visual sort of, post-war neo-realistic scenery... backgrounds. And already we wrote our first never-produced scripts already in the displaced persons camp; I still have them, very ambitious very... The other reason, the other film that was the other cause and maybe really even more important was Fred Zimmerman's film, The Search. The Search was about a family, post-war family... it's about war and post-war, family looking, searching for their child, and we thought everything, it was so naive we thought it was... so, the presentation all the research the... that we have to make a film and show how it really is. It made us so mad seeing that film, and that anger, that madness really, that's when we began to make notes for our own film, Lost Lost, not Lost Lost Lost, but Lost, Lost it was only two... or maybe it was four, Lost, Lost Lost, Lost.

The first job actually, for several months, was in a Castro bed factory, they made beds, special bed called Castro beds, you know, beds, steel beds in Long Island City, Bebrian Bedding where I was, myself and my brother, there were like, the had like 300 workers, it was a big, big factory. Then I was fired, they just had to reduce, they had to expand to, expanded. Then I applied some of my machinery knowledge that I learned in the forced labour camp to work with drills and things. I worked in some other little factory. Then I worked in a laundry, ironing, that was horrible. I used to come home and from the steam I used to be like puffed up and you cannot imagine. I used to look in the mirror – all so white, puffed up because the steam, like ironing with steam, like puffs you up and washes you out. It's like you've been soaking for 12 hours, for eight hours and it was horrible. So, there I stayed two weeks and I left. I moved around until I decided that maybe I should look something that is more to what I'm interested in and I was very lucky. I found a job in Manhattan on 22nd Street and 6th Avenue. The Graphic Studios; they needed a delivery boy and their photography. So I started just taking packages around and it was a photography place run by a very prominent, really, photographer taking colour photography technician, Perskie. But I met there all kinds of people. They did work for Life Magazine, for international editions of Life Magazine, so very, like in three, four, five months I was promoted already to the cameras and I ended up by being one of their sort of chief, you know, camera people doing, making reproductions and copies, etc. But then all kinds of people used to come to do like, that's where I met people like Archie Pencote and some photographer that are quite well-known now, used to come there and hang around.

In April of '53, I moved to Orchard Street... I escaped Williamsburg. And that is where another stage of my life, immediately begins because then it already began... already the first... the first time that I organised avant-garde film screening, myself and it was...  there was a bunch of friends that I met already in Manhattan that opened a gallery on Avenue A and 1st Street, Gallery East, it was called. So they said, why don't you show some movies besides, you know, art, so I said, okay. So, on October 29th in '53, I remember very well because it's coming up for  50 years, exactly  50 years ago, I presented my... I curated my first avant-garde film.
[Q] And what was it? 
It was Francis Lee Davis, Kenneth Anger, I have to look up, but it's... now they're all classics, but in those days they were the contemporary avant-garde film that I had seen at Cinema 16. So, that was a completely new, really, chapter begins, but I worked already, and a year, I lived in for 95 Orchard Street and paid $14.95 per month. $14.95 a month. When in... I lived for three years on Orchard Street, and in December '54, a year later, we issue... Adolfas by the way, between... was in the, drafted into the army, during the Korean War. So, he came back from the army in the spring of... when I moved to actual like, second week when I actually moved to Orchard, he comes back. So, then we begin to plan to start a film institute in New York, similar to the British Film Institute. We had plans immediately, we have, and actually, it's a long story but from these plans, later the American Film Institute developed because, based on our plan, this nobody knows that, but Colin Young, because we had a first meeting, and Robert Hughes and we presented our plan to them and that's a long story. Then, as we were working on that, also we were already planning Film Culture magazine in December of '54, we issued the first issue of Film Culture magazine. So, it becomes from there very intense, very, very, very busy and very intense. So intense that there are gaps sometimes for months that I don't know where I was, what I did, because it was so... I was so busy.
[Q] Let's go back a second...
But I was still working at the Graphic Studios because that's where all the money is, you know, came for, my, for my salary to publish Film Culture and so everybody was... Anias Nin told Parker Tyler that I... we must be Soviet spies because how else could they publish Film Culture with, how could these kids, those shabby kids, you know, from post-war Europe, who are they that they can publish this magazine and they must be paid by Mosco!. I have, I have some correspondence actually to that effect, it was later I met Anais Nin, I met her... that's a joke for my joke book. And only in 40, it was in '58, early '58 that I decided to quit; I could not cope any more with, you know, Film Culture, I had to quit Graphic Studios and I said, now I will become real independent, I don't want to work for anybody else any more. It was hard, hard five or so years to come, but I never worked for anybody else.

In the displaced person camps I'm... I took some... there were some courses of English and I took some. Already I remember on the ship, the army ship, that brought me to the States, I read and quite freely read Hemmingway's, Farewell to Arms. Now, Hemmingway, I guess, for those who speak English, they don't realise that he used... if Shakespeare used 40,000 words then maybe Hemmingway used 2,000 words. His prose has very limited vocabulary, at least that book, in others it may be more complicated, but he's very good when you're just beginning to read English. But, of course, as soon as we landed we zoomed through all of American literature, which then, later, we realised that only we did and the others finished schools, universities without reading and knowing - you know we read all of Faulkner, we read all of dos Passos, all of Farrow... and our friends had read only one or even then, the Kerouac... works of Jack Kerouac, nobody that I had met has read the first, his first novel that he wrote in Canada I think, The City and, In the Town and The City were something like that, a very big one of 600 pages. So, of course, we wanted to be writing.
[Q] And were you writing? 
We did not at all consider ourselves filmmakers, and that's what we're going to do. We thought we would be writers.
[Q] And when you thought you'd be writers did you think you'd be writing in Lithuanian or English?  Did you have an idea?
No. Actually, my brother picked up easier and faster by being in the army, the English, and he wrote several novels in English which none of them were published, and later all of them were, I think, burned when his house burned. He wanted to write in English and so he wrote in English and he published some short stories and some, you know, film periodicals, magazines, literary magazines here. But I never, it was, I guess, me who did not consider, I did not consider really writing in English; I continued all my poetry, you know, in Lithuanian, and maybe it's me who gravitated more sort of to cinema because of that. I did not... I did not know really, and it's not clear how, you know, I went in towards poetry and suddenly just realised that I'm all in the middle of it, but how I didn't realise, I don't know. In all the aspects, of course, I joined Voice in '58, in 1958. So first, you know, as editor of Film Culture, but not so much, so I guess I began more like, I did not intend or want or was ready or was capable or was, to write a prose or anything near to poetry, you cannot write poetry in any language, but your own because poetry is too subtle an, you know, instrument of language. So, yes, more or less like that, but I always kept scribble, writing my notes, diaristic notes, diaries of which, again, I now almost regret that I wrote so much because I'm editing now them for publication and just a year I'm now on the year 1960; it's a big one, and it takes me two, three, four months almost for every year, so I don't know when I'm going to be finished. But on the other hand, most, the years '60,'61 between '60 and '70, every year, you know, there are big stacks, I later sort of thin out. So, actually my biggest challenge is to prepare for publication, the diaries of between '60 and' 70 and the rest will be easier.
[Q] And so, the diaries you always kept in English? 
In English, all those diaries. And how, why it began that way, I started that one way to learn English is to begin to write in English. So, I started as practicing, I forced myself not to write, the first years I wrote in Lithuanian a lot, but then I said this is fool... because I have to learn English, so I started... forced myself not to write in Lithuanian, my diaries, and write only in English just to help myself to master the language, which I have never even mastered. That's something else. Nam June Paik says English is as bad as his.
[Q] No. No way.

My European life is completely different from my American life. I'm leading several lives simultaneously. Sometimes it, you know, it causes some problems that... The same in New York, you see, I have my American friends and I have my Lithuanian friends and my international friends and very often none of, like, they're separate, they don't, like tonight this is Japanese friends and Chinese friends, we may go to eat and they don't know and they don't care about the others and... and probably tomorrow evening I will be with my Lithuanian friends. My American friends are mostly dead.
[Q] Dead?
Filmmakers and poets. I mean, so many, I mean, my closest friends of the '60s, '70s are dead and those that remain, they're not even in New York like Ed Sanders is somewhere out of, you know, Bart, and er...

Somebody figured out at Anthology the other day, the average age of the people of my co-workers and friends at Anthology is, compared with, let's  say Cinémathèque Française or Cinémathèque Royal de Belgique where the average age is 50 or 55, at Anthology it is 30, 27, 25 or lower. So, they're all very young. Gregory, how old are you?
[Q] Nineteen. 
You see, you see, that's my, no, no, I really, I... now we are talking my, about my American friends which has nothing to do what this thing is, so, I cannot stand, I'm bored with talk, okay. I am worried. I never go to the galley openings, to the museum openings. I get invitations and calls, you know, and don't go. When I make exceptions and break the rule like last weekend, I went to the opening, or the day before that, I went to, the last two months I went to about three or four openings and - Richard Serra - then I sit and then you go to eat; there is a dinner, you know, paid by the gallery. You're surrounded by these very art collectors and artists and art historians and specialists and they're 50, 60, 65, 70 years old or even when they are 40 or 35, they're already, they're very old and they're very heavy and I feel like, what, what am I doing here?
I mean, there is no energy, there is no life; it's only, I don't know what there is. So, I escape, the last, Richard Serra, I did not, I'll come to see the opening, but I'm not staying for the dinner, and I didn't stay. I cannot, it's... but at Anthology, I feel great! When 19 years old and 20, 25 people because there is energy, there is something, it's interesting, something, something is happening, something is in progress, something is moving ahead, and here's static, it's looking back, you know, here or there, it just costs a lot of money, we can sell, it's... it's... I cannot, that is not my life. Never was and never will be.

Every book I ever read, every piece of music I have listened to have made influences and changes you, and I have big problems of when they ask, okay, give me, who is... whom... give me two or most of the time they say, what was your preferable composer. I cannot do that.  I can name ten or... I mean, Sight and Sound or just last, a few months ago, last year, asked me about my ten, a list of ten most important films ever made. I could not do that. I could not do that. First I had to break down to the narrative sort of public cinema, narrative cinema, novelistic cinema, then the documentary cinema, then the poetic avant-garde, see, it's already three groups and it's already 30. I could not reduce, so I did not send them anything because they, I'm interested in so, my tree of cinema is not just one branch; it's many different branches I'm interested in and I'm following, all of them inspire me, not just one.

My contacts from the very beginning of arriving to New York has been covering all of those different aspects, not only the avant-garde, which you could see at, what's known as experimental at Cinema 16, but I went to the, at the same time, to Club Cinema, on 6th Avenue and 10th Street, which was run a by sort of left-wing people and showing and even published a little, well, irregular publication called Film Sense, by Howard Lawson and, you could call them communist, but they were a sort of left, extreme left people, running extreme, film... for every Saturday night, for people, films of social sort of significance, if they were narrative films then it would be like Kameradschaft or something like that; I went there. And the different group, William Everson who came out from London to New York and very early started running what he called Theodore Huff Society, old films, very old that you could not see anywhere else, silent of various formats, formats that made 16-35 that did not exist any more, like 19 and-a-half, 16, but it was also 19 and-a-half or, I think, 19 and-a-half, and he had projectors dug out somewhere and he was running those films and they were some 20 people, very strange people very often, watching those films because you could not see them anywhere else but I was there. So, I was, you know, it was the same when – this is the daughter of Rumpole, Shiva, is her name – so I was interested in all of the different branches of that tree that is called cinema.

And when we began publishing, and when I say 'we' I should say my brother, at Film Culture, we covered, be tried to cover and we covered all the aspects until, until like 1960 maybe 1963, and the same I did, at the same time during the same period, writing for The Village Voice, covering all of the aspects that was, that I was interested until it became clear by '63 that there was already so much coverage of commercial or the narrative cinema that were already other publications like, okay, Film Quarterly or that I did not have to give much, any more space that I could devote more space to the avant-garde, I took writing, to the writing to the avant-garde film, non-commercial film because nobody, no other publication was giving space to that cinema. So we began Film Culture, gravitated slowly and quite really fast into sort of giving less and less space to the commercial cinema. And in The Village Voice, I decided that I should bring in somebody else and that was my friend Andrew Sarris that I could, because the independent avant-garde or underground scene became so active so that I had to give more space to it so I said, I will get, devote myself for that independent film area and I will bring Andrew Sarris to cover the commercial of cinema. And that's what I did.

A year and a half ago, Columbia University organised a sort of conference on Film Culture magazine, Andrew Sarris was there, P Adams Sitney, Peter Bogdanovich. And it was very strange because I'm somewhere else, I'm now at Anthology and actually even already after Anthology Filmmakers, and so Film Culture had began, sort of, you know, I realised that I have all those different lives that they're like peeling off like there was, you know, a life of Filmmakers Cinématique, very active through all that Warhol period, but that's peeled off, and then Anthology Film Archives that I mentioned, but then there was The Village Voice period, The Village Voice, The Movie Journal period and then Film Culture magazine. It was different lives, different, then, then came in at some point in '62 January, Filmmakers' Co-op... the New American Cinema Group and Filmmakers' Co-operative, so that strand goes there. But they're all around because they did what they had to do, all those activities and movements and procedures and processes and somebody else, I pulled out because I'm not, you know, I'm going somewhere else. And I feel that I'm very close now so leaving Anthology by itself, it's going, I don't have to be there, I can do my other work. So, I'm at the end of that also, I just have to do one more thing – to build the library, which I'm going to build, for the paper, etc, materials because that's the original plan and it has to be completed. And that's what I have done in every case when the Filmmakers' Co-operative was ready to go by itself, there were enough people that knew, the procedures were established, I pulled myself out. The same at the Newsreel Group. You know I was there for the first four, five meetings and when it was going by itself, okay, goodbye. So, what I'm really trying, or maybe as I'm looking back, to say, is that I'm not interested to do or get involved or spend my time on anything that somebody else can do. So I start, okay, because nobody else, there was no other film magazine, so I started it, so okay. There was no film distribution for the independents so I started that, there was no exhibition from Filmmakers' Cinématique, I started that. And in every case, I started it because nobody else is doing it and it has to be done, or film preservation, film preservation, avant-garde independent film preservation in which I'm still involved, that I'm still very much involved because nobody else is doing it – it has to be done. Once it is set up, somebody else gets excited and picks up and is doing, I don't have to be there and I go somewhere else. That's in my nature, that's more or less, so I have no idea where I will be next.

The period of the 414 Park Avenue south, Filmmakers' Co-operative, that was a period of like four, okay between '62, four years or so, I don't know how I slept because it was always busy that place and I slept most of the time under my Moviola, Steenbeck. There was no other place in the corner. Yeah, my, I need my six, seven hours of sleep, but if I get five I survive and try to catch up some other time.

My first meeting with Maya Deren was like in '53 when I was looking for her book anagram on, an anagram, I know the exact title, an anagram,  It's got cinema  in it, right.  It has got cinema, it has got cinema, and I could not find it anywhere, so I called collected you know, my strength, and I called her and she said, 'I will lend you one, I have one, if you want to read'. So, there I come, I'm walking on Morton Street, walking up and there up, there on the 4th floor somewhere stands Maya Deren. And I walk up and look and look and she's looking at me in a very, very strange way. So, I look at her because it was strange. Then she said,'Forgive me, it's very strange, I'm almost shocked because I thought it was not you, it was Sasha'. And Sasha, she meant Sasha – Alexander... Hammond, her husband that, they were not living, they were already divorced. And because, then she said, 'You are exactly where I met Sasha for the first time, you looked the exact same way', that, so, in the end, that's how I met Maya.

After '55, when after seeing at the Living Theatre, the first New York show of Stan Brakhage, his first six films, I... seeing that programme was another point where my life practically changed about cinema, my thinking. So that is cinema that Desistfilm, that's cinema, that's what where cinema is today, and Maya Deren, of course, the mother etc, Maya Deren is past, Maya Deren is the past and this is, this is now. Maya Deren is where cinema, when the American avant-garde, sort of the end of the first stage, and here is where it really begins with, here is where the energy is. So to me, Maya was always the past, not the present, when to many she was the present and, you know, we were friends and she was helpful to me, I was helpful to her and, but she was like a classic, like the past to me, she was never present, after seeing this first programme of Brakhage films. So my friends were already from the past... post- Maya Deren, not there were, you know, still friends of the Maya Deren circle. I never really had real contact. I respected, albeit, Parker Tyler or them for their mind, intelligence and, but they were not my... I was in the new generation and so that's where, you know, my friends became, you know, Ron Rice and Jack Smith and Barbara Rubin and completely different, of course, Robert Frank post-Maya Deren cinema. So, was Maya Deren our mother or was our grandmother, but not mother. Mother is one that begins. She ended a period, a period in which I found myself and felt at home. It was a new period that was began with, I really would say, with Stan Brakhage.

Marie Menken, they were sort of a bit invisible, though they were very visible during any event, any screening, until '60. I knew them already in, you know, '54, '55, but the first show, one-woman show, Marie Menken, I gave her at the Charles Theatre in '61 or early '62 and that was quite, to me personally, again very revolutionary. I had not yet known that she had been working in single, you know, in the single frame activity. I was already sort of interested and working, but, and that is where this thing called influence comes in. You see influences is not that somebody influences you and you begin to imitate, but you are doing something and then you see that somebody else is doing something very similar and there is this community of friendship, this understanding, ah, you see so I'm not so crazy. This is all right, somebody else is trying the same so there is this sort of friendship, this, but it's not an influence, it sort of strengthens you in your own, what you're doing, knowing that somebody else is doing it and it's working. And that is what I got from Marie Menken. This like confirmation that ah, it really works. She is the proof that it really works.

I... was so excited, I don't know what I did after it, but there was energy, there was, I thought this is, this is amazing, this is huge, this is it, this is, there is cinema, there is new cinema, there it is – that's it.
[Q] And do you remember? 
The first five films or six films, you can look up, that's all that he had. The one with the scratch, that's, I think, it's with the man walking down with the eyes scratched, that's one of the earliest scratchings on film, eyes scratched the blind walking down and...
[Q] 'Desistfilm' and 'Anticipation of the Night'?
Oh no, that's later.
[Q] That's later?
That's later. One can sort of look up in this filmography. In any case, it was... it was one of the important film screenings in my life, and the other was Marie Menken, when I saw Notebook, her film Notebook at the Charles Theatre.

Brakhage early period, let us face it, was psychodrama, it is psychodrama, though Marie Menken is something else. Then, of course, Brakhage is a poet of cinema, you know. By the way, he wrote poetry, heroic poetry and very sort of bad, maybe, poetry. I have already said that Hans Richter once, that was around '57 and said, do you know this guy, he sent me this bunch of poems, and he pulls like 20 pages, he had long poems so, short lines, but long poems. He says, 'I cannot read them'. I remember reading, he said, 'Read them, what do you think?' I said, 'No, what can I say in two minutes?' but he wrote. He wanted to be a poet at the very beginning.

Marie Menken comes, her, from Lithuania, her background. She was born here though, and there is a woman, Martina Kudlacek who is working, now digging out all the... she is making a film about Marie Menken and she'll do a book about her and digging out all her background, and the other, a week ago, two weeks ago, she gave me a short story that Marie Menken wrote, like long, 20 pages, about the, her local Philadelphia church and a priest and all those Lithuanians who come there and, very, very down-to-earth, very realistic. But she's also digging out the correspondence and, between her relatives in Lithuania and... but her Lithuanian is... was very limited, but she remembered some songs and because that sort of remains longest, children's songs. And we used to sing Lithuanian children's songs together... and then...
So, Lithuania. Lithuania is next to Russia, and then there's Poland. Russia is this side of Ural Mountains is very wide and plain and you can look for hundreds of miles there and their songs, their folk songs and also some of their more modern, already communist period songs are very wide, like if you sing like: 'Volga, Volga mat' rodnaya, Volga, russkają rěka...' They go wide and big and loud because there are spaces there. Lithuania is small, there are little hills, there are little, there is a hill, say, like 100 metres high and they call it a mountain, and their songs are very little and brittle and fragile, Lithuanian folk songs. In a very sort of lyrical kind of quality as against the wide, big armies, big space, big lands, big wars, big country, and here's everything is small, everything's small. So there is this lyrical quality that I'm talking now about my, the work of Marie Menken, the lyricism in her work and in her temperament and everything and that is territory... I think we have both of us together some of that, and that comes from this background of, ok, the local, where we come from. It determines a lot of what we are, what we do, you know, how we structure what we do, the content of these geographic, tactically... area, the landscape, the climate, the wind, what grows, the trees, the little forests, there are no big hard trees like in California, they are little. Everything is different. So, I myself have not escaped it because it formed me, it's very deep in me and, I think, it will always be at the very bottom of whatever I do. Same as it was for Marie Menken.

We began, myself and my brother, writing scripts already, you know, in the displaced person camps in '58, in '48,'49 before we came to New York.
Then when we came to New York, I, we finished together one script and then I finished another one by myself and we thought, we had this illusion that, you know, there are people in Hollywood that will produce, you know, will buy and produce our scripts, so well, there was money, actually we asked for money, we did not try to sell. We sent Stanley... To Zimmermann to Stanley Kramer to Flaherty, to Kazan. We sent, and of course we, some of them never answered, some of them wrote back; I have the letters. Like Flaherty telling us, 'How can I help you if I cannot find money myself for my own films? Well, I like your script, you know, and I would like to help, but I cannot'. The same came, I think, from Jerry Walderson. And so we, at some point, we gave up on it, we said this is not, it won't work. And then, it came already around '54 when we were already practically 100% in our interest in the independent and avant-garde. We said, that's, we like, you know, we spent our nights, many nights on 42nd Street, watching all the Hollywood movies, but that was not what we want to do. And that's where we start to begin to split from, as far as the preferences go, what we are really interested in.

In '52, '53, and to '53, I was running Filmmakers' Showcase which was a showcase of Filmmakers' Cooperative, where, I think, I met you and Richard for the first time.
[Q] That was in '62.  Yeah. 
Yeah.  And I wanted to have a... I had heard about Cornell films, to have to see them all, to have a full program of his films so to have some idea what he's all about. So, I called him and he said, with some hesitation, he said, yes. So, it was arranged and I, the screening was supposed to be like tomorrow and today is today, and I decided, for the first time in my life to buy a portable radio. So, I buy a portable, go and buy a portable radio, and come back to the cooperative and turn on, and this is going back to my extra-sensory activities, I turned on - the first thing I hear that JFK was shot! It comes. So that's what I bought for the first time in my life, I wish... I had decided to buy a radio and turn it on and there, the announcement comes that President Kennedy was shot. So, and the screening of Cornell is the next day. So, I knew immediately that there will be a call from Cornell. So I sit down, I practically, I wait for that call. And a call comes in, and the call... Cornell said, 'So, should we still have this screening? What do you think?' So, there was a long pause and I had to think fast, but I cannot think fast because I had already a feeling that he thinks now it shouldn't take place, this is now not proper. So I said, 'Yes, Joseph, you know, when the world is so bad, things like this are done... happen, I think we should take a stand, we should show, we should show and look at something beautiful like certain movies'. And so, again, a long silence, long silence. 'Maybe you are right'. So... and that's how the first show of Cornell took place.

When I lived in Williamsburg, Ken Jacobs lived in Williamsburg also. And we lived right there and maybe even met and passed, you know, each other many times, we don't know. But the first time I met him was around '52 or '53, maybe '52. At the same time as I was connecting with the film community I was connecting with the literary community. And that was a part of, and there was a little literary sort of private home club run by a certain, by a poet, Robert Stock was his name, somewhere around 45th Street and like 10th Avenue, every weekend. So, I went there to listen, you know, Jackson McLow used to hang around there, Frank Kuenstler, a lot of other poets that became very well-known later.
And one day this guy comes and says, 'I will show you, I will show a movie'. And of course, that was Ken Jacobs. And he shows some documentary, some footage unedited but, you know, that's on Orchard Street, Orchard Street, footage that he shot on Orchard Street. And I was there, okay, my brother, no Adolfas was in the army, but I came with this French, Polish guy, Edouard de Laurot, who then jumped on him, he attacked, you know. 'What is some theory, this has no political significance in these footage!' Boy, poor Ken! He was, I don't remember how he defended it, you know, Edouard was very usual, very politically violent and... So, that was our first meeting with Ken Jacobs.

De Laurot is still, even today, he's a very mysterious person with mysterious achievements and credits and past. His name really was, later we discovered, Lodanski, he's a Polish and he kept brag... telling all kinds of fantastic stories like, like taking a mess... when Warsaw was surrounded by Germans, the Warsaw ghetto, and somebody had to take a message across the river Wisla to the Soviets. He was the one who, he said, he took it. He swam, he was an incredible swimmer. He could go under the water for like three minutes, practically. And we thought, you know, come on, come on, and then in like '61, a lawyer by the name Karpatkin, whose wife is very high in Washington, Aurora Karpatkin, went to Warsaw as a tourist and they were talking, they related this, they also had heard from me about this story and it was confirmed. They said, yes, that's the guy, he did it. So, what I'm trying to say, we never knew he was telling so many different things that you never knew what was true, what was not and there were some incredible things were true.
Now, later he married Zoe Lund, who did a script for Ferrara movies, and there's a whole period there and, but it is coming out that it most of those scripts are really Edouard de Laurot scripts in spirit and fact. I, you know, I have scribbled some notes to prove it. He also left one huge novel which I still have not read that Zoe, before she died, gave to me, which looks pretty good also. He had a very big ego and some kind of thing that he always wanted to dominate and you have to do it only his way, the way, the right way is my way! Why do you do that, and when that, when I was making my first film, Guns of the Trees, and when he was around and kept, you know, saying things like that at some, that's the point where we split. I could not take him any more because, you know, do your thing or you become like you don't know where you are. And I blame him really, for some of the failures of the film when he had some input, it didn't come out the way I wanted. So, we remained friends and even much later he used to visit me at Anthology and he was very heavily on drugs, always, all the time. He was banned from many countries for many reasons I don't even know. A very, very bright, he translated some of Sartre's The God, the Devil and the God Almighty [sic] or whatever, that huge, huge play and that, we visited once Henry Miller, and he was very really grateful that it was done, that it was translated. So, he was, he spoke many languages, I don't even know how many. Very talented but very, so destructive, self-destructive and a destructive person.

The first people that were helpful to make contacts were Hans Richter and Herman Weinberg. Herman Weinberg had very close to all the Hollywood people, and he called Orson Wells, to get people like Orson Wells. Others, you know, I called or wrote directly and expanded very... because everybody was very excited that there is a new publication because there was nothing. In '54, December '54, when the first issue came out, there was only Films in Review or Review of Films, that's Henry... 
[Q] 'Films in Review', yeah...
... which is a miserable little nit-witty nothing, and in the University of California, there was the Hollywood Quarterly. I think it was called, Film Quarterly, which was very serious and very good. It used to just come out once a year, never maybe four or five issues that came out, and there was the extreme left publication Film Sense. It was nothing, nothing else. Everything else came Sight and Sound, Sequence from England and Cahiers du Cinéma and  Cinéma from France, and nothing else here. So, when this came out, I mean it was very bleak and to them, enthusiasm and support and was very easy to test, sort of, you know, of course needed some persuasion, and especially and one of my co-editors that I had befriended some time before, to talk, we need somebody from Europe was George Fennin. George Fennin came from Italy and grew up there and knew everybody in France and from Bazin to Aristarto in Italy and traveled, went to all, because he was writing for Italian publications. So, I thought he will be and... we were friends and- drinking friends so, you know, come here on the Editorial Board. So, when they first see who came up, and he was also president of the Foreign Correspondents Association in New York. He said, 'Ah, we have a room at Waldorf Astoria, which is our room when we have meetings, and this next week, so, we have no meetings but we have that space. Why don't we present Film Culture magazine, the first issue, at Waldorf Astoria, in this room?'. This, of course, it's very nice. So, we are there at Waldorf Astoria and this huge space, you know, where all the presidents are staying, so the... told the local filmmaking community, and I remember Willem Mast come in with, 'How do you, where do you get this money to get?' In any case, after the opening, and plus, you see, they were provided... we were provided with drinks and everything else on the account of the Foreign Journalists Association, okay. So, later, the people did not know what to think about, you know, are we, first they got the idea that this is serious, if they can have an opening presentation of the first issue at Waldorf Astoria, we have to take them seriously. So, that helped, of course. On the other hand, when we were asking for money, it's, 'Why, you need money?  I mean, you don't have money? You had this opening at Waldorf Astoria'. I said, no I'm slaving at Graphic Studios.

When we presented the first issue, the printing bill was not even paid, so we go, for the next issue and then we see where... where can we get breaks like that that you can publish and not pay. It was a very nice scheme. I knew somebody in the Franciscan Monastery in Brooklyn and I knew they had a printing shop so they printed it, they printed it. And then they said, 'Where is the money?' so we received you know, Franciscan monks... the monastery sued us, you're mugs, you shouldn't, you're holy people, how can you sue us? You shouldn't sue us. So, of course, we had to pay, we found the money. But my... some of my Editorial Board, members of my Editorial Board with the third issue had a meeting and said, 'You really have no money? We thought you had money. How can you publish?' That was Hendriks, a bright person, he did a great book on Hepperstein[?], the painter, he's a historian, art and film historian and music which is, 'How... you invited me to be on the Board and you have no money to publish at least four or five issues?' I said, if I would have told that to my, you know, colleagues here, none of them would have been on the Board and we wouldn't have the magazine. He resigned, he resigned that day at that meeting because we had no money. If I would have waited that we have money we wouldn't, there would be no Film Culture.

I started sort of writing plays. They were never performed and the only time that my play was performed was last season in Lithuania in Vilnius, in the National Theatre. It opened the theatrical season and it was a smash success there were, they said they'd never had such actually at a... attendance, but hundreds turned away, mostly young people were turned away mostly young people and they were, they were my audience, and they said that now maybe the leader consider that these plays are rejuvenated and it turning, Lithuanian theatre into more contemporary sort of direction because it was very... always Chekhov, always Chekhov, Chekhov, Chekhov, or Shakespeare.
[Q] Can you describe what kind of, just the genre of the play? 
It's a, very, very like a col...  consists of like 100 little segments, like a collage, and it gave the actors and the director liked and that's what all the reviews stressed and the letter that I got, it was very open towards actors play. They could do and improvise whatever of, lack, they became very free, permitted themselves to open themselves completely. It's a collage, but it's turning around and we sort of, placed in time, now with memories of the past, but the main thing that the title was The Very Beginning of the Beginning. The Very Beginning of the Beginning. And it's... very that's the main theme is very simple almost like in Guns of the Trees. They're young man, and woman takes back their, yes, it's interesting, like Guns of the Trees, my first film. They expect their first child and they begin to look more critically around themselves, but you know, towards real influencing and what, in what context and what surrounding the child will begin to, you know, walk the first steps etc. So, many questions suddenly come in and that's, that's, so those pieces of collage at work. Guns of the Trees also consisted of like maybe not 100 maybe 30 or so little pieces, more or less I, I see that in that play if only that placed in, and now 50, 40 years later, 40 years later and already what, I was in Guns of the Trees in 1961 on the, like we were all fearing and afraid it actually took place many of those things, so, and yet also, his plays situated in Lithuania, so there is a Soviet Union behind also, the memories of history, but also there is Cuba and its very, very... and also New York, it's a collage of, in... in time and geography and...
[Q] When did you write it? 
I wrote it about 20 years ago and I, and I wrote it in, sort of, half Lithuanian and half English.  It, it was staged in Lithuanian and I had English version which I was perfecting and I left it on the plane.  I have to recreate it, I mean, it does to, I have to rewrite... re-translate.

I have never abandoned, for instance, or managed to escape like some of my other Lithuanian friends managed, their Lithuanian contact, context. Only because poetry is still considered, no matter what I'm doing, what I have done, the most important thing for me was and still is poetry. See. No even cinema, poetry. Which I continue even today in Lithuanian. And, so that kept me, close to Lithuania and... and they always considered me part of the literary world of Lithuania. Some are envious you know that I'm here, that they are considering me part of, since 19... I mean, I could not be published; they could not publish me until '71; it's in '71 that is, you know, 25 years later after I left Lithuania. And they could already publish so they issued the first sort of collective book of my poetry in '71, I think, in Lithuania. And then again there was nothing and since Lithuania became independent again in 1991, they had reissued I think six or seven of my books of collective poems and diaries and short stories, etc. And for one year I wrote a column for the local farmers newspaper, Wheat. A book that came out in, a book now which is coming out in French and English in, it will be published in Paris. So, I'm very still part and out players, as I said, the theatre.  Actually at 16:00 I'm meeting the Minister of Culture of Lithuania at Anthology. And so they gave me a national... their highest national medal or something.

My Lithuanian activities, my poetry take no time. That is done, you know poetry does not take time, it takes completely something else. So, all my physical time is... cinema is avant-garde and that's very, very big chunk.
Now I'm, again I have a different life that is invisible and not known in America, but it's very visible in Europe, in France especially, but in some other countries also, or in Japan. You see, it, it's very sort of, sometimes I say that in Lithuania, I am only a literary person, I am a poet. They don't take seriously my cinema and they don't know my cinema. They are beginning now, they knew, the younger generation they... actually right now, last week, they organised a screening of my Dedication to Fernand Lege the 24-hour long video on 12 monitors. In here, in the United States, my filmmaking is sort of known, but only in certain circles. I'm mostly known, I think, I'm not exaggerating as the, they call me a maverick and, or maybe some remember from The Village Voice, promoter and maverick, independent cinema now in Brooklyn they call me 'godfather', whatever that, but not, not a filmmaker.  In Europe I am a filmmaker. And now also in Europe I'm also doing a lot of installations and the exhibitions in museums, something that I started really already 15 years ago in Japan, making prints of certain images from my film. I call them frozen film frames when, which is possible only to do with my kind of footage where there is a lot of single frame activity. Where there, if you take a regular Hollywood kind of, you know, movie or TV documentary, and take two frames there is no different than the other. In my film with, within those two frames could be, could be already three clashes or two clashes so I'm very much interested in that. It's something between photography and cinema but it's neither photography nor cinema. So it's sort of, it's challenging, kind of obsession. I have discussed this with Robert Frank and he's also, you know he's interested in those possibilities. I'm, I'm not taking any just three frames; I really chose what there is some dynamic. It could be portraits, it could be anything. So, by having exhibitions and I'm sort of, of those frames and, in galleries and museums like Metropolitan Museum in Tokyo or Jeu De Paume in... Galerie de Jour in Paris.

I had a sound piece, 75-minute long sound piece, you know, sound with 55 pieces or so from like 50 years of my tapes, audio tapes. I have thousands of them, I have been always collecting audio same way as I collect footage and I selected like from 15 seconds to two minutes long segments and its like as in my diary symphony of sounds which again was very well received. It was also on radio, they played it. Then the second piece is... in 1979 and 1980 for 10 months I kept a record of my dreams, which is not very easy, but one can get into that habit and begin to remember as you begin to work with it every day. You begin to remem... work out a method of remembering dreams. So I was planning, I wrote them down and I was planning to publish the book, but that never happened, so I gave it to one of my artists friends August Varagikalis, who happens to be Lithuanian, but he's, I think he's very, very good. He made parallel drawings to go... not illustrations, but set of drawings that go parallel and go together. It's like two notes, you know, get all very separate, but when you play them together, you know, then something else happens.  So this and that to, so... when they offered me a show, at Museum of Modern Art in the city of Paris, I thought, ah - I will exhibit my dreams. And they will be also for sale! So August prepared them on panels, when I typed with a typewriter and he may have put the combination of his drawings and I... that is was my, exhibition of my dreams. The audience were so, the viewer passes by was also... they were also invited to write down their latest dream, and there was a box, which I think I will publish later of those dreams that people left. It's closing this weekend as we are talking here, and its last weekend of September – it went for the whole summer. So, those are two elements, and then  they published an artist's book which contains a collection, again... usually when we say artist's book what is when, means is that the artists are invited to do something and then the book is published of drawings or whatever, photos memories usually you know their childhood photographs etc, so since I don't consider myself an artist, I took the apostrophe out and I just made it into plural artists and I collected some maybe 70 or so postcards and memorabilia from last 30, 40 years and, mostly by my friends artists... artists, filmmakers, and that is the, the third element.

The fourth element was a video piece dedicated to Fernand Leger called, Dedication to Fernand Leger. In 1933 Fernand Leger wrote that he was dreaming about a film 24 hours long in which you could see the life of a family, any family. I think what he meant though it would be filmed non-stop maybe from, you know, midnight to midnight. I was considering that but I thought that there must be more interesting family situation which I have done and did not have anymore because Oona is in one place, Sebastian in another place, that's, its boring. I would just let camera run on my books what, so I decided to pull out, make from my past. When I just got my video camera first, that was in the fall of '87, and I began pulling out material that family, only family, material that had to do with my family life. And I dealt... pulled more or less used material from six or seven years. So that, ideally it, in Paris it was shown on one monitor so every week they kept, went to the next two hours, but that is not my... I thought that they would be able to do it on 12 monitors such that there would be two hours, two hours, two hours, so then you can take for a five minutes watch, the year 1987, then you can jump to year 1994 and see how that's changed, its become much more interesting to follow and you are free to go on or just sit and go through them all. That is how it's playing now in Vilnius, on 12 monitors in Lithuania and that will be also recreated that way in Caen, France in Normandy, in end of November. That's the fourth element.
The fifth element was my videos, they showed on DVD of my new film, work which is now I think practically the same...in  the same order, but will be showing at the New York film festival this fall. My travels and, material, which I feel already in, between '66 and '80, but I never touched it. It could not fit in any other film without just stood out like a lump that did not belong when it came in with the rest of the material. I have a lot more material of that kind, that will keep me busy for some time. So those were at my Paris show.

I've also had, you know, a show in Venice Biennale, I participate... and that's again, you see, Venice Biennale, the part in which I participated was the Utopia Station, and which there was some 20 other artists curated by... [Molly] Nesbit and then, and Hans Ulrich Obrist. So there I had a three monitors.  One monitor I myself goes up talking on the subject of Utopia and, of course, I don't believe in Utopia, I took a stand against Utopia, I have lived in some of those Utopia and know what how they, what they are. And then another monitor showed Soho, the artists' Utopia, and what became of that Utopia and became a business Utopia, and then the third monitor is Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Art... which begins several parts, one as Immigrants Utopia, I filmed a lot in the world in 1950, 1951 and then as, an artist Utopia on verge becoming again business Utopia. So that's that.
So, I don't know, I'm not sure why I'm doing that, doing that, but when, when people ask me to like, like when Ulrich asked me to participate on this project I found it challenging and interesting to talk on the topic of Utopia in the context of Venice Biennale, so why not? So I did it. But again something that nobody here is interested in that aspect of my work and it's totally unknown. So, that's why... is developing and growing, that aspect is developing and growing.

When I began filming with my brother, Adolfas, as soon as we arrived in New York, we... our intention was to make a documentary, documentary film on... exile or how one really feels to be, how it really feels to be in exile, and that, what we... the footage what we filmed, his involvement became very short because he was called into the army.
We thought we were just practising, trying to master, you know, the, you know, the camera and lighting and we did not take that material seriously, that filming. The idea was to make a documentary film. It was, his idea was, the plan was disrupted and became sidetracked by his being called into the army. So then I went slightly in... different like a more personal direction, and only in around '59 we again picked up the idea and that's where I wrote the script of Guns of the Trees. We thought each time maybe... it was in the air, to make now, the first feature, you know, film. We knew that it won't be, you know, very much commercial, but it will be... at least a feature; and around in the way we wanted. But I said I will make, he will help me on my first and I help him on his first, and then we are on our own, so I make Guns of the Trees and Adolfas made Hallelujah The Hills, which of course, was much more successful for that sort of public and critically etc.

Something happened in the '60s with that it was so much in the air that there is a possibility for the new independent sort of, young filmmakers to succeed and to really change cinema at the end of the '60s, that's when we created The New American Cinema Group. And there was Rogosin, and there was Shirley Clarke and there was de Antonio, there was Peter Bogdanovich, Robert Frank, a lot of sort of... young, ready and energetic people. But and each of them made one, some made two films, but it did not progress, and that's where it stopped. And it's still not clear why, why it never, never progressed any further because I could really, excuse me... I don't know what this has to do with this project, but I can... my theory is that I was revealed by the facts of little facts, for instance, that throws light into why it failed, that they were too independent, that they, there was no real yet audience for those films, so and when they... but they all had illusions that their films will be successful, people will like them and that Hollywood companies, production would support them. But when they had a chance, like Shirley Clarke, Roger Corman said okay, we'll sponsor your film and it wrote, use my studios and make a film. She goes, here is her chance. In two, three days she comes back. The second day of shooting some they clash. Shirley said, 'I, this is the way I want to do', and Roger and his advisors there was, oh this, this, don't, but oh, oh. They just clash like that and Shirley said, 'No, I'm not there. I do my way or you do it your way', and she left. So it was none of them, I mean you can imagine Emile De Antonio compromising, listening what anybody will say. He will do his own way or the same with Rogosin, the same with Adolfas, the same with, with Morris Engel with all of them. They were totally unwilling to compromise and they just wanted to do their own way. And, and I think it's in that that they fail what they, they all their careers or whatever ended with that because nobody wanted to sponsor, like, and they had to remain on... that's ok, Shirley Clark managed to make like A Portrait of Jason because it was very cheap, but you know, this is not some public big, big film for wide audiences. And Adolfas stopped when he wrote two or three scripts for like musicals and... he could not, and they had to be filmed in North Africa and he could not reduce the budget beyond, below one million. So, that ended his career because if it would be 100,000, 50,000 it could have continued. No, his scripts asked for much more than that. The same with Shirley, the same Rogosin the same... and that was the end of that American New Wave.
Another problem with them was, when the Filmmakers Cooperative was created, all the low budget filmmakers joined and we were all together, and it grew and exploded and we created our own outlets, hundreds of them and it still exists. And that did not bring money, but it sort of helped the... their spirits, you know the, the whole movement. While the budgeted filmmakers, de Antonio, Shirley Clarke, Rogosin, they refused to join. They said, said no, I had, you know big arguments with them, just let's stick together and then we can together develop outlets and, no, they said, we... have our films for wider audiences, we need promotion advertising. You see, our principle is not to advertise, not to promote – the films themselves will gain, will promote themselves. No, so they did not join and that was their second mistake, second crucial mistake. Because if they would have joined, I think they would, could have developed a national and international network of outlets.

[Q] You had this kind of revelation when you saw the Brakhage films in 1955, but nevertheless you went ahead to decide to make Guns of The Trees which couldn't have been more different from what Brakhage was doing. 
You see, there is a difference between what I like and what I support, and what I do and make myself. I consider that all my major films are sort of narratives, narratives. I think that the last film, As I was Moving Ahead... this is a narrative, is a fiction, practical film. The same Lost, Lost, Lost. There is a... it is a maybe, you know, the material is documentary, but there is a novelistic theme like of one dropped in, how you gain in how you go and become willing to change and how you look how your film thinks, I mean in Lost, Lost, Lost. I mean, at the beginning is Paul Strand and the end is completely, the whole history of the, of how the, the American independent from avant-garde its style and techniques that change it is, is in that, but that goes also with my own change. As I said the very end of the, you know, film of Lost, Lost, Lost. I guess I have been here before, now I have memories, it's... it's a film about exile, but also about memory it, it's... there are several layers in that film. So, I'm not, only now as you give if you will have occasion to see there are two or three, two films that will be shown in the New York Film Festival.  I'm going already to, I'm leaving the narrative, I mean, that's Quartet No 1 and The Song of Avignon and also The Travel Songs, they're not narratives any more they are, I don't know what they are. But they're more like you know poem, poems film poems, but not narratives and those materials, you know, are again real, from real life and, but with no intention of making a diary or... so I like, was very taken by what Brakhage was doing and that's... it's like to being taken by some poem that you read, so you will never write like he's writing or she's writing, but that did not mean that now I am going to make that kind of film myself. No. That, that helped me to... I mean, to begin to turn to get be less and less interested in... what I was doing, less and less interested in what was happening in Hollywood, and the script of Guns of the Trees, you know... Guns of the Trees, whatever the film is, is already structured completely different. It's a collage, film.

Shadows was completed in, though not released, completed and screened privately practically, in '58, Pull my Daisy in '59 and then released only in '60, and, and Guns in... began shooting in 1960 and finished in '61. So it's... and Shirley was same time, filming The Connection when I was making Guns of the Trees. And Robert was editing Pull my Daisy, and Gregory Markopoulos was editing Serenity and they all used to come, you know, I lived on 515 East 13th Street, and they used to come for some leaders or some, and Gregory to chop pieces on our movieola and was chop from the Serenity, because he discovered he didn't like the leading star that he had, Dukakis, the daughter of Dukakis, and he kept chopping her from the leading actress, so she became the second actress. Unfortunately, that film cannot be seen. It disappeared in Greece, and it was beautiful, yeah.

My argument with Cassavetes and Nico Papatakis had to do with Shadows, when... you see, Nico Papatakis, had a... or ran a... had made a film already with Genet that was Un Chant d'Amour and he had a some cabaret in Paris, that's where this young woman, and I know what you real, I never saw the biography of Nico or read any books. I still have not seen the film, came in and he liked her and her singing and she, adopted the name of Nico from Nico Papatakis and later when they came to New York, since I had met them already in Paris before, they wanted to meet Andy, and I took them to Andy and that's where you know, life, different life of Nico begins. But he was at the screening of Shadows and he thought being so, so more commercially minded that it was too loose, that this film could be made into commercial success if he would only shoot like about one third of it, take some scenes out and add new ones and skip the beginning, cut, and three minutes there, and, and he, and Cassavetes agreed with him. Now, why? Okay, well sort of jump, it's like a collage, what I'm saying here now is... he reshot, and I was there through much of the shooting and then when I saw the new version I... it was, they was so different. One... was when you, when somebody sees the one that exists now and that's the second version, and has not seen the first version, still the film is very good and everybody likes it and its still very important and different in style and more loose but you cannot compare with the first version which was thought to completely improvise, its like jazz... very, in any case, it was the shot and I had written very enthusiastic review of the first one and now I see the second, the second version. I had to, to really put it down and that's when you know our argument began, which, of course, we were not on talking terms then with Cassavetes for 10 years or so. Later we made peace.  But it was like a very different film and that's when Nico, and I blame Nico Papatakis for it, Nico... but now to add something to it, why Cassavetes did that? I think only lately I... came to this conclusion, what I'm saying, will be saying now and that is that he never wanted to make a film like the first version was.  That was done by the sort of actors and friends that he worked in and permitted them to do and then he had yet no power he had not made no film, he been already in films, and when he went to really his own film and had money to make his own film where he had complete control to do the way he wanted, he ended up in what he was really later doing, which is again very, I think, important and very unique and very strong, his place in American cinemas is very, very important, but he went for, sort of, controlled improvisation like permitted them... which to any other filmmaker that I could compare with what he was doing with what Paul Morrissey was doing in that three, not in the Warhol film, but in his three films, Flesh, whatever, that's one four letter titled Tree... his trilogy, where he permitted them, his performers, his people, some actors, some non-actors, same as Cassavetes, you give certain idea and you want guess within that and, and then if you can jump out of it and if it works you will include it, not, not. And that's what Cassavetes was sort of, of developed and... amazingly when actors were permitted within that very loose framework too really, framework, to open to, you know, to... open themselves with no control, practically, and, and the content because was sort of very emotional and rich and the conflicts which no other Hollywood director, if one can call Cassavetes Hollywood, ever did, and Hollywood never embraced, he never had commercial success he's having now, like not commercial success but in, in all of the film club societies etc. So, in other words, what I was defending and why I had, I attacked Cassavetes, I was defending really when I look at the first version what I myself wanted to do, so I was in that sense wrong what I was, what I did. I did not understand enough myself and I did not understand enough him and I'm sort of thought that that was his film that he should not have changed, but really it was more my film and therefore I defended it, they should have left it as is.

Guns of the Trees, you know, a series of sketches, and then I, I really wanted to be those sketches very much improvised.  And since I liked Shadows, I got Ben Carruthers to be in the film I thought that will help me to do what I want and his girlfriend was, became the next, his wife in the film and... the one mistake I made that I permitted Edouard de Laurot, was a good friend, to stick around during the shooting. He insisted, he was a very insistent, powerful, willful person, to stick around and he could not just watch. He had to, to, to always step and at time I'm ready or ready to shoot to film a scene and have set, he comes and tells the actors completely, my cast, something else that one, should, should like Politruks in the Soviet Army; he has to indoctrinate them, and... affected.... destroyed a good number, I think maybe one quarter of the scenes that way until I really had, I could not take that any more and I said stay out, you know, that's it, this is, I cannot work that way, and he of course stayed out.

We had very, very, very little money for the film and so... at some point, I said that's it and lets put the material together. So I was never really happy with the film and then it, seldom that I show it though, what else can I say? Some people like it, but they liked in Europe, they liked it in Italy, they liked in because of the sort of political aspect, and I always, very often I during the years that, later years thought about re-shooting it completely, but it will stay as is, and, I don't have much to say about it.
[Q] Just, really, two really simple things.  Did you shoot it in 16 or 35?
I shot it in 35. That was another influence of Edouard De Laurot, that you had to be professional you had to shoot, and that, that affected also how you know how, it became very expensive to shoot sound so we had to dub it, the whole, the film is dubbed, not and we did not have a... the dubbing, we did on our own movieola, it was okay. But that was another handicap, considering the 35; 16 would have been... but, er, that was still when some of us wanted to be professional.

I wrote during, in The Voice, during that period a lot about really... improvisation and freeing ourselves from... I guess from professionalism. And they are, that loosening up of like, say what I wrote, I remember and I spent in several columns about the changing, you know, technology and the... and that now, that there is no such thing as normal lighting or normal focus or normal this or normal that, that you can overexpose or underexpose or... and its all open, it depends what you need. Now that was of course not what was being taught in Hollywood. The only time when Nouvelle Vague did that was, it was done by Resnais, Resnais in Marienbad when he suddenly overexposed a scene and that was, you know, avant-garde for, for that regular movie critics. Look, look that's new, that's and, you know,  that's usually, I wrote in The Village Voice on the, about films that I liked and I thought that those films should be brought to attention and the only, maybe there were two or three cases where when I wrote at wrote negatives... negative reviews when I, I attacked even films that I almost liked, like Marienbad, but I had to attack it because all the reviewers, all the press weeklies, dailies, after reviewing, telling what it is, always added like a sentence. I said this is real what the real avant-garde is, this, you know, not the this New York underground and underground there's and avant-gardists who are making those films that nobody understands and nobody knows what's it all about, they are all amateurs and here is an example, so I, of course, I had to attack it.

I was excited about the new, most contemporary sort of, most up-to-date developments in acting and in poetry, literature, painting, I mean the same in painting, already in dance was happening also, and but that was not yet reflected in... in cinema. Though there are, if you go to, to, I mean beginning with, Helen Levitt, In The Street, and some of the work of Sydney Myers of Morris Engel and then the Cinema Verite was coming in, they also you see then, then you a sound and image, technology, Ricky Leacock, there were things happening and it was not yet fully, it was changing, but it was not being applied or used or reflected in all of the area that I was interested in. Or wherever it appeared and there was always critics, you know, there were always called 'amateurs' or something.
[Q] And so when in relation...
OK, poets, the beat generation, even, I mean then there, there in American literature in poetry there were to the very end till now there are two, two streams going, those who were practically three, those who are really classics or and then the modern poetry that had this sort of very intellectual Duncan and Allson and that stream and then there is the Beat Generation poetry which was never seriously accepted by, in the... in the Academia, they were always like, even today the Allen Ginsberg, Allen Ginsberg, Allen is, is, was taken, received more respect and publicity and only because he was so active and so verbal but was not taken and he's still not taken as part of the really, the... the poetry of the period. Academia rules, even today.

By 1960, 1961, it became... already there was a body of the avant-garde and semi avant-garde of different varieties of independent film, but it became clear that we have no outlets, no distribution because there, there few distribution outlets that existed, they were very much in the European film or in the documentary, socially sort of from, very socially conscious documentaries and or... or the only outlet for the avant-garde was Cinema 16, and Cinema 16 had already developed its own repertoire or preferences, and our cinema was not taken for distribution, our films, and usually the, the main argument was that we are amateurs, that they're not professionally made that they, that we are not serious about cinema. So it's at that time that we decided that we should have our own distribution centre. And in, that was in January '62, and I called a meeting in my loft and we all decided, about 20, 25 of us came to the meeting to create our own cooperative distribution centre and that's how that came all about. There was no other way of doing.
Now why cooperative, because when I was a child, there was a  cooperative, farmers had created to help themselves, you know, in the  city, in our villages, several cooperatives, and when my father could  not, did not have time to go to the meetings he used to send me, or, or  my brothers, when they could, did not want to go they sent me to those  meetings. So I used to sit there and listen so I knew about, it and then  I had a friend, Almus Salcius, who became later very much involved in  Fluxus and with George, became very close friend of George and actually  the very name Fluxus they concocted together and they created together  the AG Gallery, the first Fluxus Gallery on Madison and 75th Street and  it's a completely different story. And his father was the leading...  leading specialist on cooperatives in, in Europe. He traveled, he helped  to create various cooperatives, he wrote books on cooperatives, or  systems, so that somehow was in the, I think, without being conscious of  it when it came to creation of the cooperative, I think that that  affected... helped to... me to come to this idea that it should be  cooperative and, of course, there were you know four or five basic rules  then immediately applied so that it's not for profit, nobody, that  it's, nobody's for profit, all income goes to the filmmakers themselves,  that it's controlled by the filmmakers themselves and no preference  made between one or another, and that's where the advertising went out  and promotion, it's all alphabetical. And that remains till this day.  So, I think it came from my childhood again, the cooperative and, of  course, that affected George also when he was creating cooperative  buildings in Soho, he was building up Soho, the... idea cooperative.

Now, here is a page on which I see January 7 '62, 8:00pm, 414 Park Avenue South and it is Amos Vogel who was running Cinema 16, myself, my brother, David Books, David Stone, Jack Carmin who was a lawyer, attorney, Stan van der Beek, Ron Rice, Mike Brothers-Burton, Ken Jacobs, Gregory Markopoulos, Rudy Berker, Ray Wisniewski, Louis Brigante, and Marzano, Robert Downey and Bob Hemps and Robert Breer.  Really, it like the main the... the people working in the sort of avant-garde or film area at that time, so and, of course, Amos Vogel was there who was the only distributor, not the only, there was a woman by the name... there was a little, little distribution centre called Radim Films, that had, included some of the, some of the Curtis Harrington, Davis and Markopoulos, I think one film by Markopoulos.  So, Amos Vogel, of course, at... did everything to advise us that its very unwise to create another distribution centre when there was already one that he was running, that there was no place, that there were no demand for that much work and of course we said, and then when we asked him why he did not distribute our films, why he refused oh... Stan Brakhage's Anticipation of the Night, he said that he has his principles and his standards and he cannot distribute this type of work. So that you know we should understand that, so that was the end of the discussion. We said, if you refuse Anticipation of the Night then and, and Stan van der Beek that's it, the vote we took was unanimous and, and Amos considers me his enemy till this day. So, very unwisely so because I... he did a great job to promote avant-garde film, for a decade when nobody else did anything and I always supported him and praised him and I'm still praising now. But he time had come and which he, even today, does not understand that that the times were changing, that there was a new generation of film-makers, making different kind of film and okay, there were no outlets, we'll create them and we created them.

In 1960, that's before, when the Cooperative was created by '62, we sort of knew that there are at least maybe like 20 outlets across the United States. But 20 or so, call it universities that were already have some few courses. So what... and then in 1970, ten years later, the American Film Institute issued a book listing all the universities and colleges that had film courses or departments, and they listed 1200 universities and colleges with about 22,000 film courses ten years later. Now, this explosion partially... was very much influenced by the publicity that we were getting without, we did not ask for it, and by film-makers traveling across the country and... going to universities and, and pushing, trying to persuade that the work should be shown there, and they...  then the students demanded that, you know, maybe also film courses, and they helped, I think, and the various film societies were created, screenings took place, so in... during one decade from the 20 went to... 1000, and that was also, one can trace that by the Film-makers' Cooperative archives list, mailing lists, by how many of... from how many places orders for the avant-garde, for the independents, underground came to the cooperative in '62, in '63 and... and you see the explosion, how it grew. Somebody could some day analyse and look at who... those lists and find a big change during that decade.

We began as soon as we created cooperative, we thought would be idea that we begin screenings and rent places, so we, right around a... the corner there was a small theatre that was the Gramercy Arts, Gramercy Arts yeah?
[Q] Yup.
Playhouse on 28th Street, I think, and that's where we began, but screening and that is where the first... that where Andy Warhol introduced his work, The Sleep that's where Scorpio Rising opened, that where Illiac Passion for... we used it for one year, a lot of very important work come from the 1960s and premieres there.
[Q] But even... 
And that's also where the first screenings of Flaming Creatures took place, and but we could not get my, you know, for which I was arrested, but the arrest did not take place there. We were thrown out as soon as there were rumours in the press that some, there is a film being screened that probably is becoming very controversial. The owner of the theatre heard, Mr Rakolin, heard about it and he said, 'Go out, you cannot continue your screenings here', so we were thrown out and we move to The Bridge Theatre on 4th Street, 4th Street? And that's where the arrest took place. We continued screening.
[Q] But even before the Gramercy Arts you were screening, I remember the first big screenings were at the Charles. 
It... yeah, I mean at the Charles that was simultaneously a continued screenings at the Charles, but that was even before the creation of the Film-makers' Cooperative. By the time, by the beginning of 1962 I have to look up, I think that, that it was really that it broke and we discontinued our screenings at the Charles. But I was running the most important active period, it was important because it sort of was a place where the film-makers could get together and was running open houses, and there... that was end of '60, and that was in 1961. And went I think to 1962. Because the theatre could not make money and they had no, attendance to their commercial programmes. The two young guys who were very brave and adventuresome, they gave to me, they said, do what you want to do or something, whatever, so I started changing the programme to sort of auteur theory more or less of Hollywood and introduced the independent avant-garde and even Sun Ra, whom I had met in Chicago when he came to New York. I said, 'Do we want to do something? We have place'. So Sun Ra's first New York performance took place at the Charles Theatre. So I met him at the beginning of his career, and then in like 1990 some, or 1988-89 I'm at the airport, waiting for my brother, and I see this guy wheeling a huge load of drums and stuff, by himself and I see it's Sun Ra. I think he was coming from his last, before he died, performance, it was in Moscow, I think. So, I came and I helped to wheel it out to the taxi. So that's a funny sort of curious coincidence, I met him at the beginning and the end.

Then I switched to the Gramercy Arts Theatre. In between... in between, we have some other screen exactly between the Charles and the Gramercy, we had some screening at the Bleeker Street Cinema and we were thrown out there also from the Bleeker Street Cinema under the same pretext, really, that the manager of the theatre, it was not Lionel Rogosin, who was the owner, but they said that we are ruining their reputation, that we are, like our audience, their audience is so different from our audience that their audience, that their audience, when they see this other audience, then next time they won't come to that theatre. So, after three or four weekend screenings, we were thrown out. I think that's where we have some shows at, on Broadway West, somewhere at the, I think, a little gallery that Jackson Pollock's girlfriend, somebody was running. We had, and then we rented the Gramercy Arts Theatre. We were thrown out from many places in those days.
[Q] And you also had a policy that... 
... including Writer's Stage on 4th Street. We could not have any screenings after the arrest, that's where, after the arrest and seizure of Flaming Creatures, when everybod... everybody said I'm in trouble because there was, you know, the Lenny Bruce case going, it was just, had just completed and he, he lost the case so that my case, they thought, was worse. So, I thought, okay, then I will make it more worse if it's, so then I screened Genet's film two weeks later and I was arrested, of course, again. But they, it was by my calculation that Genet was, had already a certain reputation in New York, The Balcony and I think The Maids maybe had opened so that I'm arrested for Genet film, made by Genet, actually by Nico Papatakis it will be, make the case for the more difficult, like Jack Smith, you know, who is, you know, nobody. So, I, it was sort of calculated. Actually, so calculated that I had a sandwich and I knew I will be arrested, I had a sandwich, a chicken in my pocket and when I introduced the screening, I noticed already police in the audience and I addressed them. I said, 'I know you're the police so, you know, please have a good time, watch the film' and, of course, I was arrested and imprisoned. I brought out my chicken, and then there is this voice in the next cell, you could say and you see there was this black guy watching greedily my chicken. So, I, you know, split the chicken, I gave him, squeezed in half of the chicken, and we had a good supper. So, a year later, I walked, no it was more, like three or four years later, I walked somewhere, not far from here and this black guy comes up. 'Remember me?' I said, 'Who are you, I don't know you'. 'You gave me half of your chicken in jail'.

Since the case was very bad, everybody said, Jerome Hill, a good friend and supporter of... I mean it's a long chapter on Jerome Hill himself – I mean it was... he was really a very, very generous and understanding supporter from the beginning of Film Culture magazine and Film-makers' Cooperative later Anthology Film Archives etc. So, he said he will get himself and his friends to put up money and to hire the best possible attorney, lawyer, defense attorney that they could get, which they did, and they chose – whom did they choose? They chose Emile Zola Berman, Emile Zola Berman, what a name! But he was very known as somebody who had not lost, ever a lost a case. And very much respected by other lawyers and prosecutors, you know, always listening to what he had to say. So he managed and we had witnesses and testifiers, Susan Sontag was one, Allan Ginsberg, a few others, seriously talking about the importance of this film and still, you know, I lost and got six months suspended sentence, but at least I did not, that was Emile Zola Berman was aiming for that because they could have put me in jail for a couple of years so he was aiming for suspended sentence, and he got what he wanted. We appealed and we lost again. And we re-appealed to the Supreme Court where we were about to get a chance until a very extreme Republican component of the senate there, of the Supreme Court... decided that to use, I mean, they, one new judge was about to be appointed to the Supreme Court and that was the judge Fortas, Fortas and the Republican wing, the hard-core wing of the Supreme Court did not like him and they heard that he likes Flaming Creatures; he would have defended it, that he would have voted to throw out the case, and Fortas was, so then the Supreme Court, some members made hundreds of copies of Flaming Creatures – what a promotion – and distributed through the... around to undermine that, look what this is guy is promoting, look what he likes, and he was rejected. He was, he lost, he was thrown out. Our case was not thrown out, it was Fortas who was thrown out; he never go to Supreme Court and we lost our appeal. So that is the end of the story.
It's not exactly the end because when I was in Paris two, three months ago I was in company around the dinner table with a young lawyer who was on a case of some obscenity case going there in Paris that somebody had lost and he said he is, he wants, now it's some years back to show that it would be thrown out, I said, ah why don't I do that. So, he said, he offered free services to look into Flaming Creatures case and I really don't know about the legalities of something like this, but he would like to do that now or to reverse that my case should be thrown out or taken, should not be in those books as a criminal any more, taken out. Cleared. So, he's, I haven't done anything about it, but he's ready, you know, he's waiting to do it, all the information and sort of look into it.
[Q] But just to clarify, the 'Flaming Creatures' case was never thrown out but Genet...
Oh, they did, Genet... they did not! They were smart, they did not include it, I will ignore it, people will ignore it, the prosecutors said, we'll concentrate on this one, only, they threw out themselves the other case. They knew that that would complicate the case, they were smart.

In 1964, after the... my arrest and jail, for screening Flaming Creatures and Genet's Un Chant d'Amour, and we had some publicity about it, Mike Wallace's secretary calls me she said Mike Wallace would like you to come to his studio and also, bring Jack Smith, he would like to have a, you know, a program with you. So, we come, and it's all set, and we... it's a live show. So... it's like Letterman today or something like that. So first he asks me some questions about what is underground film, there sort of, put it into context. So I take one minute and I tell him. Then he turns to Jack and would pay a lot of money if I could remember exactly what Mike Wallace said to, what the question was. But it was something to the fact... OK, Jack Smith, Mr Jack Smith, you made this obscene, film, you know film, this obscene film and Jack jumped on him, stood up and, and said, 'You stupid! You mongoloid! You mongoloid!' and he turns around and walks out. And I said to Mike Wallace and said, 'You know, my friend, I have to go with him'. So we both walk out, we walk out, on Mike Wallace who was, you know, the biggest, the biggest there was nobody bigger than Mike Wallace in '64, so, and that was it.
Then time passes, in 1991 it was, we had a big party at Anthology, organized with some of our friends. And there is, one of the table as I walk through it, I see it's Cronkite, Mike Wallace, all the big television people sitting there. So I come to Mike Wallace and I say, 'Mike Wallace, do you remember me?' He said, he... now he stands up, he said, 'How could I ever forget you! How could I ever forget you! Nobody ever walked out on my show, you were the only ones who ever walked out on my shows'. That was 30 years later, he still could not forget it.

My acquaintances and friendships and meetings with the film-makers covered the whole range from, you know, extreme commercial to extreme avant-garde because I, during the Film Culture period and since I was the only, for three years, the only reviewer at The Village Voice of films and I reviewed... I met, you know, I knew from Antonioni, or Otto Premminger or, I, you know, I was sort of, met Fritz Lang and did interviews or met or... and then of course, the avant-garde, so I... I, there were some funny, some funny memories, some funny meetings, some funny like, like Fritz Lang where I did extensive four hours long interview with him and instead of taping, Herman Weinberg suggested that I use a stenographer and I did so and Weinberg was there, it was... my brother was there, it was a terrific interview. We all had a good time and, but the next day the stenographer calls, says on her way home she lost the notes in the subway. So, then when Fritz Lang used to come to town I used to avoid, I did everything that we couldn't meet because he would ask, you know, where's that interview, oh boy, I managed to avoid meeting him for years.

I was always there at the Co-op for the first few years, and it was me who always ran those showcases and showed their works, so we were always working and for a couple of years we even advanced when they needed money through the Co-op until Jack Smith decided that he will never return that money, he deserves that money, but as I say, this is film-makers money, it's their rental. You know, they... no, he deserves it. So, then, of course, he left the Co-op. So, from there on, there was not advanced any monies. But it was a working relationship. Even back to Jerome Hill. Already in 19... it was like maybe in 1961 when Jerome asked me, he said, maybe we should establish some... oh, maybe it came from me, I don't know, but grants to film-makers some small... so for five or six years, every year, I handed to Jerome a list of 12 film-makers and every film-makers got $40 every month. So, it was our sort of very humble grant system, I kept, you know, I looked, it was not only the American, it was, you know, Peter Kubelka who was on it, also I included some European film, avant-garde film-makers. And if any of them were doing better in the year that followed I took him off or her off and put somebody else. And that was very, very, very helpful. I know Peter used to always, whenever I saw him, said, oh that's saved him because that was like paying the rent and even paying for some wine to celebrate the coming in of the money. Half of it they bought wine for half of it and the other half went to paying the rent. So, it was very, very helpful. And that's about that kind of relationship, of the practical and down-to-earth. But they kept coming to me and I had somehow always to try to solve it and looking now through my notebooks and calendars of that period, and I see $5 to Harry Smith, $2 to this and that and that was some, my usual tactic was that, okay, Harry you're broke so now I will take what I have in my pocket and I will put everything on the table and I will take yours from what you have and we'll split. I was the winner in many cases, in many instances, but Harry usually had nothing left. So, much that Naomi Levin, one of the filmmakers began spreading a rumour that was really, that I was really a millionaire in disguise, that I actually was a millionaire, but I was just playing a sort of a poor man, like an eccentric millionaire.

I managed always to do many things at the same time. None of those things that I do are so huge or so big that they could not be... I mean, none of them take all of my day, and I always managed. I mean, one... I sometimes think and I have sort of thought about it, that even my filming procedures, that is affected by the fact that I'm doing so many things. See, if you have a... making a feature film and you have a script, I mean there must be months of time that you have to really allocate to it... it cannot... cannot be done any other way. And I had only fragments of time so my filming is... was reduced only to... became very fragmentary because I'm shooting only when I have time or when I, not only time, I think that the diaristic form of cinema to which I gravitated, requires, which is not a scripted film, which... real life... the only way, the only way... time that I filmed, if one can film, record such materials, is when you really feel right, this is it, you know, this is, I should be filming this. And that does not happen 24 hours a day or seven days a week. That can happen suddenly when you walk somewhere and you, you see something and it, and it responded, it provokes something in you, it has some memory, it has something and you want to film it. So, you film it and you never know when that will happen. It comes in a way that something close to the haiku form of poetry to the... where the haikus deal with the brief moment specific place and feeling of... it's very down-to-earth and very realistic and very down-to-earth in haiku poetry there are no fantasies or it's always connected to a specific place, to a specific time of the year, specific experience of the moment. So the same because I'm filming what's really happening and there and now and... what I'm about to filming something about what I feel very strongly and so it is, I think the haiku or kind of poets work comes closest to I think why I work the way I work in my films. So, it's not only the fact that I don't have long periods of time, you know, you don't need any time for something like that. So, my filming does not require time, therefore I can do it, what required... Anthology Film archives, the fundraising, there were some, you know, of... to take care of films and that concrete and time-consuming sometimes work, or editing when you begin when I begin to put those little pieces into, into my film, volumes of two hours and three hours or whatever. And that requires time and more than one thinks because there, you know, time goes so fast, you get so involved. But that I do only late at night when I'm not, when I know that nobody will interrupt me, no work or demands of any other kind, not even telephone calls, so usually all my film editing, putting together such work, is usually done around, after, very seldom before 9, afer 9pm. Evening comes then I can go into my editing room and that can go until, you know, 2, 3am or, you know, long stretches. So, I work with the sort of nightly, when everybody sleeps and nobody's portables go through my brain, the clatter of the noises. So there, time runs fast and you need a lot of time. But filming does not require, in my case, any time because I'm part of it, a part of whatever is happening, so I'm there anyway.

Journalists, writers come along to me or Ken Jacobs or somebody and says, okay, now tell us something about the '60s. So, you know, the remark, one of the remarks that I keep repeating was what Ken Jacobs said to one of those journalists,'The '60? Really, there were '60s? I did not know there were '60s'. Because we just lived and did our work. We did not know that all that will be, any of it will become history of any importance. So, I mean, I still, when I film, when I tape, I'm just doing it for myself, not for history. You know, we're talking about history now, you know, when everybody is asking, do you have footage on Nico or do you have this, I regret that I did not film; I just filmed like a minute or so. I filmed more of Warhol or some other people that I spent more time with. But you know... because we did not know that it will be history, it was our lives. No, history does not come into it. What comes in is my own memory of my own... and I would say that the most influential invisible memories that affect everything that I do, comes from my childhood. And I think that is the same, I believe, case with everybody. I think it's the first 10 years that determine what we are, what we do and how we do it, maybe even before 10. And it effects, why I film, that maybe there was a colour that I remember, that suddenly comes and I'm not aware of that, that somewhere or some... something else there, some detail that I film, that you have to be very sort of open and ready. And that's part of it.

The Living Theatre, though it was, of course, run by Julian Beck and Judith Malina, but it was like an institution, a theatre off Broadway, off... actually it was on Broadway, it was on Broadway and 100th Street, exactly, on the corner and that's where the Living Theatre was in the '50s. And they were known for avant-garde sort of experimental theatre productions, and they also gave space to film screening and actually Julian Beck himself – and this is not known very much, or not known at all, I don't know how I know – he made a few films when he was very young, before he even went into the theatre, very abstract, just deal with colour, practically. So I was very close and sort of following what they were doing and when they produced The Brig, since I did not miss any of their productions, and as I said, sometimes I went to see two or three times, I thought I should see it. And it was already at the very end of the running and already they had been arrested, I think charged, for, maybe it was not directly for The Brig, or for... during some demonstrations, that the play was very much attacked in the newspapers by very military people, so I thought I should take a look. So, I went and I looked at some, maybe 15 minutes of it. I said, this... I have to film it, I have to film it! Now, why I wanted to film it because like there was no, not much of a play there, but it was all action and all noise. It was a floor, for the floor, it was wooden, some boards and there was a lot of running around, walking around, it's all noise and it was very rich and noisy and movement and sort of violence, violent, brutality, sort of, very, that came through movements and noises that I thought, I said this would be, you know, I want to film it. So, I walked out and there is Julian and Judith, and I said, I would like to come tomorrow and film this. They said, yes but this is the last performance; they're closing us. We cannot even come in tomorrow; the place will be locked. And they said, why don't you stay and see, and I said, no I don't want to see the rest, I want to treat it like reality and come in like a news, newsreel guy, news guy and film without knowing what, like that I heard about this and I'm a newsreel guy and I want to come in and record it for, you know, for the news. So, they said, 'You really want to do that?' I said, we could, because we have to dismantle this place, they will let us in, in the evening tomorrow. So, that's your only chance. Okay, so I said, next day. The next day they called us and no, they did not let us in and I said, good because I could not get the equipment because I did... wanted to have a newsreel kind of equipment which is Auricon camera that records image and sound on the same track. So, they said, you know what, we can go next night, we can go in through the window, through from the street and we will do it there. So, we did and we dragged in everything to the window, we went in from the street, down through the basement.

I had two... I had three cameras actually, so that they were always ready, I had Louis Brigante and Ed Emshwiller to load the cameras and I did it non-stop, just a change of camera. And what I did, what, it was a little bit intentional also, though they thought it was accidental, but I knew that I will be, since I don't know what's coming, since I don't know where each of the actors will be going next, I was very often disrupting, I was in their way and they had to immediately, to re-think and improvise within there because I was constantly where I should not be, but where I was interested they had to go, but I'm there in front of them, shooting close-up their face, or whatever. So, that added to the reality and intensity of the... and it was not filming the production, not filming the play, but it was like filming my reactions to it. So, it was a completely like different thing, so when... and since I had everything on film, in real time, I developed the next day, and like 24 hours later at the Bridge Theatre, I invited Julian and Melina and the cast, here it is, take a look. And that was 24 hours later. And Andy heard about it and he came. Andy was there, too. And of course, you know, it was... it changed the lives of... and work of, for Andy was totally taken by it, really you can do that, and with the camera with sound. I considered that was my negative contribution to Andy's work because, I think, what is really work was in cinema was the silent films. And now he wanted, he immediately, his next reel was already sound. He had to do it. He, it was, that was my negative influence. But it worked very well and Melina said, yes, but, oh yes, they saw as is, as was then I thought there was too much of melodrama, there were also periods when they were, it was nonsense, sort of melodramatic nonsense, it's between the action. So, from the two hours I reduced, I put my brother to eliminate all the melodrama, I reduced it to 63 minutes and it became very intense - just noise and violence and activity they're going. So, then I showed it again to the... to Judith and Julian. 'No, no! No, this is not our play! This is... no, you have to, you have to re-shoot it! You have to add...' I said, no, this is how it will be.

Two, three years later, they're in Europe, already thrown out and they're in Berlin and the Berlin television people said, 'We'll put it on television'. And they worked for like three weeks to produce a television version of... and everything was in it, all the melodrama and everything. And they presented it on television and Julian and Melina and the cast watched it and after it, we have to send immediately a telegram to Jonas that that is the film, this is... this is ridiculous what they did. So, it was my version that to became really the version and that faithful version carefully done didn't work at all, did not work at all.
[Q] Then is it true that when it won the prize in Venice that people actually thought it was a documentary of some real?
I... they sent me the reviews, they had some... some really... and some of them with the... 'Oh, he's attacking the United States Army', you know, that you know, they were very nice permitting him to go into it and film. Not all, some knew, but there were two or three reviewers who did not realise that it was really a theatre piece made real. I was not even there, I did not even know that it was shown, I found it from the newspapers. David Stone sent it without telling me, sent it to Venice and that's how it got there... And P Adams Sitney was in Venice that weekend, but he was so poor and broke and the night when the film was screened and then celebration, he was so poor he was in some play he did not know he would have gone there, he did not know either. So, that's the footnote of The Brig, which is still, there is a lot of camera, the energy of it is created with a camera, camera movements, really.
And of course, I remember, five or six already after Vietnam, the play, they recreated, they staged the play and I think it was Philadelphia and they invited me to take a look at their play and they showed also the film and then, like the... after Vietnam, all of it looked like so tame, so... already so much other violence was if you looked already on television or was taking place that was much more violent and this looked very, very tame. So I said during a discussion... I said, 'The only way  today that you can still get the same reaction would be if you would actually go and hit an audience with a stick on the head, you know, from the stage, and nothing'. Everything else is very... no matter what you do or... it looks like a mild version of reality. Things have changed since, that much. But still, the energy of violence remains because of the camera, I think my camera work.
[Q] And you hand-held, on your shoulder?
Yeah, I had it all attached to myself.
[Q] But it was a heavy thing you work on, wasn't it?
Heavy, but not so heavy, it's manageable.

The first Bolex that I bought, it was Ray Wisniewski that borrowed from me in '61, one of the Bolexes. It was already my second Bolex, I think. He said, 'Please, we are going to protest this nuclear ship that is coming in here', on boats or something like that. So I said, 'Okay, go and film'. Then he comes back the next day, says, 'I was in a boat, they attacked us, we were... our boats were attacked and I had to jump into the water and the Bolex fell into the... into the Hudson Bay somewhere', the Hudson I mean. So he dived and he got it out, but it never worked, it was full of salt. Then my next Bolex was... I sort of trusted more some people with some warnings and Gregory Markopoulos used to shoot Galaxy and parts of Twice a Man, Reuben, Barbara Ruben shot Christmas on Earth and Naomi Levin filmed her little film Yes, and there were several of them, many films and Jack Smith, of course, for Normal Love. So, there is the Bolex here sitting still and I shot most of Walden and parts of Lost, Lost, Lost with it. I'm on my fifth Bolex now. You know, they survive for one decade or less and then the springs get tired.

We are in the year of 1962, the Cooperative has been created, it's there in my loft, I have been reduced to the back, back room somewhere, and we had... I had several people engaged, one after then the other, they lasted like one month or so, each to run the Cooperative. The Cooperative's a cooperative and the offices are run by hired persons supervised by the seven... a committee of seven elected film-makers. So, I had several people there and then, end of 1962 with David Brooks, young, very young person, 21 or something. He was a student still and also beginning to make films. And already the place was very busy, every evening we had screenings, the film-makers bringing the footage and already getting reputation.
Then we're going into 1963. I mean, everybody, you could meet everybody there from Robert Frank, Allen Ginsberg, Salvador Dali coming in with his stick and Ron Rice and Jerry Joffen and Jack Smith and it was getting a reputation of a place where strange film people are gathering and showing their work. So, then, one day at the Gramercy Arts Theatre, film-makers showcase – that was beginning of 1963, I think – somebody by the name of Rubin – and he was the uncle of Barbara Rubin, not father, uncle – he comes to me and says, 'I have a niece' - would that be a niece? - 'who was just released or they're about to release her from juvenile delinquency house, if somebody would give her work and pledge a sort of supervision that she would not be side-tracked again. So, will you do it?' I said, 'Sure, I will do it'.
So, a few days later, there she comes. She may not have been more than 18, something like that, so... and she's very quiet and she's there for two or three weeks and very quiet, she does what she is asked to do, and David Brooks who has been around and seen and has taken all kinds of... already tasted all kinds of adventures and drugs like from peyote to... I don't know what, from Jerry Joffen and Ron Rice. He says, 'What, why, why is she here? She's some kind of nit-wit, she's silly, nothing... she knows nothing, she's not talking'. And then one afternoon there a was a whole gang of... a great variety of poets and they begin to talk about drugs, you know, the influence, what drugs and what their experience is and suddenly Barbara begins to talk. And I, you know, I wish I would have done more taping in those days, audio taping, but what she said made them listen to her because it seemed suddenly, this... this person of 18, 19 that they thought she was just nothing, she comes and knows more than any of them. And so they begin to listen and suddenly it changed the whole... David Brook and said, 'Who is she?' And from then on, you know, then everybody wanted to meet her.

It comes out that she has read also a lot and she could quote Thus Spoke Zarathustra pages practically with that she had, you know, she said, 'I know the whole book in my head'. And she befriended everybody and she sort of became a... like the glue between different factions because she was very active, like somebody with a mission to keep everybody together and in peace and not to fight, you know, between different... There were different factions and some were, you know, like violently sort of attacking each other and very often she managed to make peace in that community. And, I mean, her contributions are so many and different that, let's say, her keeping together the Velvet Underground and bringing them first to me, then bringing them to Andy Warhol and then that's how Velvet Underground you know came into existence. How she met Bob Dylan I don't even know, I don't remember, but there she is and comes into Bob Dylan's life around the time when he had a motorcycle crash and she... everybody thought his career is finished and she thought so and there she is around keeping his spirits and saving him. And so... then she goes to London and meets supposedly in the street the Beatles, which one went out of... maybe John or...
[Q] No, maybe George.
Maybe George and then supposedly that's how the legend goes, she gets them really on drugs. And she... So it goes, I mean it's her life story still has to be written because she was very, I think, important in that period and to keep us all together.

I have tried... tried at least once practically everything, but I've never permitted and I've never, never will permit to put anything into my blood. I only take what you can eat, sniff, chew or, I don't know, drink or... but nothing that... I cannot stand injections, even when they take my blood and I go to a doctor, I cringe. So... but in general it's like this.
I spent one weekend at Timothy Leary's place, the LSD, with some people, Barbara Daas, who was not Barbara Daas yet, so on the third day he comes to me and says, 'Let us go for a walk'. So we walk and then stops on a bridge by a little brook and he turns to me and says, 'I don't... why... everybody here, friends, you know, and they're here, and some are with their children, but they're all, you know, trying something because this is chance or occasion and they're under my... supervision and they're in no danger, some be it LSD or something, and you seem to be just filming, reading...' Because I was sitting a lot of reading, I found there a book on... actually, on Meher Baba, who's not very... nobody knows maybe that name any more, whom everybody admired like some guru and I discovered... I started reading and I could not stop because from that biography came out that Meher Baba was really not some mystic who just knew meditate but he was running... he was a psychiatrist and doctor running the several hospitals for mentally, mentally disturbed people with great success and that's what he was known in India for. He was an amazing doctor that saved thousands of lives. He was not some, you know, drug person. So, that's, reading... So I said, 'Yes. I have tried practically everything that my friends have tried but nobody... I always like... The highest intoxication that I have ever have had in my life was when I was reading Rimbaud'.
So he turns around and we walked back and he said nothing, nothing more. In any case that's my position, that I get much more excited when I read good poetry or when I saw... nothing can match this screening when I saw Brakhage's Desistfilm and this Night... and this film with this guy walking down with scratched eyes. Those were electrical, they changed your body, it goes down to your cells, molecules and cells and atoms and so I always found a very lasting influence. So, when I, you know, got some peyote some, I even took LSD once and nothing was that... that lasting on something that I would have to have or want to try again.
Or, you see, another thing is I like wine with friends. Friendship is one of my drugs, when I can eat and drink and sing and be with friends. That's exciting, there is something in the air, there is something... and that's what keeps me going, not... there, I get excited. And that's my drug. I tried with smoking, sometimes... I tried because I want to impress one girl that I knew. It didn't work. No, actually, I mean, narcotics, drugs or whatever the name. But when I was a child, when I was ten or 12 in our... the farmers where I grew up in our village, the villagers, always in their gardens had also... they used to call it canarpes, canarpes, cannabis, cannabis and they grew them because they protected other vegetables and plants from something, I don't know, so they always had them in different places of the garden and when they reached the bloom, and the ripe stage there are little, we used to chew them, we used to as children. I don't know what that did to us, but we liked them very much. So, we grew up with... on pot but not pot but actually it's... yeah, yeah.

[Q] What was your... I mean, did you have a relationship to the Warhol factory?  I mean, it's always very... 
It was a very, very busy period in my life because that was the busiest Film Culture magazine period. I was already doing a lot of my film work, it was Cooperative and having other things and all the screenings and showcases, so, again, my relationship was very practical, down-to-earth level. You know, showcases, and it's very seldom that I... there had to be... there had to be a reason for it, for me to go to. Either he was previewing just something finished that he screened in the Factory on the canvas, a big canvas was there. Or some special party like he was leaving maybe for Europe or for something or some other special occasion, I did not otherwise, I did not, I was there only a couple of times during the actual filming, I was not sticking around there, no. Because I saw them, you know, they all came to the screenings, to... or Andy, this is the anecdote, you know, about Andy. That when people ask, when did, how did you meet him? I said, 'No, I don't know because I found out that he was there at the Film-makers' Cooperative in my loft, already after several months of him there sitting on the floor and watching movies. I did not know who those people are and there was Andy, but I did not know it was Andy'.
I found out later during some birthday party, when they said, 'Come, come, Andy will be there, some of your friends and Andy'. I said, 'I don't know Andy, he's not my friend', so that's... so I met Andy only later at Naomi Levin's birthday party. And then I recognised him, I had seen him before. Actually, we always were very... did not spend... we spent more time during some summers later, 1969, 1970, '71, '72 in Montoc already when he bought his houses. And where I spent some summer weekends with the Kennedy children, with there Peter Beard, we spent more time together, but here it was just very practical, down-to-earth relationship. Screenings... he invites his friends. But he always supported me and he never let me down. Whenever I was really stuck and needed help financially, he... on a number of occasions he helped. He was very, how do I put it, healthy sense of solidarity. I never read... I don't have... I think I stole a copy from the Pink Pony, somebody, Ben, my friend stole it, I think I just received a copy of his fat Andy Warhol diaries book and supposedly he's very... whatever he says about the others when... but when there is an entry about... with my name it is always very nice, I was told. So... but I have not had time to check with it.

Until like '60, as far as Film-makers' Cooperative and Film Culture magazine, whenever I really could not find money anywhere else to pay the bill, then I went to Jerome Hill and Jerome always helped. Film Culture would not have continued that long without Jerome Hill. Actually Jerome Hill saved not only Film Culture, he saved Cahiers du Cinema. In around 19... maybe, I don't know, I'll have to check, '67 or somewhere there, they were about to collapse financially and he gave them money to survive and with the little condition that he will give it to them for the rights to publish English editions, so Andrew Sarris was involved in it. English for like a year or two, there was an English edition of Cahiers du Cinema, but maybe that was a by-product of his helping, giving money to Cahiers du Cinema to survive and continue.
Later, as far as, you know, Film-makers' Cooperative, I also for like a couple of years managed, he helped. But the beginning, like '64 or somewhere else, I never knew where the money will come from. I attacked different people, I went already to the people I had met, you know, at the Factory, some of the society people to, you know, to give 300, 200, 100, whatever and it was saved. Fundraising was... began there as a daily non-stop activity and still continues now at Anthology. I do... I still have to do the same. But it's getting easier since I know more people and they sort of... they know that this is what we're doing, is not just a joke but it's, you know, it's useful to the people and so it's more understanding and support. But there were some very difficult periods when I could not even help, you know. Jack sent a message from Rome that he's here, stuck in Rome and needs $300 so I remember I managed to get like $60. I don't know how he came back.

I began... became more conscious of what I was doing, maybe around '61, somewhere there, that is maybe I thought, 'It's like a record of my life'. Not so much conscious of a diary form itself, it sort of developed gradually, so I began looking through all my past material and I kept like looking every year until I come maybe '65 until, and reducing sort of it and eliminating, I regret now that I threw out some of the footage that I eliminated, and something that became later, Walden and Lost, Lost, Lost.
Walden was finished first and like was practically finished in '67, but I think first screening was in '68, maybe, I have to check the dates, but I completed it in the form that it is almost like it is now, when Gerald O'Grady from Buffalo called me and said, 'I'm organising an arts festival at the Albright Knox Gallery in Buffalo and besides theatre, music, whatever, we would like to have an evening of film'. And we thought maybe if you could do that. So I said, 'Sure, because I have something practically ready'. So, that is... he sponsored, you know, printing and that's how that film came, was completed. Lost, Lost, Lost came three or four years later. At that time already I sort of... but I kept in Walden on the... I mean, the same applies to all my films. Certain kind of material that goes like together has a certain unity.

The title Diaries, Notes and Sketches, that came very early. That was always there, but then there was always the second title, one for some time was Dedicated to Dziga Vertov. Then, at some point, I don't know how, as I was making final sort of question, I thought that more to Thoreau than to Dziga Vertov so I decided that Walden. The more that, you know, I realised that I'm very obsessed with Nature in the city, that there is not that much snow in New York that my film of New York is full of snow and not that much of Nature in general, but my film always takes Nature. So, that is where Walden comes in. Thoreau was an amazing person really. Just a few years ago it came out some of his other note books where... notebooks on various plants and his... that he kept notes as he's passing, walking every day, that this plant, this flower is in that state, now she's almost to bloom and then three days later, ah, it's blooming already. I mean, he kept record of things around him so incredibly detailed, amazing, amazing. Yeah, that is my Walden. New York is my Walden. I mean, you don't have to be in the middle of a forest, a countryside to be in Nature.

I don't see most of New York, I am... I restrict myself to a certain little area and I am familiar and like that area and then you notice... I think one of the most beautiful trees in New York is just in front, across the street from Anthology, on the corner... one of the most beautiful lush, with a great crown and that's Nature. And we were with August my friend, film-maker, painter, poet. We were so angry we have not forgive... forgiven yet to that Manhattan mini-storage place. It practically killed the tree on 2nd Avenue and first corner before the second street by stupid people, they did not like the grass growing there, they wanted a tree, nice tree and they put cement on, so that the water could not get there or nothing. See, but by the time we noticed that, you know, that it was... the tree was trying to survive, but it's dying so we ripped off everything to keep the tree going, but it's dying... poor tree.
And of course, we planted with George the first two trees on Wooster Street, in Soho, the first two new trees, it was forbidden, industrial manufacturing area and George found that they were levelling out some garage space on... further on Wooster Street. He said, 'Let's...' One night, he said, 'Let's go and get...' Actually, he went during the day and he saw two little trees there, you know, just little ones and he said, 'Oh, can I take them because they were destroying them, dumping them, carting them away'. 'No, no you cannot get them'. So at night he said, 'Let's go and get them'. So, we went and we got them and we planted them in front of 80 Wooster Street.
And next morning, I got up, I woke up and I see police, there are a couple of police people, I think it was one woman and a man, and they're looking at our little nice trees. They say, 'Who's in charge here?' So, I said, 'I'm, sort of, you know... what do you want?' 'But this is illegal, you have to... these trees have to go out. This is illegal, you cannot do that, you cannot plant trees on this street'. So I said, 'Okay, we'll go and tell this to the owner of the house'. So, I go to George and George is just getting up and grumpy, and... 'Tell them they can take them out themselves'. So I go but before I go I pick up my Bolex. So, I go out and I said, 'The owner of the house says he does not want to do it. If it's illegal, if you don't like it, you can take them out. And he asked me just, you know, for him to make a record, to film'. So, they looked at me, they looked at my Bolex, they turned around and never came back. And the trees are growing and they're big and nice. Now there are some new trees already planted, but they're very young, that's recently. They are the most photographed trees probably in Soho and most pictures... the Japanese, they come every few years and for the Japanese like very much trees. So, they... I have to go always with them and tell the story from the beginning and they put those stories in the papers, every few years, they follow the growth of the trees in front of 80 Wooster Street.

When George Maciunas organised the first Fluxus Cooperative – that was the first Cooperative – that was the beginning of Soho on 80 Wooster Street, I decided to join it and we took ground... basement and ground floor for the Film-Makers' Cinematheque. I mean, it did not exist but, you know, we decided that that location, that venue, that for exhibition – we will call it the Film-Makers' Cinematheque. But we had a lot of problems with the building department, they said, this is wrong and that is wrong and somewhere around... that was in 1967.
In 1969, we had to discontinue screening there and we moved to the... what was know as Huntington Hartford Building and which was also known as the Swiss Cheese building on 60... 59th Street and 8th Avenue. At the same time, when that was happening, there was a dissatisfaction amongst some of my very close friends about my screening programming policies at the Film-Makers' Cinematheque. My policy was very, like, open. I knew... I mean, that there is no other place, this is the only place at the time, practically, and I have to be very open and permissive and that is... it was the accusation, I was too permissive in my programming and showing. Now the irony of all this, of course, later that whatever I showed there later it was... all became classics of avant-garde film. But... so, at the same time since there was this criticism, I thought just exactly the same. Around the same time Jerome Hill was called by this friend Martinson of the Martinson Coffee fame, they were in the army together, they became very good friends and when Martinson became the chairman of the Shakespeare Theatre, the Public Theater, on Lafayette Street, and began renovating the building for 25 Lafayette, he said, 'There is some space here, maybe you want to do something, you know, for cinema'. So Jerome called me and said, 'Do you want to do something here?' I said, 'Why not?' 'Good'.
But at the same time I was... what I was already planning since George, George, the first two buildings that George had acquired for the Cooperatives was 80 Wooster and there was another building on Greene Street practically on the corner of Canal Street. So I put... Jerome, actually, Hill, put the deposit monies on both buildings on the ground floors and basements. And the idea was since there was a dissatisfaction about my programming that 80 Wooster will remain very open, the way I had... and the Greene Street building will become Cinematheque 2 which will be like an academy of very selected, very selected, it won't be open very much. And it was at that time that Jerome called me and said, 'We have this space at 425 Lafayette'. So, then I abandoned the Greene Street and took it and just went ahead at 425 Lafayette. And since I was too busy and I also was like fed up with all my screening activities, I just wanted to quit and just do my own work and have nothing to do with that anymore. So I called to P Adams Sitney who was in Europe at that time. I said, 'Come and take over this new situation'. So, he came and he became the first director of what became Anthology Film Archives.

The idea of the film... of the Anthology Film Archives was that it will be very select, it will establish a repertory of avant-garde independent and classic cinema, that will just keep running and running so that those who want to know more or less what has been achieved in cinema as an art 'till now could have some idea by seeing if we could... if we attempted to reduce it to a... we managed at the point that we ended our selection, film selection meetings, we had established a little film selection committee, we ended up with about 300 films.
Now, there was a need at that time already for such a selection, for such a... what we call the Essential Cinema Collection repertory. Around 1969, 1970 there was already so much demand across the country for programs of the avant-garde independent cinema that help was needed and because some of the people who were in distant cities in United States, very far from New York, or San Francisco, they had no occasion to see some of those films. They had no idea what really those films are about. They had heard, you know, that and that some titles, some names, so whenever they wanted to show one or two or three programs, they always called me or P Adams Sitney. And we finally got tired of preparing those programs – we did it once, we did it ten times, we did it 30 times then we said, 'It's enough'. Why don't we instead prepare a list of what we think is important, what has been achieved in the avant-garde film and then when somebody asks for advice we just send them that list and say, 'Everything you... anything that is on this list is of importance for one or other reason and you can take any film and show, and that's it'. So, that is, at that point, and we did not want that list selected by me or just P Adams Sitney or some other one person, we thought there should be like four or five people, there should be more, more opinions. So we created a little committee of five filmmakers and film sort of historians, theoreticians and that is how that originated and those meetings and purchases of all of the films that we voted in into the repertory were purchased with the monies from Jerome Hill. He established a special film art foundation to support that.

One week before we opened, and that was December 1 1970, Martinson dies, and in '72 Jerome Hill dies. So, we lost, within our first two years, the two biggest supporters and after Jerome died, the family of... that controlled the monies, Jerome's monies, they decided that they should cut off the funds, slowly faze us out because this was, Anthology Film Archives project was just some kind of whim of Jerome Hill, and it was not an essential kind of project that the foundation could support and they cut us off. So, we could not continue with the Essential Cinema, we could not, the idea of Essential Cinema Repertory Collection what that we would continue our meetings and as time and years went we would add new titles as we explore different areas. So, Essential Cinema Collection became an aborted kind of undertaking, very, very, I think, ambitious project that could have really become very, very, very important as time went on, ended right there in 1973.
It achieved though one, I think, it achieved something that... universities and colleges across the country wanted to show two or three programmes, we could direct them to our Essential Cinema Collection because one thing that we had covered quite well really is the avant-garde sort of film area. We did not cover the Hollywood, international cinemas, avant-gardes of other countries, but we covered quite well the American avant-garde film as it was at that time. We did not exactly complete, but I think we did at least 90% of the job. So that helped to very much to establish the avant-garde American, avant-garde film, avant-garde film in the academia. That sometimes is thrown, you know against us that, but I think it's wrong that criticism has little, I think, value. I think it, it achieved something that we did not really intend. So that was... then we had since our funds were cut off and we could not stay at the Public Theater, Shakespeare Theatre, that is 425 Lafayette because it, we had to pay yearly rental which was pretty high, and I had already purchased 80 Wooster which was totally like very cheap and practically free. We moved in 1974 to 80 Wooster.

We had to go in already 1971, in 1970 when we began looking for the best possible prints for the films that we had voted into Essential Cinema Repertory, we discovered that many of those films – nobody knows where the originals are, or they're fading or they're shrinking, or we had to go into film, we started film preservation department which became very, very important because until 1970 many films made in the 1930s, 1940s sort of held the color and... but around 1970 already they had reached the point when they had began shrinking, fading, etc.  So we had to focus going to immediately into film preservation.
Then when we moved to Wooster Street we had also to go the video was already going strong and we introduced the video department that Shidea Kokobota, I invited her to be the curator of the video. And since we had no more Essential Cinema Repertory committee to select new films to add to the collection, I had to slowly open, but cinema continued, I opened also two programs of new works.  Which means I went back into my irresponsible permissiveness which continues today, and today it's more complicated because as the world... cinemas of various countries became very active, but the outlets like in New York or United States practically disappeared so we became also the outlet, the house for various national cinemas around the world for a little sort of surveys and there are no other places for them to do that because those little festivals, many of them, most of them are curated and supported by, you know... We had the Cuban... first Cuban film festival after 30, 40 years and they curated, when we had Filipinos, Filipino or Greece, Greek festivals they... they program because we cannot program them. We cannot curate because we don't know. We are not there; we don't know what's happening there.  So we have very open policy and so that there is a great variety, at the house of the... I don't know what.
Ironically, almost that here is a place created for the avant-garde film and it's... we... it's... we who went to the pains of getting the building, renovating that cost us million point seven and we're still paying debts. We're still owing to the banks 250,000. Here we are, the avant-garde helping the commercial cinema and they're not helping us because some of the commercially minded independents are using us and we're helping them, we're nice people, we're open, we're helping. They don't help us but we don't care about that, we help them.

We moved to Wooster Street in '74. During the renovation transitional period, it was transitional period when we lent, made a space available to other activities and that's where Richard Foreman staged, I think, two, maybe three of his very, very early productions and some other theatrical and a lot of music; where Phil Glass gave his first concert in New York, when he came back from India and his music changed. And Henry Flynt and Lamont Young, we had a lot of... Ornette Coleman, music going during that period. And then in... since we needed money to renovate the new building that we acquired in '79, in '79 we sold Wooster Street facility, place and used some of that money towards renovation of the new building.
So the... the programs were discontinued practically by '79 on 80 Wooster Street.  Now, what 80 Wooster did also was that I had befriended, you know, George Maciunas already in 1952, 1953 and when he... when, you know, began working, developing his little Fluxus movement and when in '67 I acquired 80 Wooster space, he had no place to live so I gave him the basement to live and work.  And that's where he stayed for 10 years until he was beaten up by Mafia and had to move out of New York. That's another story. But all the activity, 10 years of Fluxus activities took place at 80 Wooster Street and that was very... of course, was very important for George, was very important for the whole Fluxus movement, that he had a place where he, you know... I allowed him to do whatever he wanted and, of course, he used the street also and Nam June Paik did some of his events there also with Charlotte Morman, it was a place not only of cinema but of Fluxus and some related activities of that period.

One of the reasons why I went looking for the larger and different space was that on 80 Wooster Street, during that period, our film collection grew and our... our book and periodicals, the library, paper materials library grew and the space was very... very minimal. Projection space was okay, but we had no other space for anything else. So I thought we have to get a larger space. That's when I noticed that the building on the corner of 2nd Avenue and 2nd Street, the courthouse, old courthouse building, was still there and owned by the city and I went after it and then on auction – that's another long story – we purchased it and we moved and transferred all the... because it is a much larger space. Larger, quite large but by now and now when I'm talking were in 2003, in the fall, it's too small already for us because since the coming of video film labs began closing, going bankrupt. They had no work and abandoning all the films and materials which most of them were independent productions and we dragged them into our building and we're still dragging them and there is no more space and then... then as time goes, various film collectors die and they leave their collections to us. Film scholars die like Louise Jacobs for instance, J Layder, and they leave large amounts of very important paper materials and they're all... I mean, like a history of the last 50, 60 years of American cinema. As it is now they're not available to any scholars. They're in boxes, so we are now, you know, to accommodate and make them available. We are in the process of building a library like an additional structure next to the current building. And that will take all the paper materials. So, it's constant...
[Q] And is your... I mean, is this...?
After that when I finish the library I will go to Himalayas.

When it comes to the film preservation we are the only museum, film museum, in the world that has made... and we belong to the... I know that, because we belong to FIA that is International Federation of Film Museums, that we have made... we put priority when it comes to preservation to avant-garde film. When other museums don't do that's... that's usually for them it's a footnote, not that important at all. It's so much that when the Museum of Modern Art during last few years built the largest film vault for films to really store them under very proper conditions they did not make any provision for 16 mm films, only for 35. While the whole avant-garde is on 16 with the exceptions of the 35 and eight, so you can see where their heads are, where our... or their hearts are and where our hearts are. So when it comes to... and monies are still very limited for preservation. The modern mode as time goes now during the last five, six years there is much more consciousness in that area. But they need to preserve not only the commercial film but also the independents and the avant-garde but we don't get more then like maybe 30,000 per year so we have to make decisions what... what... how we should use that 30,000. So for screening we are very open, for preservation we are very strict, very strict. We think very carefully, you know, what is really important according to our judgment and that's where the monies should go even if the rest disappears, you see. So, there we are very selective. We have to be because, you know, monies are limited.  We have preserved a lot of Brakhage during the last five years and Joseph Cornell and a lot of work that others are not preserving at all.

In '70, I thought I will just... I will have nothing to do anymore with exhibitions and with screenings; I will just do my work. But as it happened, P Adams Sitney who was the first director of Anthology, he did very well during the... or the year and a half before it opened when there was less pressure, just before, around the opening he couldn't take it any more and... and he practically had a nervous breakdown and... but was going to buy a ticket to Brazil or Argentina somewhere. I... I had to step in, I had no choice. I had to go back because I could not let Jerome Hill down where he had put half a million already into building special theatre and purchasing the whole collection. I had to go back. I thought temporarily, but that temporality became 33 years. So now I consider I have very good team around and by the time I build the library, I will go to the Himalayas, maybe for a year.

The main headache is the fundraising and... and that... that is, you know, luck, miracles, luck and hard work and nothing else, constantly, you know, attacking all the people, all the people that I've during my, you know, my New York life I had sort of befriended, and the renovation of the building we knew will be about one million. It became one million point seven to transport it from, you know... Totally, it was disaster of a building, no roof, no... no... just walls, practically, so I would say one third of it, of the monies came from the artists who donated their works which I sold.  We published an art portfolio with some of the best artists that we had in 1970: Warhol, Rauchenberg, Richard Serra and Rosenquist down the line. Then, we took a huge bank loan of $850,000 and that's what we're still paying, 250. And various smaller, you know, donations and loans, but we did it.
I did not know where it will come from, I had no idea, same as I don't know now. The library will cost us two million and a half. I have no idea where it will come from, but I know that there is a necessity for it, therefore, the money... I will be able to persuade it somebody or several people to help me because there is a necessity and when there is a necessity I am able to persuade people. When there is no necessity for something then, you know... But at this case there is an absolute necessity. Because those paper materials must be available and plus... I mean, they're history and Harry Smith's of 3,000 very rare music records, there are 5,000 of his book collection of his book, the original Kenneth Anger drawings and all the and boxes and boxes of Joseph Cornell paper materials and Brakhage and... and etc. Of course to some, some will say: so what, big deal. But there will be others who will understand.  And so, what I mean, with all the money is going for totally useless activities, projects like wars and here at least here will be two million and half put into something that will last, that something that will remain. So it will be done.

I never have an idea about how I'm going to put it together. Okay, let's say Lost, Lost, Lost. After... there was some since I had more material than that what's in the film. I thought that I will more or less deal with the... first, I looked and looked through it and then as was... as I was looking through it, it became clear that one... a lot of it deals with my life in exile as I see, as I'm changing so I decided just to stick to that theme and to use only that material that relates to it or could be used, manipulated to... just around that theme. When I went to He Stands in a Desert Counting the Seconds of His Life, I pulled out only the... As I was looking and looking again what I have... I discovered there was a lot of little scene, like scenes on various... in various places in various situations that lasted for only half a minute or one minute to two and it was only my concentration on what was happening there and none of those scenes relate to any other. There were like... okay, they were like Lumière, the first films of Lumière or none related to any other you know there different completely, there is the factory there is the train and one has nothing to do with the other. Or the same was I found that I have hundreds of such scenes so I eliminated everything else and just left those scenes and practically that whole film is like 150 of those scenes and they don't... they... of course they... they show my glimpses of my life, but sometimes they have nothing to do, I'm...
Actually, in that film mostly I keep my own life out, I concentrate on the situations and life of other people, be it like a niece's birthday or... or again, the factory in Pittsburgh or... or very little of my own life is there, everything is like outside. Reminiscences... is very clear, and then of course in the As I Was Moving Ahead Counting The Seconds... No, As I Was Moving Ahead Counting the Seconds of my Life, that's an interesting... As I Was Moving Ahead...There I, again, eliminated. My process is elimination, you see. I look and look and then I feel that that doesn't belong here and that doesn't belong so I take it out and then what's left... I left, I felt it became clear that I'm concentrating it now on my... just my life, my own life and I took out everything that dealt with the life of my friends and that's something else. Most of it I took out and it's still sitting on film. That's more or less how it works.
[Q] But then how does the sound come into it?
Then I collect all the sound of that period...
[Q] That you've already recorded?
That I have already recorded and I have thousands of reel-to-reel and cassettes when I carry very often a little, just tiny Sony in my pocket and much of that sound comes from my Sony. Also I have a Sony during my editing and I have tape recorder on the side and at the same time when I'm editing always ready to. If I... when I'm checking, looking through my footage very often I talk into my tape recorder which parts of it and I use in the film. So it's a combination of the material, audio material recorded during the filming and then my comments are... I have also a radio going all the time and if I hear something I pick up right there from a little tiny radio that I sometimes use also. P Adam Sitney has, you know, as a joke, he was very amazed he walked there in my room at Chelsea Hotel when I was editing Walden, look he has two televisions going, I had two television sets going, I had a radio going and I had a tape recorder going. I had four sound things going at the same time.

I shoot on reversal, I film on reversal where you can immediately see and that you don't have to spend money making a print and plus when you begin to edit you are right there, you don't... if you edit negatives, then you have to... it's so much unnecessary work and there, it doesn't make a difference in quality at all because the best thing is it's original. I learned this from Kenneth Anger. Plus... I mean, before that, before Kenneth Anger, you know, I used to... I edited the first Guns of the Trees and The Brig and the... what's known as A and B tracks, you see, was to hide the splice, Kenneth says. I never do that, I just put one piece next to other, I never do that, so hah! So what if you see some... that's part of the visual activity if you... but actually, you don't see the splice. So I just work with the originals straight and it saves me a lot of money and time. A lot of money because much what I don't use, you know, why make print of it? Some... it... when I decide to use then I will, you know, I make a work print also positive when I begin to work with sound that's when I make a copy but not a negative, I make a cheap one they call untimed print of the original to work with sound already on Moviola, that's when I begin to work already on Moviola, old-fashioned Moviola. Before that I just work on hand rewinds and little viewer.
[Q] So that once you make that work print...
Then I, you know, then I transfer, I pre-edit sound from whatever is on cassettes I put on, on reel-to-reel, I pre-edit and I make a copy on 16... 16 magno copy and with 16 magno and with 16 work print I then I begin to synchronise and match and work.  That's when I do the final work. And that's it.
[Q] And so in the end what you would be doing is you would be conforming the original...
Then when I finish with it then I just cut the original which is, you know, for me the work print, if I make any changes during the sound adjustments then I just do those final little changes which I can do in a couple of nights. Not like when... if I would try to match original to negative, oh boy, little pieces. If, you know, one works in long stretches, but I work in tiny little pieces.
The one that sometimes... and you see, I don't all, everything in my film stays the way it came out from the camera, like those little pieces of 10 seconds, 15 seconds, but sometimes I cut out one or two frames and that would really mess me up if I would be working with the negative. I make little cuts, like if you're a writer and you decide to take one word out from a paragraph or sentence, so only that much. Or a comma – you take out a comma or you add a comma. That I do, but not more than that.

It happened so that the editor of Pravda... Pravda, Yuri Zhukov, decided – that was in maybe '69, decided that '68 in America the year '68, actually it was late in '69, yes – that there is this very anti-American movement in American like Chicago Eight, whatever, and that he wants to do a book on them and he wants to meet them.
[Q] Seven.
Seven?
[Q] Yes, seven.
Seven, the Chicago Seven? Or eight? And so... and I was... did some pieces on cinema and for Iskustvo Kino which is the main film magazine in... was, those days in Moscow, so he sort of knew me from that, the name, so he approached me to into... for introduction, that could I introduce him to Allan Ginsberg to a number of people. So I said okay, sure. So he did that book and he did also... and that he gave me a chapter and later he saw The Brig and he thought it was a great anti-American film and that it should be shown in Moscow at the Moscow Film Festival which they did in... I think 1970. Then in '71 said, 'You should come to also to the Moscow Film Festival'. So I said, 'Sure, I've never been in Moscow so I will come'. And said at the same time I would like to go if you are going to Moscow maybe I could go also to Lithuania and visit my mother.
So there was long several months of silence and then thanks to Zhukov he persuaded them that they would allow me to go to... otherwise you could not go. So there I am in Moscow and I said, 'I should go and visit my friend Zhukov in Pravda' and, of course, all those delegations and... You cannot imagine what it meant when you pronounced the word Pravda, the... and when the delegation there from Lithuania discovered that I am friends with somebody, with the editor of Pravda, suddenly they did not know how to take me, I must be maybe an important, with secrets, you know, I could be a spy working really like that with Zhukov and Soviet Union so... 'You want a taxi? You want a...' I said, 'I want to go'. 'And what do you want to do in Moscow?' I said, 'I want to go and say hello to Zhukov', they went white practically. So they were in panic, they found me a taxi fast and I went and while they waited in the corridors there I had tea with Zhukov, I filmed it all and it appears in my Song of Moscow that will be shown at the New York Film Festival, the little moment for having tea with Zhukov. So I say, 'Can I really go to Lithuania and visit my mother?' 'Oh, of course you can'. So now, of course, nobody resisted and from there on the all the secret police, the Lithuanian, they did everything that I told them to do because they did not know how to take me.

I had my Bolex, when I arrived in Vilnius in Lithuania. And nobody was allowed to leave Vilnius, and you stayed there and that as all you saw of Lithuania. I said, 'No, I don't want to, I want to go to my village'. They say, 'Yes? Yes, really?' And they have to go and get approval from the ministry, but they could not refuse, so okay, so they took me to my mother. But they said, 'Yeah, but you have only Bolex, you are making a film?' I mean, we have all this technology with us, it's a real... we have a camera, we will give you a cameramen and soundmen. And I said, 'No, I don't want, I just I want my, you know, my Bolex'.
So all the time, wherever I went, there was always like a mile away and further there was a truckload of... full of film equipment because they thought... they said, 'There will be time he will realise that he needs it and he will call us'. 'Call us'. No, I never called them and, of course, I filmed with my Bolex and all the time though, you know, you could hear helicopters sort of going there and, you know, I was never really alone and I never, I could never really know, I was never able to be really free in what I was talking. I did not because there was also... they sent a woman from the Party that went, you know, to help me to be for... you know. And she was always there and you did not know in what bush there was a microphone or so I had to be very, very, very careful.
So then I filmed, then I came back and I put the material under the bed and there it was. And I had completely forgotten that Hans Brecht in Hamburg, whom I had met some months before I went there with Kenneth Anger and Steve Waskin for something had he said, 'Oh, I hear you are going to Lithuania, are you filming?' I said, 'No, I don't know because my camera broke down'. So I said, 'Yeah, but Hans Brecht said, 'I will buy you a camera and I will pay for the film for the rights to premiere it in Hamburg'. So he bought me a new Bolex and all the film that I needed, but then I forgot about it and I receive like December, I don't know, 10th, I receive a telegram from him saying, 'Yes, the date is set, it's 23rd December, send us the film'. God! So I had like one week to finish the film and make a print or something and ship then I made the date. Really, I made a date, but I had then to really figure out some very simple and straight structure how to... and that's how, since it was so close to me, so like very personal footage, I sort of distanced myself by putting the numbers like mathematically numbers and I just strung it and very, very... I did in two or three days, you know, editing so-called  process. Then it was screened and in Germany it was repeated every year practically on that day for like 10 years because German refugees identified themselves with that film so it was very successful in Germany.
And then at the end of that year – I think it was the same year – a Soviet film, the head of the Soviet film expo came to New York, Serebrekov was his name and with him came... Actually, he came Banionis, he brought the print of Solyaris and Banionis is the star of Solyaris which I screened for friends and told them about the Elgin Theatre just for ourselves. Then he said, 'I want to see this film that everybody is talking, the reminiscences of a journey to Lithuania'... And Banionis, old friend still from Lithuania – he used to come and teach us in my little theatre group, I knew him from those days – said, 'I want to see it too'. So they saw the film and the film ends and Serebrekov said, 'You have to destroy this film. This doesn't show any progress in this, how do you dare to show this film, don't show it!'  And Banionis, you know, my friend, he began defending and indeed it practically went into a fistfight between the two Banionis and Serebrekov. Of course, you know, I did not destroy that film but he really was mad, Serebrekov. So that is more or less on Reminiscences of a Journey to Lithuania.

The region I come from in Lithuania, a little region, is known for its homemade beer.  It's the strongest and... the best and also strongest beer in Lithuania or maybe anywhere. It's homemade. My father, my older brother, they made... and you have to make it, I used to watch you know, I could probably make it. So the beer, it's a beer tradition, Lithuania has no wine, grapes don't grow there, it's too cold. The climate is three months of deep winter, three spring, three summer, three fall. They're very... seasons are very visible, you know. Here, some in New York, you don't know the transition, you get confused. There, it's quite clear. So the grapes don't grow, but it's a good climate for beer.

Paradise not yet Lost falls after Reminiscences... There were other films in between that includes the material that I've filmed in 1977, my second trip. It was also a period when I became sort of more... on many occasions with my friends here around our big table here we used to discuss and talk, you know, about culture and where things are today and where things are going. And a lot of it with Peter Kubelka, I used bits of those conversations in the film and it has to do with some of the... what we considered good things that we still have and that those good things and which I call the 'fragments of paradise' that are still here and it's like our duty, our... that we defend them and sustain them and don't permit them to disappear, but the opposite: that they should grow, they should grow and of course that's the beginning of that theme that continues now through much of my thinking and works in that period.
Though some people, you know, accuse me of being escapist, I say that I'm very realistic and down to earth and I'm not a pessimist. I consider the situation that we have now is not very much different maybe from what it was 10,000 years ago or... there are always, always little islands of... groups of people or individuals that keep the best that there is and the rest of the population is always somewhere else and fighting and nobody knows what they're doing, what they're caring about, and we... I try what I can to say, I mean why... why I'm keeping in Anthology Film Archives? Because I consider that this in cinema, this... this is like the avant-garde film to me some of those works are... are ecstatically beautiful. These are fragments of paradise and I have to do everything to keep them to see that they don't disappear, even if the rest of cinema disappears, I don't care, but this I will do everything that it wouldn't disappear. So this kind of obsession or craziness that keeps me alive, I would say. No, I go a little, you know, further in that theme, you know, that we are talking about image but we're all creators... makers of images, you see, in... in whatever we do, whatever you say, so cinema, yes, images of one kind. But, you know, the imaginations and we create images that affect everything and everybody around us so that, you know, that's the extension of my thinking of little paradise that, you know, I should do everything not to think, not to project, not to project images into the world around me that would affect the world in the wrong way, you see... you... the way I see it. But that's, you know, the difficult thing for all of us to do. But one does one's best.

Diaries, be it film or written diaries is just a variety of fiction, because the processes is not very different. Okay, between written and film diary is... you... in the evening and you're writing some of notes on what happened that day, but you are already somewhere else, you're maybe already tired, you ate already, your thoughts are... you're already... memories of that day, or if you're thinking about the previous day, they are completely already changed by where you are at that moment and what you write down is already something else, it's already a variety of fiction. Of course, when one writes a... okay, you go to Dostoevsky or you go to... to Tolstoy or there is the use of personal experiences integrated there, you know, and you don't notice or that, you know... you know, in the mind that whatever he's writing there about this guy lying and dying there and about the experience of, you know, dying or... he has sort of deducted from, you know, observations from his own life and friends etc.
Here, when you write the day you sum up your day or the week or writing memoirs it's, you know, more personal and more direct but it is... it becomes fiction. So when I'm filming, if I would... my camera would be running 24 hours non-stop, then I would say, huh, it's some kind of real, you know, life, there is 24 hours with no planning and no, if you wouldn't move even the camera, if it would be just running, no discrimination of... But I don't do that, I only pick up, like, maybe five seconds or maybe half a minutes on some day or in some week. So how can this represent the real, you know, realistic life. Of course it's... there might be some reasons behind it, why I decide to do... to film that moment only those seconds and those reasons are very, very deep, I am not aware of them, so what I'm making up and when I'm putting them, first there are those bits that. And then when I begin to put them together and I am again somewhere else 25 years later like or 10 years later, then I see it all then completely differently and I don't... I ignore, you know, the... don't remember all the details, the background, the circumstance that I filmed. It's there, you know, that footage.
So, again, I begin to impose and structure from the point in... in time where I am now, so it's of course whatever... what Dostoevsky wrote it's really... it's Dostoevsky, and whatever... and my film, when I put it together As I Was Moving Ahead... of course it's me, but also it's... it's fiction, it's fiction. Same, and... and plus, I'm not the only one during this period that is doing that. The whole thing started like 50 years ago or so in the second part of the 20th century when many writers and not only writer's turned to this to very sort of more personal... using themselves as part of their art from literature to... there are various different varieties which, like, what Norman Mailer did and what Max Frisch does, it's very different. Actually, I'm more with Max Frisch but it exists. It's all... I think we got a little bit tired of... of very strict academic kind of novel, so that when we see what some of the most current German or Hungarian or novelistic criteria, it's very autobiographical. Very, I mean – everywhere it's happening today. Sebald or Kertesz, Imre Kertesz, it's very, very autobiographical, very... not exactly diarisitic, more... So it's... it's big subject, of course. Then we go to, of course, to Anais Nin, and of course you see... you don't... people, diaries. Oh, now we're going to find out everything about them. No, I'm not Anais Nin. We're very different, there you find, you know, very personal, much more personal, of course, I'm all in but it's in a different way, and as I say, As I was Moving Ahead... as a joke, you have to know who to read it.

That material goes almost 30 years back and during that period I had made several other films so I... I selected that there was some material that dealt more with the lives of others or attempts to recall some situations very objectively and keeping... trying to keep me completely out on these sort of views in cameras and cinema and trying to get to the essence of the situation. Okay, I thought, there's several weddings there in some of the films where ok, I had nieces, Jacob's birthday party so... birthday party, it's a... birthday party is a very, very special, you know, thing, birthday parties and I wanted to get to the sort of... in my own way, to get the essence of what a birthday and my friend... friend's birthday party is, trying to keep myself out. I'm not there in any other... and the... Actually, I have been... from 1960 there were situations like for instance snowing or winter situation where people are there in winter enjoying winter. That has been... I have been trying to get to that for, like, many years and... and not... and always, like: no, I did not really get it, I did not really get it until I really get it, and I know that that's it and now that's, you know, according to my childhood, you know, was snow and people there enjoying and having fun in snow. Then I don't... I'm not interested any more in filming that type of situation. That's it, I got it. And there are many other situations, scenes where I keep coming back to it until I feel, huh, I got it, that's it. That's it.

In 1987, I was given by Sony a little video camera – in the fall of 1987 – so that I could produce for them some images to advertise the camera and for that they gave me the camera for free. So I thought okay, sure, if you give me the camera, I have no problems giving you some images. That was the beginning and actually the next week after I got the camera, Allen – Allen Ginsberg – was here, we had an evening, so he saw it and he got so excited. Actually, he went around this place, my... slowly step-by-steps and it took him like 15 minutes and he taped everything, every bookshelf, every... that,  'I want one also!' So I called Sony and I said, 'Allen Ginsberg wants on, too'. They said, 'Sure, you know, we will give him, too' and we'll get some... and as he was just about going to... to Israel, he says he will bring some images from Israel. So they did, and when Allen came back I said, 'Oh, so you now you got some images for them'. He said, 'No, the first evening I was there, the camera was stolen from me'. So it was stolen.
Yeah, so that was the beginning of my video, but it's the footage which someday you will see is very different. There is no single frame activity, it's more on... real sounds, real, all real sounds and very much on mood and feeling, so sort of people, people, it's very... Sometimes I permit to run it very long time without interrupting, goes for... actually, I have one video 30 minutes long that does not... is not interrupted, it's one take, things like that, and sort of seeing what one... what happens if... when you don't interrupt.
[Q] And some of that material you've already made into...
You have seen, I think, one of the one-hour take that's there, mob of angels, a group of women drummers and dancers.
[Q] But there's also the one of Allen Ginsberg's...
I have several and one of the earlier is... is The Education of Sebastian or Egypt Revisited which is six hours long, my trip to Egypt with Sebastian from when... one end to the other, that's... that's one and I have a lot of short... various short... short pieces. I have one that is called Autobiography of a Man Who Carried his Past in his Eyes. That's about 45 minutes. There are others.

I do a lot of sort of... how put them, like I have a video about one hour long on simply memories of the factory on Andy Warhol factory period. Then I have another one about... also one hour, on notes from the Film-makers' Cooperative, like historical reviews, memories, of historical surveys and memories and... and various subjects.
[Q] Where you interview people or you talk?
Mostly I talk or, let's say, when I did the factory it's very often there are, like, occasionally on... by request, like when they did Andy Warhol show in Vienna in 1998, very big one, they wanted me – it was on the factory years – to come. I had to be, you know, at the main speaker, but I could not come at the last minute, so I said, 'I will send you a video'. So I prepared a video for... on that occasion. So I went to the actual location and I videotaped that, then we had a little conversation, you know, with Gerald Malanga, but not... not, that's about it really. And then mostly me speaking and telling close-up into my video and that's during that trip I did... I brought... also they wanted to show Empire film.
Did I tell already the joke about the Empire? So I will tell you an anecdote. So, I bring Empire film and there is an auditorium of some 120 people and I introduced the film and I say, 'The New York Premiere at the City Hall Cinema', they had about 300 to 350 people and some sat and walked out and came back they brought sandwiches and at the very end, if I'm not wrong with my memory, there were about 30 people left, so I said, 'I'm curious about how you will do so' and then I go and have some wine, I go to eat. Then I come back like two hours before the end, everybody's still there. Then I go out, I have more wine, I come back just before the film ends, everybody is still there.
So, the film ends and I'm, of course, amazed. I come in font of the audience and I say, 'You, people, you are amazing. You are really amazing, I cannot believe this', and as I am still talking there's, like, a woman on my right approaching and she begins to talk almost over my voice and very loud and clear and she said, 'So now, since everybody stayed, so for this ticket... what are we going to do for this ticket? We'll have a lottery probably; we'll have to have a lottery'.  And I'm saying, 'What is this?' So, then I found out, the newspapers, the press found about... about the Empire film, eight hours long, most boring film ever made will be shown in Vienna, there's one of the papers offered that... a Lufthansa round trip ticket, free ticket to the one who will stay to the end. So they all stayed to the end to get the ticket, this ticket, and there was a lottery and one of the fil-makers that we know got the ticket and... what is... I forgot his name. So that was the Empire screening in Vienna.

[Q] You're in 'Empire' actually, right?
Yes, Carrie Angell... she was looking frame by frame, discovered that I'm reflected in some of the frames. I'm there with the camera. I was the cameraman for that film. I made the shooting, you know. Andy at that point... still, nobody around him knew how to operate a camera that took more that film in Bolex, so I rented an Auricon, the camera that takes 30 minutes and I had... kept changing the... the film and there it was, and I have framed and I said, 'Andy, take a look what do you think' and he was, 'Go, it's okay'.

Kenneth Anger was asked once why does he allow his films to be on video. And the difference, of course, is very big. I was teaching a class of Cooper Union students last year, I do that very seldom, like once every 10 years I teach somewhere, when I really need money because I hate teaching. So I had a session on film various... what happens when you put images on different materials. So I projected side by side, I projected Puce Moment as a film and Puce Moment as a video on side by side. And, of course, Puce Moment is film that has very subtle colour materials, dresses there, and the difference was so incredible that I had nothing to say about... I mean, the video washed out the colours and somebody asked Kenneth why do we allow that. Why do you put your films on video?  Actually, the same is with The Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome. He said, 'I don't care; I have never seen how they look on video. I don't care and I will never look at them. All I need is the money'.
Yeah, but poor Kenneth, they swindled him out of... it brought money, he got some but the last $30,000 he never got because Sheldon Rochlin died and 30 for Kenneth would be a lot, got lost between Tokyo and New York and now he has to hire lawyers and try to get it. And, that is... and some films like Maya Deren are OK on... on video. Black and white, some black and white, where there's no single frame activity or Reminiscences and some and Lost, Lost, Lost are, like, OK and my films, I think, do better on video than some other film-makers that work with... I know you like her, Robin Brear, that some of like '69, '67 where it's just the film that those are the titles, that's pure colour and subtle variations of colour that usually does not work. You just see purple rain, nothing works. So it depends.  Some work, some don't. Digital, I don't know yet and some cannot be transferred to digital at all.

I have this running argument with Godard and some of the film-makers who is his buddies, that's why I put some in my film, a little title: 'This is political film'. Because, you know, they look at it as: Godard has made some very nasty statements about the avant-garde. I mean, he liked, you know... he wrote very nice review about Hallelujah the Hills and where this little political, naive political film that we made with Adolfas on Vietnam... He praised that very much, but the rest to him, like my films are... like my last film, of course, there is nothing about contemporary, you know, it's problems, nothing, it's a totally useless kind of film, politically. But you see, I put that in because my... what is politics? They were... to me politics is... is reflected in the way and style of life and thinking and being what one is and it's that attracts then everything around and changes the whole society. So then I say, 'Who are really the people that have changed?' I mean, there have been people and movements and parties and systems that made this 20th century into the most horrible century that we had. So we go to all the politically, political parties, to all and those who supported those parties to the very end. You know, I went to there, I lived on there, you know, under the Soviets and under the Germans so I... I could ask myself who has contributed to the positive change and those were all negative affects. Those aren't humanity, and R Buckminster Fuller.  Who else? John Cage, Fluxus, some of the scientists, some of the poets, so that's something else. Those are... now to me, those are the right... there are politics, there are many different politics so there are some right politics for me, some are positive, some are negative, depends how they affect and change humanity and life. So I am totally against Godard politics, and when I put that title in it's my conversation with Godard. More or less that is how I look at it.
[Q] Of course, Godard is the person who's come closer to your position than...
Now?
[Q] Now.
Not in these last... okay, maybe he has cut back since his last film, okay that's not what I want to talk about it. It's so stupid and you see, he's very clever, that I have to admit. To hide the stupidity of his talking about in... in whatever the title of his last film, I wiped it out already of my head, he has cut it to little pieces, abstracted so that when something, some stupid statement is cut to pieces abstracted there, it sounds okay, you see. But when you put it together you begin to think and put it together again, it's naive, it's naive and stupid and simple-minded. He's talked there about the French Resistance and the whole thing is stupid. No, I don't think he has... he has left that, you know, active kind of Marxist or whatever position, but now he has... I think, maybe his brain has melted, he's now totally in... descended into the... totally nit-witty, stupid. You have to tell...
[Q] I'm not going to get...
But I liked his... Pravda is one of the films of Godard that I really like, Pravda.  That reflections on the... of all that period, well, he... does not speak.  There is no talking, where he be open his mouth, you know, I had to close my ears, it... it's whatever he says so pretentious and stupid simple-minded all those philosophies.  In Pravda, it's only noise, noise, great sound, one of the great sound films and it's not available, you cannot find it anywhere. I wish he wouldn't talk in his films. I will somehow send a message to him: please, in the next film don't talk.

Jerome Hill came from the... from St Paul, lived on same street as Scott Fitzgerald, actually next door, Summit Avenue, and came from the family of railroad builders that built railroads between St Paul to California and became very, very rich. So, he came from a very rich family and he went into the arts when all his brothers went into the businesses and they did not take him seriously. He went... he studied architecture, painting, music and worked in theatre decor and left several... worked with Wilder, the composer Wilder, what's his first name? The sound compositions. And then he went into the cinema.
He began with Carl Gustav Jung, decided to make biography on him and after, like, two weeks kicking around and filming and producing some footage, which I later edited into a film, he decided that Jung was not photogenic enough and he went to Africa to see Albert Schweitzer and made a very well-known documentary film on Albert Schweitzer in Africa and made several others other films in between. And his most important film is Film Portrait, his autobiographical film that traces his childhood and his work and progress in life and cinema. And it's very important in one aspect: that it reflects also very well that's the kind of rich societies, the background that he comes from.
In any case, at some point in '57, I think, when I was editing already Film Culture somehow I needed money to continue and I think it was Willard Van Dyke who was already the head of the Museum of Modern Art film department, I think, suggested that I talk to Jerome Hill because he understands being a film-maker himself and he will understand it and help me, which he did and always when... that was the beginning. Whenever Film Culture really needed money he always came to help us. And later, when the Film-makers' Cooperative was real at the beginning very, very broke, he was... also contributed money and, of course, he was... without him Anthology Film Archives would never come into existence. It's all, you know. This man is... I think, in the whole history of... in that sort of... that I participated in of the avant-garde experimental independent cinema between '50 and now, I have not known anybody else as generous and understanding and selfless, financial helper to the avant-garde.  Many, many things that I really don't know where the avant-garde film would be without Jerome Hill because, indirectly, all those organisations that he helped... helped to sustain, you know, the movement. It's so that's in a capsule, that was Jerome Hill.

P Adams Sitney was studying at Yale, I think, when he came. I was running... when I met him first, I was running the Charles Theatre. That was '61 and I think that's when I met him for the first time. He was already publishing Film Wise, very irregular publication, each issue was devoted to a different film-maker. He had already published, I think, one on my... Willard Maas and Maria Meken and then he was preparing one on Maya Deren, that's when I met him.
He was 17, I think, or 18. He was an amazingly bright young person. Actually, when we went in December '64 during the... in Knokke-Le-Zoute in Belgium, we went together, we took some films including Flaming Creatures and Barbara Rubin came with us to the Experimental Film Festival, what it was called, and of course it became a big scandal, they refused to show the film. I resigned from the jury and we tried to do everything to screen the film, but it was P Adams Sitney who made the sort of defending statements on the film and later Jacques Ledoux who was the head of the Cinémathèque royale de Belgique, said, 'Yes, we had many discoveries during these festival, Flaming Creatures and other, but the main discovery was P Adams Sitney'. And he was only like 19, that's all, around that time and they were all amazed. In any case, I invited him immediately to join me to help me on the Film Culture magazine and we have... and he continued, of course, exploring that direct concentrating on the avant-garde film and publishing books on it and he's now at the University of Princeton, teaching film and literature. Amazingly bright person and knowledgeable in cinema and literature and one of my oldest friends.

Peter Kubelka I met for the first time... I had heard of Peter Kubelka's work in Vienna and he brought his film Arnulf Rainer for the premiere at that festival at the Knokke-Le-Zoute Film Festival in that Experimental Film Festival in Knokke-Le-Zoute in December 1964. And I saw the film and I was amazed and I could not believe that because the rest of the films at the festival were not that... not that exciting and then it comes Arnulf Rainer. I see the film and then I hear the film ends and there is silence and I see that nobody's excited about it except me and I walk out into the lobby and I see this solid, pretty stocky young man walking back an forth and sort of very depressed so I knew it has to be Peter. He knew that the reaction would be, you know, very negative so I knew it was Peter Kubelka. So I came and introduced myself and that's how we met. And so the friendship began there.
Later he came in '66, he was, for one year... the film... in charge of United Nations Film Department and we... and he was editing at that time Unsere Afrikareise, another of his masterpieces, great films, and he was also doing a lot of... during that period he also became the Judo champion of the New York state and, of course, you can imagine what competition there was in New York state. But he... and then the press, after he won, the press asked him – the newspaper photographers – to repeat and demonstrate some of his techniques and during the demonstration he twisted his wrist and that was the end of his Judo career. He's still very good and he can, you know...
Actually, if we talk about Peter Kubelka, here is an anecdote. Anthology's opening was on... Anthology Film Archive, took place on 30th November 1970. We had a big party, everybody was there, not only avant-gardes but, you know, Otto Preminger and, you know, those were all our friends. Preminger was very friendly to the avant-garde. He said, 'When I go home I will beat up my kid because he's not making films like you', he used to say. So everybody there and we... the policy at Anthology in those days was that nobody's permitted to go into the theatre after the show starts because it was a very specially designed theatre designed by Peter Kubelka, of course, where you... it was all black and the seats designed so that you could not see who is sitting before you, in front of you or even who is on the side of you. They were separated – sort of like blinders – and there was an empty seat, of course, if you walk in you want to know where that seat is so what's the sense walking in. So the rule was not to permit anyone in. So there is... we were having a great party and then somebody,  the big guy – actually, it was Ira Cohen – was trying to walk in and there, women in charge of the doors said, 'No, you cannot go in'. 'So, who's going to stop me?' And Peter was there, so Peter says, 'Please, don't go in there's, rules'. 'Who's going to stop me?' He says, 'I'm going to stop you'. So Peter, of course, is... was pretty, you know, bulky and solid, but not as bulky and solid as Ira Cohen. So Ira looked at going to start is marching in. So Peter just took... it was so fast that... that I think it took his... he was in a long coat, took his coat, like, with one had, one, two fingers wrapped up twisted and there was Ira Cohen on the ground. So he, Ira Cohen, does not believe, he cannot believe. He stands up and he's again on the floor, on the ground. So four times he got up and... and because he just could not believe it, every time he went was on the floor. Then Peter had enough so he just put his fingers, finger on him and Ira Cohen couldn't move and then he let him go.  So Ira Cohen realised he cannot do anything and against Peter so he went walked out smashing every plate that the servers, women, girls, that we had engaged... had in their hands for their guests. He just smashed them all and he walked out. That was the opening. But we all had a great time, it was a great opening.

Joseph Cornell. I met him when I was in, I screened his films for the first time in New York the day JFK was shot and there is a long story there, but he came to the... he gave all his films to Anthology and, of course, you know, if you went to his house, I mean there were... he had... there was some similarities with George Maciunas of Fluxus movement where George was working on many, many, many pieces at the same time, many little boxes. They were, like, growing naturally, like... every day he added something to that or that. Joseph Cornell was the same. He had various boxes in the basement in every corner there that were in different stages of growth, of changing. In any case, he came to... and he played games with us very... we went... Luckily, whenever I went to him to visit him, P Adams Sitney went with me who has a very good memory, I don't have such memory as P Adams Sitney and Cornell would say, 'Okay, the line in my film The Legend Fountains, that line there... and I forget the line, where is it from?' Luckily P Adams knew it, the Garcia Lorca. That, of course, made his day and our day and we were okay because we... we were knowledgeable enough.
So he came to Anthology's opening and there he sits on the steps there and Parker Tyler, a poet... Actually a better poet than anybody knows right now because I think he's one of the underestimated poets, but he also wrote a great, I think, novel, the only one together with Henry Ford, Wilder, Young and Wilder or whatever the title is, but I think it's great, very ungrammatical great, and has written several books on various artists. An art historian and was very knowledgeable in the avant-garde film, wrote several very good essays on... on early work of Brakhage, Markopoluos. So he sits next to Cornell, there they are, they talk and then Joseph Cornell turns to Parker Tyler and said, 'Parker, I would like... maybe you could return to me that box I gave you, remember, ten years ago I gave you that box?' And Parker Tyler is shocked. 'Joseph, I mean... you...you gave it, didn't you give this to me?' And Joseph Cornell says, 'Yes, but you didn't see the invisible strings attached to it'. That is Joseph Cornell, because Parker Tyler wrote something somewhere about something that Joseph Cornell did not like so then he... he wanted, you know, it back.

I met Stan Brakhage, I have to check somewhere the records. I met Stan Brakhage, I think, in '55, that was '55, at the Living Theatre during his first presentation, first screening of his, I think, five first films. The Living Theatre was a very experimental avant-garde theatre and that... in the... those days and it was on Broadway and 100th Street. They had just finished running Strindberg's Dreams, I remember, so the screening was organised by Marie Menkin, Hans Richter and Willard Mass. So I met him there and I was... I was very, very, very much taken with what I saw.  I thought here is the new cinema, here is the avant-garde of today, here is what I'm interested in. He... there was so much energy, it was so different from everything that I had seen. Of course, then we met, you know, many times, we... we remained... we had some arguments during some periods of our lives, but we remained friends to the very end, but Stan always needed some enemies, some... he had to have some, like... somebody to argue with. So he... and later he changed, he agreed, you know, for the opposite party, you know, like, one example would be when he decided that Michael Snow is really practically an enemy of the avant-garde film as every film-maker who is working in the sort of structural or form of cinema, structural cinema.
There's sort of defined my P Adams Sitney and film, you  know, the issues of film culture, that that kind of cinema is... really is destroying the avant-garde film and he had some very... we had some very, almost wild, confrontations and he denounced Michael Snow and did not talk to Michael Snow until, like, 10 years... for about 10 years when decided again, looked at the film at The Central Region at Wavelength and decided that he was wrong. So he, you know, he... again they were friends.  So he... he needed that type of... he always needed something to oppose... that kept him going and helped him sort of to concentrate on... on what he was himself all about. But, I mean, he, of course... he's a figure that has changed drastically the American avant-garde. With him I consider begins the post Maya Deren, the new... the new American avant-garde same as with abstract expressionists or action painters start, we have the new painting.

Andy Warhol, Andy Warhol. I met him during the period of my life of Park Avenue South the where the... 414 Park Avenue South and my work for the Film-makers' Cooperative had sort of established itself and most of the local film-making community was... you could find them every evening but in the '60s during that period and were talking about '62, '63, there was a very close relationship between painters, poets, they knew each other, they... they... and when... you could see in the same room sometimes, you know, Allen Ginsberg and... and Gregory Markopoulos and Robert Frank, and Ed Sanders and there was a variety of... and some music people and some personalities that already were much, you know, completely somewhere else, like Salvador Dali.
So that is where, more or less, I met Andy although it took me some time to recognise him and somebody had to introduce me, but, in short, that's where it begins. And I was starting already the Film-makers' Showcase the Gramercy Arts Theatre just around the corner, and that is where Andy used to bring next, like, installments of his Kisses, they were running three minutes-and-a-half or so, slow speed, but one roll shot on motorised Bolex and there were... Those Kisses preceded the regular programme and they were very much awaited and somewhere there in, like, mid '63 we premiered Sleep. Some people say it just some joke, it's somebody invented, but it's not an invention I really had tied him up and... Andy came and I tied him with a rope to the seat and said, 'You cannot escape, you have to see it yourself, it's six hours long, of course, he escaped because he had seen the film. It was a joke. But there, I think, during that screening I also, for the first time, met Harry Smith and probably you were there too. I bet... in your furry coat, you still have that, I'm talking to Amy Taubin.
So it was a very important event and from then there on I moved to other spaces, screening spaces to the Astor Place or where another series of... we had screenings there for a year-and-a-half, so a good number of the early Warhol films silent and sound were sort of shown, seen for the first time and we continued, of course. He was very helpful in... when I acquired a courthouse building for Anthology and had to raise money.  He was very helpful and I was putting together a portfolio in which he participated and so here is an anecdote, a little anecdote on Andy and his prints.
So he said, 'Okay, what do you want, what kind of image?' 'Maybe shoot it from a film?' 'Oh, that's a good idea. So why don't you select like some frames, go through Chelsea Girls and select some frames and then show me what you've selected'. So I went through it and selected some frames and bring them to Andy. 'Oh, that's okay, make some copies'. So I take to the printer, make some larger copies. He looks. 'Oh, they all look interesting'. So then I take it to his favorite print maker to produce prints already, a large 20x30 inches prints of different... he chose the image, that's okay, maybe this one? So I produce six or seven variations, sort of different, I ask the printer for slightly different colours and I take them to Andy and say, 'Here are the tests'. So I lay them all out, so he looks at them, said, 'I don't know, but... you know, all these...', and it happened so that they were like five or six of his clients from Europe, from Munich, there was one from Munich, I knew some names, I forgot. He looks at them and said, 'You... you are buyers, you decide'. And he walks out. So now I wish I would have taped this, and those buyers, those clients those collectors of his work began their discussions, you know, which one, you know what, which one we should chose? Which one would sell best? Which one? And it was very interesting because they were not so, you know, dumb, and what eventually came down to that: 'Oh, those are to go, those are like television colours, those are... that's what Andy likes very much, let's choose this one that Andy wouldn't choose'. And so then Andy comes back. 'So which one?' They said, 'This one'. He looks at it. 'Oh, okay, good'. So that's... that was the print that I included in the portfolio. He was very open to suggestions from other people.

Nam June Paik, a Korean artist, who got interested in music and art and went to Germany from Korea. Cologne, that's where he studied, it was in Europe that he met George Maciunas of Fluxus Movement, because George was helping his father in Wiesbaden, Germany. His father was a railroad engineer, worked in... for the American army and that is where George organised the first Fluxus Festival in the fall of '61. And they had met already because George had already organised little events, Fluxus events, before that. There were already a good number of them involved in that festival.
And then George moved to New York and began organising events here and Nam June Paik moved to New York. I guess he had about finished his studies. George was opening AG gallery on Madison Avenue in 74th or 5th Street and around that time I met, of course, Nam June Paik. And we did some... later we did some events of our own together because – sort of political events – because I think now... that I do not know. I think that he comes from the part that became North Korea and that is why he was very much, you know, for, like, free Korea and I, of course, was for free Lithuania so we used to travel like Cincinnati some other places and he would read United Nations Charter in Korean and I would read in Lithuanian and that was our political Fluxus performance. In any case, we remain friends.
Of course, he now happens to be paralysed, spends a lot of time in Florida. I met the other day, was passing by Broadway and Spring Street and he was there, sitting in a chair and watching the street, and I, of course, video-taped him, but he has been very active in Fluxus and the related sort of... that could be all described as Fluxus events. He did one of his last performances... actually was at Anthology Film Archives about five, six years ago. The repeat of his event, The Destruction of the Piano where he sort of destroys slowly by pushing the piano and he plays some and then... those pianos, of course, are always purchased from storage places of... of old unusable pianos. Some people think that they are perfectly good; they are never perfect pianos. Actually, his school, primary school buddy who became later president of Lithuania and who is was very instrumental, actually, in the destruction of Soviet Union when he confronted Gorbachev that is Landsbergis they were with George Maciunas together on the same bench at school and corresponded and Landsbergis sent some Fluxus compositions.
When Landsbergis was at that event at Anthology Film Archives, he happened to be in New York and he was appalled. And he's a musician, you see, he's a composer and pianist, Sokurov made a film with Landsbergis when he just became president, a short film that they are playing on piano and there is a line of telephones because he had to, you know, deal with all the developments in the world and he's there with the piano and then he... so, he was very appalled and, you know, he found out that those pianos were already not useable any more.  Then, of course, he... you know, his work with Charlotte Moorman, the police was always a little bit, you know... very close to his activities and there were several arrests made with Charlotte Moorman at performances.

Ken Jacobs I met, but we never were, like, introduced, but we sort of looked at each other and we... I saw his first film and I said, you know, nothing because there were some other people who were there and they responded and attacked him when he showed his first little documentary on Orchard Street and that was maybe 1952 or '53, must be '53 and I met... Actually, I met him already not very much longer after that, couple of years when... no, that was in '53 and I met him only... actually, met him in like '62 maybe or '61, or maybe even before that at the Charles Theatre in 1960, so that was seven years later. And we, of course, became good friends. We made some trips together to the very sort of anecdotal trip to... with the prints of Flaming Creatures and Blonde Cobra to the Flaherty seminar and Vermont when we had, like... we were... some were semi-invited, we were invited and they knew that they were coming, but since they did not like the documentaries, they did not like... did not... they were afraid of Flaming Creatures, they gave us, like... and in the country, of course, one eats earlier there and after all the seminars, Flaherty seminar film-makers just... they go to bed earlier, get up earlier and by... when we arrived  at 9:30 they were all practically sleeping and our screening had to be 10:00, 10:00 at night, so nobody... We insisted that we were going to screen and only one person came and he was Louis Marcorella from Paris, so he saw the film and they did not even give us a place to sleep, we slept in the truck and the car and outside. I filmed that, that appears in Lost, Lost, Lost.
What can I say... I mean, he's one of the still great inventors in cinema that's always doing something different and new than anybody else. And one who is continuing, even today, that I'm speaking that is late 2003, and I think that his work and not only in direct cinema, but in... I don't know, this nervous, nervous... what is the correct title?
[Q] System?
Nervous System performances where he used project... he builds his own projectors that... he manipulates images, frame by frame, and backwards and forwards are quite... and using some little distortions... are quite incredible. Some of the best visual pieces that I have seen during, like, the last 15 years came from Ken Jacobs. And he's the only one, really, that is really doing that. So he never lacks invention, he like keeps moving and whatever he does is practically perfect. He's... he's an amazing artist, an amazing person.

Some of these people that I have been talking about, they're very complex and difficult people. Many intense artists and, you know, taking any artists that have given us incredible works are very often... are very difficult or complex people. So that if I go to the '60s, mid '60s and later, they were all meeting, you know... I mean... meeting, I have to tell that I managed to be friends with them all. So I met them all, I met them all. There were periods, which I think only... maybe there was one, one case, which is a complex case, that's Jack Smith. But I managed to be friends with all of them, therefore, I could meet... and when they meet in my place, they sort of meet and they talk, but outside, very often, they did not speak with each like and some of them I know even today are not speaking, like Kenneth not talking to Michael Snow already for 10 years or P Adams Sitney did not talk to Brakhage for 30 years or whenever... You could not have Harry Smith and Jack... Harry Smith and Kenneth Anger in the same room because they would be incredible trouble, so... and etc. So it is... but... and for some very little and small reason which... not very rational reasons sometimes.

I had heard already of Harry Smith I think through Robert Frank who had seen him in San Francisco end of the '60s before he came to New York, but he was very had already made his films, his main films, that is Early Abstractions, Heaven and Earth Magic and he worked there with several other film-makers. And I heard that he's very good and he's very difficult and very eccentric and very...  so he, Harry... he was very much interested in music, of course. Now by the time that I'm talking, Harry Smith's Anthology of the American Early Folk Music and.. is a classic and he's more known actually in here in America and Europe as by the wider... he's known more by more people for his work in music that is collecting those incredible anthologies, than film. But when I met him for the first time, I knew only about his work in cinema.
And think when he came, I met him first at the screening of Andy Warhol's film Sleep, and he came in, and he looked at me, he went direct to me and he said, 'I hate you'. I said, 'Harry, now, are you serious?' 'I don't think we are serious because if you would say this seriously I think you know what it means, what it does, not somebody, if you say that seriously and if you really hate somebody'. Now, of course, I said that because I knew he's interested in sort of the deeper effects of relationships, so he looked at me, turned around and walked out to whomever he was... and he came back only much later. I think he went out, had three or four beers, then he came back. And he will then... then like a week later he comes in to the Film-makers' Cooperative where I was and drops his films in front of me, says, 'Here is my work, do whatever you want with it'. And that's where our friendship began. He was a terrific... I mean, encyclopedic kind of person who... an incredible memory. Whatever he read, he remembered, he could go and locate exactly on what page where it is. He collected, he left when he died, about 10 years, about 5,000 books which are now at anthology on... on linguistics, anthropology, folk arts of various countries, nations, tribes, a lot of native, and wherever he went, he snooped, he always bought books. If you give him, you know, money, even if he has to eat, he will spend first on the books and then food.

He lived at Chelsea Hotel where I lived for some good number of years. We were around the corner and he always had visitors, like, he was very close to Allen Ginsberg, Corso... Gregory Corso was always there and very often I could smell what they were smoking right in my room. Sometimes I... real smoke used to come in, they used to set mattresses on fire and there were fireman coming in. And he was a very heavy drinker during the time that I met and used to... wherever at night, like usual late night, if he walks with somebody, he sees a fire alarm handle he goes and pulls it down, and therefore then fire alarm. Until I think he befriended... Barbara Rubin befriended him and... and somebody by the name Rosebud... by the name Rosebud. I don't know her real name, you were around too... I mean, I'm talking to Amy Taubin. Yes, she befriended or they befriended him, they really admired him and decided to save him from drinking and all that trouble, that he was almost every night going to jail and... and they managed. I don't know how they did it. He stopped drinking, or at least reduced to drinking to minimum. I mean, his diet was very, very strange, when we moved into Anthology Film Archives, we purchased the building in '79, but we opened to the people only in late '78, that means in '88... that means for like eight, nine years we were renovating.
For the first few years we had no heat, no nothing and he had no... Harry Smith had no place to live. He lived in various... on the Bowery with friends, for some time he lived in some hotel, he had too many problems there, so I gave him during all his days, for like two years he spent, I gave him a room; it became his sort of working space where he moved in with his drawings and and stuff and he used to come like everybody at nine o'clock, though we never keep such strict, you know, at Anthology, rules. He used to come because he, you know... he cannot... he did not like his... that was the period he was staying on the Bowery somewhere next to William Burroughs place and actually it was William Burroughs that got him that little place there on the Bowery, together with others bums practically, and he was not in very good health, Harry, already. And he used to come and stay until we all leave and he leaves also like signing in and signing out and there... and very cold, we were all with gloves, mittens all the time, with tips cut off so that we can type and so he spent and when that... when he, of course, died later, he left all his materials at Anthology, hundreds and hundreds of boxes of materials. That is Harry who is definitely, if one can use a word, genius as once Robert Frank said, 'I have never met geniuses in my life except one, Harry Smith'.  I think he was.

I met Jack Smith maybe in late 1960 or early '61 as before he made Flaming Creatures, he was around. They were just planning but it was made just around the time when I met him. On the roof, closed movie theatre, just sort of further on Avenue B where the Charles Theatre was. I was doing programming at Charles Theatre and also helping the managers, they needed some workers to sell tickets and so I got Jack Smith. Jack Smith for some time was our ticket seller and also at the same time the guy who... the editor, main editor and writer of the Mad magazine, was also a ticket seller. That was the beginning of the Mad magazine. And that's where I met Jack for the first time, and, of course, you know, he kept bumping and seeing... he spent... hung around Film-makers' Cooperative and, of course, argued with other film-makers and Barbara Rubin always had to make peace between them, and also I lent him my Bolex for he shot Normal Love with my Bolex.
And we were I would say good friends. I visited him on his Grand Street loft; that's where he lived for some time, a loft where he removed the ceiling and made it into like a theatre space where he made performances, in some of them I was caught myself sometimes because he worked with, you know, just with people, not with actors. And our little problems began when Anthology Film Archives opened and we purchased the print of Normal Love. Of course, I'm, you know, jumping here because first, you know, our premiere opened Normal Love to the public and was arrested for it sentenced to six months...
[Q] 'Flaming Creatures'.
Flaming Creatures.  Did I say... what did I say?
[Q] You said 'Normal Love'.
Oh. Yes, so we continue with Jack Smith. In '60... December '63, of course, I took it to Belgium, Knokke-le-Zoute and that's where you know the L'Affaire Flaming Creatures took place. It's a long story. Then I came back and decided to show it to the public and that's where I was arrested and later sentenced for six months suspended sentence. And we were still in, sort of, good relations with Jack Smith, until later he said that he was very unhappy that he was not permitted to be in the court and testify, you know, to tell the... you know, to talk about the Flaming Creatures because he said if I would have told them they would have believed me, that is... is Jack Smith and I would not have been sentenced. But the the main defence lawyer, Emile Zola Berman, looked once at him and said, 'No, no, no, please, please, don't let this guy in'. And he blames me for... but it was not my decision because... plus, they had... he had... was not... there was no case against him, it was against me and Ken Jacobs who was also arrested at the same time, so he had no... nothing to do there.

When we opened Anthology Film Archives, he purchased at a very nice price with the monies from Jerome Hill who paid for all of the prints, a print of Flaming Creatures and we showed it publicly and already... by that time, that we are talking now about 1971, the censorship laws were were practically abandoned in New York City, and I think that the case of Flaming Creatures contributed a lot to that because there was so much discussion of censorship, film censorship because of that.
And then like a year later Jack comes in and he says he wants more money for the print, he needs money. I said, 'No, I don't have because the print was paid by Jerome Hill Foundation and they paid it all and better than some others'. But I checked with the foundation and said, 'No, they cannot'. So he, from there on, he began turning against, you know, Anthology and me. He declared that I am a landlord and a lobster, and he had very funny names invented to describe me. And I became a personage in many of his productions and he always told me not to go to see... he almost forbid me to go to see any of them. He did not want to have me in any of his... in those... I went once and he told me to go out, not to watch it. I thought I will, you know, maybe put a mask and... and I did not take it very seriously because I knew how complex he is and I knew that he... he is... and yet he was... it was not a game, it was serious, he took it, he really meant it but that... that is what... how he was and all his work was.
I mean, he, Jack Smith was another one that one could, sort of, call if one wants a genius because, you know, he's a genius, one who really changes directions art and a very, very deep way. I mean, in theatre he was doing so many different things: and photography, and theatre, and cinema, whatever, in every of those areas. He... he went into new directions and inspired others and created, like, followers who then later proceeded and went to those directions that he started. So he was a... a pioneer and... but as I say, complex and... and a sort of suffering person. I don't know exactly how he grew up, somebody some day will look into it, but I know that his mother lived in Chicago and she used to call me like once a month or so. How is my son? Tell me how is my son doing? And she was just a working woman and obviously he did not write to her, not call her, so I had to be the one to tell her. So that was that much... of course, one can again talk and talk about Jack Smith.

I don't even remember when I met Marie Menken but it must be around 1954 or somewhere there. She had a studio with Willard Mass to whom she was married somewhere in the... on the... maybe around Ladlow Street, somewhere there in the East Village close to Canal Street. Gryphon films where they had a... you know, where she made some of the films where Willard Mass shot some of his. The other person very close always with them that I met was the composer Lucia Luoschevsky who did music for Marie Menken's first film. And Noguchi... And I met Noguchi there also because... but our real relationship began when I did began programming for the Charles Theatre and I decided to show or have her complete show so I could see for myself and my friends could see her and everybody could see her complete works, what she had done. That that was in '61 or late 1960.
Others had seen like Stan Brakhage when he came to New York for his first show at the Living Theatre in 1955 somewhere there, he stayed at Marie Menken's place. Stan had been before and stayed with Marie, with Maya Deren during his first trip and that's when Marie Menken met Stan. So that when later they decided to give him a show he stayed with Marie Menken. So, Stan was familiar, already, that early with her work. But I was not that... I was familiar with some of her early work but not with her most important work like the work explore that... in which she extends... very intensely used single frame activity that, I think, affect... influenced very much, I think, Stan and he admits that, of course, Kenneth Anger and myself, her work in... What really I got from her more than from anybody else is that she seemed to be able to create little film poets from nothing. Like nothing, it seems like nothing important, what made them important was how she did it. Her kind of filming and editing in the camera. So, it's like pure cinema you can... you know, she could take anything and make it into a lyrical poem, the quality of all of her work is very, very lyrical. There is like nothing very important that... like, there is a mood, there is something, that activity on that screen and which activity and which nothing seems to be very important or impressive or monumental, it's like reading a little poem. Which, you know, you read a lyrical little... let's say, Creeley poem and it's incredible, but there's nothing much in it, nothing much but it is great. It puts you in a state of ecstasy.

Cinema, like any other art is the... is technology, the content and form. And they're all completely interconnected. This question where, what dominates more, there's those who are so in... in just... in form and they sort of don't care, and the reason is not that important. Those are formalists. I... I could, I think... in my case I think very... there is a lot of stress on the subject that is, you know, technology, subject and form. On the subject, for some reason, I think, there are film-makers where the technology dominates. I would consider myself a romantic because I think pay much attention, a lot of attention to the people. I am never really abstract because if... if you deal with the people and emotions and feelings in... totally abstraction, that disappears. Some even... when I'm in single frame but immediately there is a few seconds moment when there are no single frames, maybe a second, there is a face, there is hand and there is some relationships, feelings, I'm interested in feelings. So I'm not a formalist and there is some kind of balance maybe, but the form does not... maybe does not dominate, does not come out on very top, but... but without form, it would not... again, it would not exist. It... I form it that way; otherwise, it would not work. What is form? I mean, how you shape the thing that you are putting together, a film.
[Q] A formalist would say that form itself creates feelings.
No, you... form... you have to does not you have to it has to be on something to make form, it will be air. It has to be the clay or film or in itself form is abstraction, there is no such thing.
[Q] No, I don't mean that, that's complicated. Yeah. I mean, my... 
I mean, take Otto Malevitch still there is like OK, nothing, they're minimal, they're just white. But still you know you have to put it in a certain shape on that canvas and there it is. If you say just white and there is nothing, so what, it's white.  It had to be on canvas, there had to be material and the shape is then visible and the then what is the subject? The subject is, of course, the white.

Who is a formalist?  Name me a really... somebody who's considered a formalist.
[Q] Well,  I... there's no one I think who's considered a formalist who wouldn't  argue that they weren't. They would argue they weren't. You'd say  Michael Snow is a formalist.
Michael  Snow, Michael Snow, I think Michael Snow is a minimalist or working  with content that is very, very sort of mental and abstract mental. In  other words, his form... he's not a formalist in a sense because there  is a form which some people would name in Michael Snow's case as  formalism is determined by the content, by the sub... and the content is  very mental, it's very just like ideas put into certain shape.  His  photography, his films with, of course, much of it in some cases, of  course, like The Central Region; it's a very, very concrete  content and subject. You cannot... you can call it any name, but it's not  formalist. It's, again, determined by a certain idea that how he wants  to put that subject onto that screen. I wouldn't call him a formalist, I  would argue against, okay, the minimal or... or Yoko Ono, I think. Yoko  Ono's greatest achievement will always remain her... her first little  book with maybe one hundred or so – I think its called Grapefruit – little suggestions and that is... what it's called? It's not min... my head is going. I... Gregory, where are you?
[Q] Yeah.
No, conceptual. Yoko Ono's greatest contribution will always remain conceptual art, just little ideas like now you look at the sky for five minutes, look at the clouds now, whereas her technology, her subject and form, you see, that's where it becomes... when you go into conceptual art, but before that we can, with minimal, you know... we still have everything very clearly defined and you can talk about content and form and formalism. No, I'm not a formalist. I'm a romantic, basically.

I met Robert Frank during the... For years, I thought I met him for the first time during the filming of Pull My Daisy, I don't know why because it was such a monumental event, I think that film is. But I met him actually when I'm now, during this period, that is when I'm talking... this is end of 2003 somewhere, Fall. Fall or end of September. I'm looking through my old notebooks and calendars and discovered that the mind, you know, forgets things that calendars retain... the entries and notes that I had met already Robert Frank like, about two or three years earlier before that.
He came from... very shortly after he came from Switzerland, he moved to... he was doing helping on a film Lou Clyde Stouman? Stouman? Stouman? Was making a film on photographs like that film reports that's ten-minute-long segment on Weston, on Weegee, and Robert Frank was working with Weston at that time and he then Lou involved him to help him on Weegee in New York, etc. So I met him very briefly after that film was finished in New York to Stouman's wife, Hanelore Haan, they sort of split around that time and she moved to New York and she knew Robert Frank, so it was Hanelore Haan Stouman who introduced me to Robert Frank. And then I did not see him, you know, very often, but beginning... I saw more of Robert the beginning of filming of Pull My Daisy. I was not there during the Jack Kerouac's improvisations for the soundtrack and we... we continued and when he was editing Pull My Daisy, I was editing my first film, Guns of the Trees. Through the years I... another incredible you know person, very, very, very different from any other. I would say that maybe he is the most from all my friends of that period was and remains the most humble and sometimes really underestimated, not underestimating. I think he knows what he's doing and what's all about but he does not want to be, you know, talked about, presented. He wants to be totally invisible, totally invisible and not to stay in the recognised higher society. I mean, let's face it; everybody would like to have him, you know, to... for dinner or meetings and why he didn't just come. No, he has been... he prefers to be on the Bowery which... or totally like part of the crowd of the lowest, really. And he sympathises with the with the sort of lower depths and... yes, I'm talking more or less about Robert as in real life. Of course that goes into his work, his photography. And he sees, you know, you can... it's one if the people that you you can't... he sees so you can see that he sees everything very directly, very there to the to the very bottom, though it's like when you see his you know, it's all you know, he's... he's open and hidden, he's very, very defaced Robert as a person. Very, very open, very. Very open. But there is also, like, he's like a rock there. It's... you cannot touch, you cannot budge, he's there. Like a rock. In any case we have been, we remain very good friends. Actually, so much that a year ago he had a foundation and he, you know, he used to help some people who needed money but it, you know, takes time and it's a nuisance so he decided to close it and whatever there was he gave to Anthology Film Archives to start an endowment. So thanks to Robert, Anthology has now $250,000 endowment, beginning the seed of the endowment. Robert Frank. I bend my head to you.

Hollis Frampton, I met him much, sort of, later. Already he had done, I think, very important work in cinema, but I did not meet him until maybe '67, '68. He sort of was hanging... I mean, his friends were Michael Snow, Carl Andre, Frank Stella, and that was not my... I did not know any except Michael Snow. It was completely different and very, very mental, sort of, intellectual in a way, crowd. So... I met him already much later and, of course, you know, we spent some time... I mean, Frampton's... when Frampton was, like, 12 years old he was still... he did very much some things like what I did. He used to go to the libraries, look where he grew up, and now I don't remember where he grew up, with a shopping cart and just take, like, half of the shelf and then a week later he comes back already with everything, he zoomed through the all the local libraries. He's one of the brightest people that I ever knew, I think, Frampton. He had...
The other, of course, was P Adams Sitney. He he spent... one one of the his teacher sort, of was, Ezra Pound. When Ezra Pound was in... during his American period in prison, Frampton visited him almost every day and sat there under his feet listening and also brought some books that Ezra Pound wanted; he was permitted to have. Very, very, very, very incredibly bright person. But his main work has not been or yet even shown even today. And there was a big controversy and that made Hollis a little bit unhappy that one of his major works was Hapax Legomena, a four-hour-long film where some parts were very abstract, some are real. But even P Adams Sitney when we came to voting in the film into Anthology's repertory and all my other colleagues on the committee chose to include only one part of the film called Nostalgia, and Hollis was happy, he needed money so we bought it, but he was so very unhappy about how can you detach one part and not to show the... But they did not understand and I have to say neither P Adams Sitney, nor Kubelka, nor Brakhage... No, Brakhage was already resigned, he was out, Ken Kelman, the other members of the selection committee did not see it as a... did not see the importance of that film and the unity and how those very different parts each of those four part, six part, were very, very different and they appreciated some of them separately, but not together. And that was, of course... that was upsetting to me also because I was defending it as a whole.
And then when he died he left his main work unfinished. In a sense, maybe finished, but on paper because very complex, it is a film that consists of 365 parts, one for every day. It was planned so that one for every day. It's like, you know, Pirandello wrote 365 short stories, one for every day. So... and there are instructions exactly what to show, there is... how to... or many parts must be transferred into by way of computer and it's exactly all instructions are there. Now we... Anthology has screened till now maybe like a version of some 10-hour-long just to see what... how it works. And I think it's an incredible project and there's some day... maybe, for one year, at Anthology Film Archives, we will screen one part of you know, one part of... this is the Magellan film I'm talking about, the title is Magellan.
I have also a dream; I have a dream of a program at Anthology. I'm working on it now, actually. I will be... it will take me a year or so. I will have a repertoire selected of 365 avant-garde films. Actually, there will be more, but one for every day that will go for 365 days, year after year after year. It will be sort of an avant-garde film calendar.

It's very possible that I had not met Kenneth Anger until the premiere of Scorpio Rising in 1964. We premiered it at a Film-makers' Showcase. Then around that time also he moved to New York, so we had many more occasions to meet and, you know, just one thing I could say right now same as I have said and I will always say about Andy Warhol, there was... there is Warhol who always had great solidarity with the avant-garde and which I was doing especially. He never let me down. I could always go to him. Kenneth is another one of those. He... his dedication to the... I mean, he has been in his background is Hollywood and commercial cinema and they're all his friends and he admires and idealises many of the stars, but his real heart is in the dedication in his own work is the avant-garde film and he will support and won't betray, won't budge, he will be always in there. He may argue and have a great great list, he says, of enemies, you know there and he has many of them and that he puts curses on and never talks and but that has nothing to do with his dedication and with his... Also, he's very... very sensitive to if he feels that anybody has some bad, wrong intentions like they come, you know, to okay we will be able to give an interview, he sees immediately that there is... this person is just, you know, came only because he's considered like controversial, some personality, he just wants to do an article for... he does not do that, he just throws... or or when they call me and ask to make the files on Kenneth Anger available for... for research, I always check with Kenneth, 'Did he check with you?' And he tells me, 'No, no, that person, no, don't' and I know when I meet those persons, those people and I see that they're not the right people to do an article on Kenneth or to... he's very sensitive to that kind of thing.
And of course, you know, parts of his life, we don't know, you know, much... some periods and it's a pity because, like, we don't know much on anything what's his life. I don't know how long he was in Paris, but he spent some time in Paris, you know. Cocteau was the first one that recognised and wrote about this film, the first... no, it's not exactly first fireworks because he has made some other little films before that thought he never released. But we don't know much, there are, you know, holes, gaps in many lives of some of the key personalities, artists out there, avant-garde movement. And I... I have a real defect in myself, one, I have to admit. I never ask, you know, personal questions. So much that if I sometimes I have problems I... somebody says, introduces himself or herself the name and then I don't get and then I'm ashamed, too shy to ask again, and weeks, months, sometimes years pass and I don't know the name and I meet again and then I... somebody sometimes tells me. So I don't dig into the past into private personal areas of some of my colleagues and friends and because sometimes I feel, you know it's... you know, I should not do that.

My typical day would be... okay, starting from the... you see it changed through the different periods of my life. At 07:00, when Sebastian was growing up, or Oona, it was a completely different schedule because I had to get up very early, make breakfast, take to school, you know. But since they sort of went on their own practically I can tell you that my present schedule of my... would be like: I get up around 08:00, I have my breakfast which is always the same for now, for many years, oats, my... my oatmeal, oats, it changes only during the weekends when I have eggs or something else and I have more time, but oats have everything that you need for the first part of the day and then I walk to Anthology Film Archives. First thing, actually, I feed the cats when I get up. To Anthology Film Archives, and I take care, sort of, of the first part until usually the Anthology is very active in the evening, so Anthology staff leaves very late and they appear only very seldom before 11:00 so until between I arrive at Anthology around 09:00 something, I stop at Gitano for the best espresso in the neighbourhood, on my way, on Mott Street and Prince, and I take care of this, because it's in the morning that many of the deliveries are there.
I... I seldom answer calls unless I expect, I don't pick up calls. But all my international calls I make then because we have to do it before 11:00 or something because of the time difference. Then others begin to arrive, but there are all kinds of challenges every... because, okay, Sarah from the Film-makers' Cooperative will call and say you have to replace print of Barbara Rubin's film. So I have to deal with the lapse, we have to check what we have and so it goes. Then visitors, there is no day that somebody some... from some country somewhere wouldn't come and take some time because they want... they have questions they have to do research and if Hiller is not there then I have to get the files and... because the library, paper materials, library. But otherwise I tell the visitors to come only like around one or 1:30pm and, ah, at 11:00 I go for an espresso, another espresso.  Most really 11:30. Then I... at 1:30pm, I go to Creme Cafe or some place and I eat and usually somebody, some visitors, friends join me. They always know that I'm there and they will find me there.

I return around 2:30pm. I spend about... no rush, about one hour and then I still check what else there is, usually has to do with film preservation or with some answering, they come with some questions that I, only I, can answer about some films. Now, we have an archivist who is beginning to work on the collection and there are many, many, many answers because it was me who brought every film in that building and I know every film, where it is and what it means and what it is. So, I have to do that. Around 3:00pm I go, walk home. Sometimes, on my way I stop for a beer, go and then I begin to work on what... many projects that I am involved simultaneously, like now on my written diaries... you know, reading and preparing them for typing. Somebody right now is doing a big volume in Lithuania and my... my, writings so I have to see it always, that they have everything to dig out, to go through, and sometimes they need to locate some dates that were I discovered my calendars and this incredible treasury of dates and notes from last 40, 50 years. I kept notebooks always, yearly notebooks. It goes this way until like 7:00pm when I begin to think where I'm going to eat. And then sometimes I call my friends or somebody who is visiting in town... calls me during the day and asks me to join them. If not then I... I do something at home. My kitchen talents are limited. I know how to make potato pancakes, some... some other pancakes, some... or I always have sausage and garlic and cheese, which is very good for you, goat cheese.
If I'm... have a necessity or sometimes, always people want some film or something, new video, then I work on, actually almost every day I spend some time on my video and I have not been in my film room for like several months already. I'm not working right now, present on film. But I'm working on some of the sounds. Somebody wants to issue a CD of Lithuanian songs because they discovered that I always sing with my friends, most of the time, actually the reason was different. I discovered that what they... what I get from Lithuania today are folk songs. They are so really orchestrated and so polished and so academicised that I don't even want to listen to them. Because real folk singing is, you know, when people get together and they sing and it's pretty raw, so... and when I get together with my friends we sort of... singing is simple and straight with no academy and I have a lot of it so I will be preparing a CD of Lithuanian folk songs.
Then most of the time when I cannot do anything else then I turn on television to see if maybe some news... unless there is Clint Eastwood on it, then I get involved, then I go until 02:00, but normally it would be like 12:30 that I go to bed or something like that. Okay, approximately. But I cannot... the Anthology period is very... I cannot indicate to you how complex, usually its not a second free. I mean there is... and I have to do two or three things if somebody calls, I have... something else is there I already forget that and its very complex there because there are a few of us and there is a lot to do.

They find me and they surround me and that's... I prefer that than... I don't go and seek any... and I cannot stand and I would just die whenever. I... in the sort of older generation stuffy situations I mentioned, I think... or did I mention during these sessions that I went to, not long ago, sometimes I go... I don't go to openings, I cannot stand opening parties or dinners because they sit around, they are not always that they are old. They can be 35 or 40 years old, scholars, even some successful artists that became successful very fast and when they talk it is just business and it's boring and it's... it's... there is no energy and there is no excitement and no poetry so I cannot stand while... And my... Anthology's family including those who visit us, you know, we laughed the other day, that the average age is maybe when you put all and put all the ages together of all the workers and friends, it's maybe not more than 30, maybe 26, 27. So it's... I mean, there is life there, is energy there, is... there are dreams there, there is poetry, dreams... that's where I am at home and that's... yeah.
The scholars, you know... that's not my... that's why I cannot teach, I cannot stand the university atmosphere, no, no. I don't, I deal... I mean, the past is reflected so that it determines everything that I do or film but I look only forward, I don't look back. Actually, you know... is somebody asked what would you study? I said I would like to go to university and study something now. 'What would you study?' I would like to probably study history. And, yeah, yet I bought... today I bought... I passed where there is a bookshop, I bought Aeneid, Virgil's Aeneid in Latin and so I will be trying to read that. In poetry, I am interested now to go as far back as in literature but not... history, it would be interesting to go and study history. But I have no time for it.

I'm talking here about my conversation with Stan Brakhage that was published in Vogue magazine in about, when, the year 2000 or 2001. With funny photographs of both of us by Serrano, where mostly you can you see most prominent part in that photograph in my picture is my shoes. I had great shoes, and Serrano said later, 'I would like you to take... maybe you could... are you free two days later?' He said, 'I rented cardinal's robes; I would like to take a picture of you in the cardinal's robes'. And I said, 'Sorry, on that day I really cannot do it'. Okay.
So maybe I was talking about cinema and poetry in same terms as Cocteau, I think was always comparing you know the avant-garde and Gregory Markopoulos does that too, the closest equivalent if you don't want to talk for let's say 20 minutes but if you want just to say it in one sentence and briefly so that people would understand what you... that you were talking about, what the basic difference is or relationship of the avant-garde film and the Hollywood or any other film they say, 'Oh, it's like poetry, like, you know, prose and poetry'. So this is sort of the most simple, most down-to-earth and primitive, you know, at some point it becomes much more complex. But in... in a very reduced, bare sort of shape, that is the comparison which is still not that far-fetched, not that crazy and not that, there is great many, many things that connect written poetry to the avant-garde film. Because both deal with sort of in... work with very condensed language.
In one case, you know, written language and the other, other you know images, film language and both are in very... or not very linear, and then here we come to, of course Maya Derren's terminology, there not so much horizontal but more vertical with, you know, detail after detail and they grow and then you feel you don't need any more. That's it, like if you put salt into water, the point comes when you cannot put any more in it. So... and what the subject matter which is then is... is again, it's not that type in film, in avant-garde film, not same as, as in a novel or where, you know, there are characters, protagonist, their story, their adventures. It's a horizontal thing, goes and goes and when here, very often, there are no... maybe there are some you know people but they are not exactly going to adventures, we know more, we see what maybe their minds are in or what their obsessions or... or dreams they're... but no, not really. Or surrealistic adventures but surrealism is already by itself... is... and dream is very close to poetry so... and one can go and go and go, but there is a definite... for somebody who has not seen much, when you say that, that will immediately put in some kind of perspective that will be, will help to understand. I would say, something like that.
So... I have views that no comparison myself on a number of occasions, it helps people, but otherwise I usually talk completely different about it. I would say, okay, here is a young person who comes to me and says, 'I want to make films'. I say, 'Tell me three of your favourite filmmakers' and this young budding filmmaker will say, 'Godard, Hitchcock, Scorsese'. I will immediately know that this person is going to narrative and to public cinema narrative, they're the great works, it's like you know, there's Melville, there is... so then another one comes with great enthusiasm, says, 'I want to make films'.  And I ask, 'Okay, tell me your favourite three filmmakers'. And this person enthusiastically says 'Maya Derren, Brakhage, Frampton'. So, of course, I know to what direction this person is going. And that' s about the closest that I could, you know, go, describe the difference by naming the films and filmmakers. Not so much in discussing how they really... but definitely nobody will confuse those two groups of... of filmmakers.
