leonard.hayflick

Leonard Hayflick (b. 1928), the recipient of several research prizes and awards, including the 1991 Sandoz Prize for Gerontological Research, is known for his research in cell biology, virus vaccine development, and mycoplasmology. He also has studied the ageing process for more than thirty years. Hayflick is known for discovering that human cells divide for a limited number of times in vitro (refuting the contention by Alexis Carrel that normal body cells are immortal), which is known as the Hayflick limit, as well as developing the first normal human diploid cell strains for studies on human ageing and for research use throughout the world. He also made the first oral polio vaccine produced in a continuously propogated cell strain - work which contributed to significant virus vaccine development.

I was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in 1928 and raised, as you might expect from that date, as a depression child, during which time we were economically deprived, as were most people at that time. And that had a longstanding impact on my life, I'm sure, in respect to economising, even in areas when there was plenty, although they were very rare in my life. So we lived in what's called a row house, which means one house after another with a common wall, and that was a lower middle class type of housing. My father was a dental mechanic, that is, he designed the prosthetic devices that people have in their mouths to replace lost teeth. It's a very exacting technique and he grew to be quite expert, one of the, if not the leading expert in that kind of very critical designing in the field of the area. So his income, despite that fact as it grew over the years, was rather modest.

And over the years, to the best if my recollection, I... my interest in science began when I was about nine or ten years old, I think. A relative, I believe an uncle, bought me a chemistry set – I don't know whether they exist today, I haven't seen very many... any of them in recent years. I understand that there has been a terrific effort to protect young kids like myself, at that age, from harm that could be done with a chemical set were available at that time, and so that pressure today has, in my view, unfortunately made opportunities for interest in chemistry considerably less. But my chemistry set had several chemicals in there that were, as I learnt later, dangerous; explosives could be made, etc, and I became very interested in chemistry as a result of that Gilbert chemistry set. Many of our viewers, I'm sure, will be familiar with those sets; they existed in the US at least.

One event stands out in my memory, and that is that I became so advanced in – at least in my judgement at that time – in understanding the chemistry of explosives and fireworks that I wanted to move onto something a bit more dangerous.
And by this time I had established a relationship – along with a friend of mine who had a similar interest and a similar age – we became friendly with a clerk at a chemistry supply store and scientific supply house right next to the University of Pennsylvania, which was quite a distance from my home, but within reach by bicycle. Of course I was not a student at that time at that university. And he... We became very interested in glassware and the strange designs of chemical glassware, it was very fascinating to me and to him, and this gentleman allowed us to go down into the basement of this old building that housed this store – it was called Dolby's – and he... most of the glassware down there was obsolete and he allowed us to purchase it for a few pennies actually, which satisfied our curiosity tremendously.

One event stands out in my memory, and that is that I became so advanced in – at least in my judgement at that time – in understanding the chemistry of explosives and fireworks that I wanted to move onto something a bit more dangerous.
And by this time I had established a relationship – along with a friend of mine who had a similar interest and a similar age – we became friendly with a clerk at a chemistry supply store and scientific supply house right next to the University of Pennsylvania, which was quite a distance from my home, but within reach by bicycle. Of course I was not a student at that time at that university. And he... We became very interested in glassware and the strange designs of chemical glassware, it was very fascinating to me and to him, and this gentleman allowed us to go down into the basement of this old building that housed this store – it was called Dolby's – and he... most of the glassware down there was obsolete and he allowed us to purchase it for a few pennies actually, which satisfied our curiosity tremendously.

One day I decided that I would like to buy metallic sodium, which, as many people will understand, is quite a dangerous material, it's highly reactive with atmospheric oxygen and bursts into flame on contact with the atmosphere, and so it is kept under kerosene, under a layer of kerosene, in a metal can. The... the metallic sodium is soft like butter; you can cut it with a knife. And this clerk wouldn't sell it to me without permission from my mother. As I mentioned earlier, my mother was quite liberal about these things, she trusted my judgement. Of course, she had no training in chemistry and I told her what I wanted and she said, 'Okay', and she signed a letter permitting me to buy it, which I did do, and brought it home.
The only dangerous thing that we did, although in retrospect it wasn't all that dangerous, more of a prank, we use... there were, behind these row houses, a socket or a hole in the concrete behind... behind these houses that held a clothes drying rack that would be set out in that opening in order to support it and allow it to be opened. After a rain my friend and I, on our bicycles, having cut the metallic sodium into little cubes and having kept it under kerosene, would take these small cubes out and throw one into each of these openings. Of course as we... a minute or so later after we drove by – it took that long for the reaction to occur – there would be an explosion, not a... like a gun shot or even less than a gun shot, and a flare of orange flame would shoot out of these openings. And, of course, the neighbours would come out and look at this and be uncertain as to actually what happened, because by this time we had disappeared, which was without the extent of the threats to my neighbours that I... that I made.
As a result of all this knowledge of chemistry, I also became very much interested in biology. I recall borrowing a book from the high school library that I was now about... that I had now entered, and it was a book on pond organisms, which opened up a whole new category of biology for me that I wasn't terribly interested in prior to that. And I recall getting a kind of microscope as a gift. It wasn't a standard microscope; it was... it's difficult to explain, in fact I don't recall in detail exactly how it worked, but it allowed me to look at pond organisms. That, of course, opened... as I say, opened up a whole new area of interest and fascinated me very much.

Having now arrived in high school, I guess it was at that time, the... I took… I was enrolled in a course of first year chemistry. And I aggravated the teacher very much, because in several cases I tried to correct what he was saying in respect to some chemical reactions. And, of course, he took a bit of offence at that, this young kid trying to correct the teacher. I didn't do it overtly in a way that would have terribly embarrassed him, but I did make the point. He finally realised what I... what my knowledge was at that age... at that time and he sequestered me in the stock room of the chemistry laboratory, which was very dangerous for him to have done, and he just wanted me to help out in the stockroom and arrange the chemicals and help out and a lot of scut work, because what he was teaching was way beyond my... way beyond what I had known; it was too primitive. That was dangerous, because it gave me the opportunity to now get chemicals whose names I didn't know, they were new to me, and so I moved up even more in respect to my chemistry knowledge. And he was... He turned out to be very friendly and we got along very well and he helped me learn even more than what was taught at that high school course.

I had also a very good physics teacher in high school, who encouraged my interest in physics. So all around in science I had some innate fascination with scientific things. It's, of course, not possible to explain in detail, even to myself, why that interest occurred, but it did. And went on to university after doing quite well in high school – I think I had... at that time the grades system was such that the highest grade was an E, standing for excellent – and I think virtually all of my marks were with an E.

I was actually competing, prior to the last year of school, with a fellow girl student for a scholarship that would've allowed me to go to any university in the United States with four years tuition... free tuition. I believe it was called the Mayor's Scholarship, that is, the mayor of Philadelphia, for whom it was named over many years. This girl was not all that brilliant in my mind and the minds of many of my friends at that time, but she managed to ingratiate herself, and her mother was a big help to her, with most of the teachers in that school. And she was also a good student. And she, as I recall now, won that Mayor's Scholarship, which disappointed me and I think half the class, because they all thought that I should have won it and that this girl really won it by influencing and becoming very... overly friendly with teachers.
In any case, I was, as a backup, given a... two awards, one was to Temple University, which is a university in Philadelphia. I wasn't interested in Temple University, because they didn't have the strengths in science that I knew existed at the University of Pennsylvania. Consequently I... Also the second award that I won was called the Bausch & Lomb Award, the microscope company, and that seemed to me, and to a number of my friends who were supporting me at the time, to be a kind of second class award, and consequently they persuaded me to do the following, which I probably wouldn't have done without one of my friends in particular, persuading me to do it. He was quite a cynic; he was a brilliant kid. His name was Edwin Bauer, now deceased. But Ed, who had, as I say, a brilliant mind, he convinced me to reject this Bausch & Lomb Award and protest for having lost the Mayor's Scholarship. And I did it. Of course it had no real meaning and any material sense, but it was quite satisfying to have the courage as a high school student, to do something like that; it, sort of, gave me more guts than I thought I had. Consequently. I actually had won a competitive contest, a written test, for a scholarship, a full scholarship to Temple University, but as I... and that was a city wide competition. As I said earlier, I rejected Temple not because it wasn't a good university, but only because its strength in science didn't compare with that of Penn, and so I decided to have a shot at getting admission to the University of Pennsylvania. I did that, I was accepted, and started my class, as I recall, in January of 1946, that is about six months after the actual war had ended. I use 'actual' for reasons that I'll explain in a minute.

I was accepted as a student and I learnt to my chagrin that most of my classmates... If I remember correctly I think I was the only Philadelphia High School student to be accepted at that time, because there was an enormous influx of war veterans who had had returned from the war, January 1946, and had now enrolled in university, so that my fellow students were many years older than me. I was, I think, 17 or maybe 18, and these fellows and women were in their mid to late 20s, which at that age is an enormous difference, many were former bomber pilots, bombardiers, lieutenant generals, etc., etc., and this was very disturbing for me, it was... I felt very uncomfortable competing with these people.

I also learned, by the third or fourth month of my course work at Penn that my parents really couldn't afford to send me to university and my sister also; I had one younger sister, younger by about a year and a half. So that when I went... when I learned this, I also learned that the, what we call the GI Bill, existed in the United States at that time and that the war legally, legally, was not over in the United States until 15th May of 1946. My 18th birthday, I now recall, was on the 20th May, five days after the war legally ended, which meant that I could have escaped the draft. The draft was still ongoing, it was… it was fading out, but I would have been drafted on 20th May... I'm sorry, on... on 20th May, but because the war ended on 15th May, I could escape. But I chose not to, because the GI Bill was very appealing. It would... It was an 18-month enlistment in the Army; it would then provide me, after that period of time, with a full four year scholarship, if you will, actually payment, to the University of Pennsylvania. And it would relieve my parents of that obligation, allow my sister to go to university and also in some way, I suppose, make me a bit more mature for the company that I would then have at the university.
And that's exactly what I did. I received a leave of absence, which allowed me to return when I finished my military obligation, and entered the military with a rather uneventful career.

I was stationed in the... at two facilities in the United States, the first... First of all I was trained, infantry training, at the Aberdeen Proving Grounds in Maryland. I was trained to repair 90 and 120 mm anti-aircraft guns. Upon graduation, probably the week before graduation, the military had moved from that kind of anti-aircraft weapon to radar guided weapons, which completely eclipsed my training.
And I was then sent to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, with an ordinance unit and was very bored with the jobs that were assigned to me, as were two or three other draftees from universities, all of whom, including myself, were assigned to sandpapering trucks in order to have them repainted. We felt we could contribute a bit more to our country than sandpapering military vehicles. And so we decided, after a long consideration, since we were Privates, the lowest possible rank in the Army, that one of us should go to the Captain of our unit and tell him that we are not complaining, but we would like to contribute more to our country than what had been assigned to us, and we would be delighted if he could find some work that was more challenging. Unfortunately, I drew the shortest straw and it was my duty then to go to the Captain and ask him whether that was possible. Fortunately, he was very receptive and within a week or two all of us were assigned to an instrument repair unit that was run by civilians. The repairs were made on small instruments – binoculars, watches, scopes of one sort or another – and this was much, much better. First of all it was challenging, we were all learning a new trade, so to speak, and that lasted for a while until we were moved to Fort Benning, Georgia, during the last year of my 18 months. And there I became friendly with a lieutenant who asked me to do several jobs for him that he felt were beneath him, or for which he had little time, one of which was for me to take charge of what's called the United States Armed Forces Institute, which is actually a kind of high school training programme for military who don't have high school training and want to get a high school diploma. I was sent to a school in Madison, Wisconsin, to learn how to do this. I set up an office with high... with books, but excellent books, they were all reproductions of poetry, English literature, science, nature, all kinds of instructive books that I put in this small library office that I had. But because there were so few men who were interested in doing this I had a lot of free time. And during the last eight or ten... eight or six months of my experience at Fort Benning I had also a car available that took me every afternoon to the Fort Benning Post Library, which was wonderful, because now I could read my way through that library for the next eight months, which is what I did.

When I was discharged I went back to Penn and was uncertain as to what I wanted to major in. I decided that when I was forced to choose my major, I had just started a course – I think I had been part way through it – in microbiology, and that was fascinating. Also... that also perked me up when on the first day of that course, during the laboratory, we had a laboratory experiment, a laboratory that was associated with the lecturing, a laboratory assistant, a girl, walked in with a tray and on the tray were test tubes. Of course I knew by then... I knew what test tubes were, but what I didn't know was that in those test tubes were what we call slants, which means that the test tube is slanted on a surface with one end raised about 15 degrees into which one pours molten agar, which is like... which is a gelatine. And after the gelatine sets the tube can be then set on its end so that that slanted surface remains covering along half the wall of the test tube. And then the agar is streaked with a fine needle with some micro... some bacterial organism. And usually the streaking is done in a wave fashion so that you laid down a wave of individual microorganisms, which of course you cannot see at that point. Then you put this business in an incubator at body temperature and within a day or a few days you get the microorganisms growing. And what she had brought in on that tray were about 30 or 40 of these slanted test tubes on which were wavy patterns of microorganisms with different colours, brilliant colours – red, yellow, brilliant white, green – and that, for some reason or other, triggered my... my fascination with 'what that was all about.' Of course I knew nothing about that at the time.
And because of that experience I settled on microbiology as my major in... at the University of Pennsylvania. Took a lot of courses in microbiology, biochemistry, single cell animals, amoeba, parasitology, and of course I took all of the other courses that were required for a rounded education in history and arts and language, etc. Graduated and because by this time I had caught the eye of the professor of microbiology, he found a job that he thought I would be interested in at a company called Sharp and Dohme in... right outside of Philadelphia.
So I decided to take that job, because it was working with bacteria. And I also knew at the time, before even taking the job, that Sharp and Dohme had just been acquired by Merck, of course a giant pharmaceutical company, and that I would soon be moving from that location outside of south west Philadelphia, to a point north of Philadelphia, called North Wales, but I took the job understanding that.

And that job was very interesting. The goal of the work that I was doing was to be involved in an assay for an enzyme that destroyed blood clots. And this enzyme was produced by a streptococcus that we grew in huge tanks, tanks a couple of... at least at that time, huge – they're much bigger today – about three metres high and holding maybe 1,000 litres of fluid, in which we grew this organism and then it was processed in order to extract the enzyme we were interested in. This was a pathogenic organism, so that we had to worry very much about aseptic techniques, that is, sterile techniques, techniques to prevent ourselves from being exposed to this organism.
And all of that added up to a very, very interesting experience that I... was carried over, of course, when we moved from that point to Merck's facilities in North Wales, Pennsylvania, right north of Philadelphia. And that facility was... had just been built, it was a huge horseshoe shaped building, state of the art research laboratories in which I was now a part of one. And my boss was a very nice fellow, a man by the name of Aaron Wasserman, who had spent his military career in Europe and trained in the UK and, in fact, married a British woman. He was a wonderful guy; he encouraged me in my interest in microbiology, as did his boss, who was the department chairman, a man by the name of Willard Verwey, both of whom were very influential in my love of microbiology. I also met several other people there, one of whom was a virologist, and people who were involved in biochemistry. So my interests began to become even more expanded than they were.
By this time, since I still had some... I still had some friends at Penn who had gone on to get a Master's Degree, and some of them even were pursuing a PhD, I had not done that, first of all because of financial considerations, but more importantly, as I recall, I did not feel that I had the ability to obtain a Master's Degree or a PhD. And I don't know what that... what kind of message that sends, but that's how I felt about myself. I just looked and had experience now with some PhDs at Merck and just thought their broad knowledge was so great that I could never achieve that level of understanding.

After about a year at Merck, during which time I should say I met my wife, I had contact with a good friend, as I say, still at Penn [University of Pennsylvania] and pursuing a Master's Degree in the medical microbiology department, which was in the Medical School, unlike the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences where the microbiology training that I had took place. And he kept me apprised as we met from time to time, of what he was working on. He happened to be working on what was then called pleuropneumonia-like organisms. Today the name is 'mycoplasma'. These organisms are the smallest free living organisms, that is, they're so small yet they have the ability to grow on a dead source of nutrients. That distinguishes them from viruses, which are a bit smaller than these mycoplasmas, but can only replicate on a living cell or in a living cell.
And as time grew... passed I became more and more interested, not only in these organisms, but also in the idea of going back to Penn and trying to get a higher degree. I realised by this time that that might be doable. I went in to see my... to see Wasserman and Verwey, they encouraged me, which was a big plus. Of course I was living at home still with my parents and so my financial obligations were very low and my income at that time was... was great for a single fellow living at home and paying very little for his upkeep, and so I had accumulated modest savings. And I think I accumulated sufficient savings to go to Penn for one year. So that did indeed happen. I made application for Graduate School and in particular, to be accepted by a professor in that department who was the leading authority on these microorganisms.

I was accepted as a graduate student. And unfortunately this fellow, whose name was Harry Morton, a wonderful guy, a rather stiff fellow, but still a very good teacher, decided that he didn’t want... couldn’t take me as a student, because he had too many students already. That was a big disappointment, but as it turned out it didn’t have a great negative effect. I was assigned to be the student of a new assistant professor, who technically was not allowed to have graduate students, but on paper I was the student of the department chairman to get around that red tape. So I was technically the student of the chairman of the department, whose name was Stuart Mudd, M-U-D-D, a very well-known microbiologist at that time, a wonderful man, very liberal, who got himself, unfortunately, into a lot of trouble because he started... at one point in his career, I guess a few years after I got there, had founded an organisation called Russian-American Friendship Society in an effort to try to overcome the vast misunderstandings between the two countries. And as a result of that he suffered by a lot of rightwing nationalists, but he was independently wealthy, fortunately so, he could overcome that. But it coloured his experience and also the experience... understanding and knowledge of some of the students who realised what a great guy he was, that his motivations were purely to help countries and help people and on the other hand, he suffered these terrible blows from the rightwing. So that was, kind of, important attitude that coloured some of my experience and that of others.
My adviser, this assistant professor, his name was Warren Steinbring, again a very nice soft-spoken fellow, husky build, was a former football player, he was fascinated with microorganisms as I was. And also I had a fellow student assigned to the same young professor, a man by the name of Frank Kapral. And Frank was a committed microbiologist and committed not only to microbiology, but to a specific organism, that is, a streptococci and he could not be dissuaded from working with any other organism but that. My interests, of course, were with these strange mycoplasmas.

Warren Steinbring did something that then had a fantastic influence on my career. For reasons unknown to me, he decided to take a course at the Mary Jane Bassett Hospital in New York State. But the first course in cell culture... At that time it was called tissue culture, which to some... large extent was a misnomer, because you actually don't culture tissues, that's rarely done, you culture... cells, that is, the cells that compose tissues. So Warren took this course and by this time Frank Kapral and I were disgusted with the primitive laboratory conditions that we had. And they were primitive, the building was from the late 18th... 19th century and the laboratory facilities were crude, almost antique. And since we had to work... work using what's called aseptic technique, that is, to work with the organism of interest and to prevent the contamination of that organism in the vessels that one was using with other microorganisms, so you had to know what's called sterile technique, how to work with a Bunsen burner, to sterilise instruments and the mouths of the containers, and so that was all learned. But in these primitive conditions that we had in this laboratory, it was very difficult and we needed to redesign the laboratory such that it would improve our aseptic technique. This happened to... We happened to realise this at the beginning of our first summer as students, while Warren was away taking this course in cell culture.

Frank was... had a lot of experience in carpentry; I had no experience whatsoever. He had, in fact, built a house with an uncle of his so he knew a lot about carpentry. And he said, 'Len, we really should take a month off, or six weeks off, and build this laboratory or else we're not going to be able to do our PhD work, our laboratory work, here properly.' And I agreed with him, it was obvious. Neither of us had the funds to buy the materials necessary to do this. Again, I lost the bet with Frank as to who would go to Stuart Mudd, the chairman of the department, who, as I say, was independently wealthy and supported a lot of people out of his pocket at that time, who should go to Stuart Mudd and ask for funding. I lost the contest, whatever it was, went into see Stuart Mudd, told him what the story was and he simply, as I recall, reached into his pocket, took out $75, which at that time was an enormous sum of money, gave it to me and wished me luck. And in that context, of course, approved what we intended to do, which was really modest, but it meant construction.
Frank and I spent the next six weeks building this laboratory that was quite good. We next needed an incubator, because it's necessary, of course, to put cultures into an incubator that is held at 37 degrees Celsius, 98 degrees Fahrenheit. And I remember the first piece of equipment that I bought was bought from the Sears and Roebuck catalogue; it was a chicken egg incubator, which cost, I think, about $40 or less. And that incubator could now be used for microbiology work, because you could adjust the temperature to precisely 37 degrees, unlike the higher degree necessary for egg... for embryo genesis in chick eggs. That work... So that was the start of our laboratory. By this time Warren Steinbring came home from the course, full of enormous enthusiasm in respect to what the future would be using cell culture. Of course, I had never heard of cell culture, which as people know today, is simply growing cells from humans and animals in bottles or test tubes and other types of equipment.

So Warren, with his enthusiasm, tried to persuade Frank and me to shift our interest from the microorganisms we were then interested in to cell culture. We both resisted; we resisted for several weeks. Frank dug his heels in so hard he wouldn't even consider it. On the other hand, I was less intractable and agreed to at least learn the technique. And I compromised with Warren, I said, 'Okay, I'll allow you to teach me cell culture', with the understanding that I will try to grow these organisms in cell culture. We knew nothing about their behaviour under those circumstances, and it seemed like an attractive thing to do, because it was known that these organisms that were then highly associated with veterinary diseases, diseases in chickens, turkeys, pigs, etc., had a cellular affinity. And so that bridge was okay with me and, of course, it was okay with Warren, because it gave him an opportunity to teach us this... teach me this technique, which he did do.

The teaching was relatively simple, because all of the techniques used in bacteriology or microbiology are identical to the ones that are used in cell culture, the only difference is that you're working with cells and not bacteria, and, of course, cells are much bigger than bacteria. In any case that made the transition very simple in a matter of days. And I started to grow chick egg... chick embryo tissue in cell culture and to work with those cells in which I had introduced... I'm slipping on the term, because at that time they were called PPLO, or pleuropneumonia-like organisms, today they're called 'mycoplasmas', and that's, of course, what I was working with.

As a Master's Degree student at that point, I was sent over to the Wistar Institute, which is right on the University of Pennsylvania campus. It later turned out, of course, I spent most... a large part of my professional life there, so I'll say a word or two about it, because it's important in respect to how it impacted on my scientific career.
The Wistar Institute is the oldest biological research institute in the United States. It was built by a foresighted member of the Wistar family, a very wealthy, influential Philadelphia family, one of the members was a General during the Civil War, and there... one of them had enough foresight to build this institute, which is technically called the Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology. My original contact with that institute, which also is to some extent influential on my career, was as a high school student.

The Institute was founded by a member of the Wistar family, a very well-known, at least in the 19th century, Philadelphia family, who had some wealth. They had several influential members, one of whom was a General during the Civil War, and they had... they built a substantial library, in addition to which one of the members chose, with enormous foresight, to establish an Institute technically called the Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, which had been built in the 1880s and was the first and oldest biological research institute in the United States. It sits in the middle of the University of Pennsylvania campus, but... and has ties to the university, of course, but it remains independent from the university in respect to management, budget, etc. In order to demonstrate its independence from the institute... from the university, my chief, when I returned many years later, just to give you an idea… humorous aside, would demonstrate his independence, the independence of the institute from the university. The director at that time was Hilary Koprowski, about whom I'll discuss more later. Hilary would pull out a bottle of whisky or claret and pour it for a visitor in order to prove that, unlike the University of Pennsylvania where that is absolutely forbidden and you could probably be sacked for doing it, he was able to do it without fear of any reprisal, because it was an independent institute.

The Institute was a fascinating place. I went there as a graduate student, because at that time I was assigned to look at an infection in the animal colony. The Wistar Institute had a world famous animal colony of rats, of albino rats. In fact, virtually every albino rat colony in the world is derivative of a pair of rats from that source. Those rats were originally developed, if you will, by a woman scientist in the late 1800s, early 1900s, from two... from a pair of Philadelphia albino sewer rats. And they had profound impact on research over the next 60 years. I won't go into those details because they're not appropriate for my... for the discussion. But it's important to mention that, because they were a valuable resource and because they were known to have an infection called middle ear infection and there was some suspicion that these mycoplasmas might be involved as the ideological agent of that ailment.
So I set up a small lab at the Wistar Institute rat colony and I was also given a laboratory in the main building. The main building had a very interesting activity that was its major activity that occupied almost a single floor of this three-storey building. The rest of the building was virtually empty, except for a fascinating museum on the first floor – that I think I overlooked in one of my earlier statements – that is, that I had been introduced to the Wistar Institute as a high school student, because this… this museum housed something that interested a lot of students who whispered it to each other and that's how it was usually known to be of interest.

My first knowledge of the Wistar Institute occurred with my visits to Dolby's, that I earlier explained, had their facility right next to Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania campus, but although I know of its existence, I didn't enter that institute until I learned during my high school days, after it had been whispered around that there was something of interest there, that I decided to make a visit. And what was of interest that had been whispered among the high school kids, was that a collection of human embryonic anomalies, disfigured human embryos, in large jars in formalin probably, that represented very bizarre appearances. Several of the embryos were Cyclops; several had two heads, multiple extremities, multiple fingers, an entire collection of these kinds of bizarre human embryonic pathologies. And of course that was fascinating for young kids in their late teens. And I had gone there several times to see these, prior to my experiences as a student at Pen. And so I knew about that collection and several other interesting anatomical exhibits at the Wistar Institute museum on the first floor. So having that as a background, and now finding myself there as a student, was rather interesting, to say nothing of the laboratory that I had in the animal colony where my thesis was to look at the etiology of middle ear infections in the Wistar rats.

I should say parenthetically, that by this time I had been persuaded not to stop at a Master's degree, but to continue on and get a PhD and do a proper research project that would be much greater of course than what was required for a Master degree. And so I had agreed to do this, also because by this time I had won a fellowship in graduate school that would pay, I think, virtually all of my... all of my tuition, and since I had some savings, and was still living at home, my costs were minimal.
I also should mention that these events of course occurred after I had returned from military service, and received in addition to the four years of stipend at Pen [University of Pennsylvania], I also received $75 a month in subsistence, which at that time was a substantial sum. In fact it allowed me to support my entire family for a number of years, because I should also mention that when I was a freshman student at Pen, my father, who had decided to join a cousin, and go into business with him in the dental mechanic field – that arrangement failed and my father was now left alone, he could not get his old job back with a major dental company that he had... that he had been at for, I think, 40 years, and so he had to go into business for himself, and consequently he needed a laboratory built. Fortunately I had a good friend who had a good knowledge of carpentry and plumbing and electrical work, and together we built my father a laboratory during my freshman year, which was very costly to me because I almost failed my freshman year since I had to spend so much time building that laboratory and setting it up for my father.
I also, as this time went by, had taken a course in accounting at the Wharton School, because I was not clear, as I said earlier, what my major would be at the university, and I thought I should do a little experimenting and go into... take a course in the business school. So I had a bit of training, at least a first year course in accounting, and so I could handle some of the business matters which I later turned over to my mother who ran, with my father, that business for the next few decades. But it was costly in respect to the damage it did to my grades during the first, perhaps on to the second year at Pen. But I recovered from that and did pretty well after that time.

When I first went over to the Wistar Institute as a student, and started my... actually by this time I turned my Master dissertation into pursuit of a PhD, and so chose this bigger project of the etiology of middle ear infection in the Wistar Institute rat colony. The institute, as I mentioned, was a three story building. The first floor was almost completely filled with laboratories, but the second floor was totally empty, and I had my pick of an entire floor of labs. These labs looked like laboratories that... and they were laboratories of course, they were built in the late 19th century, with antique Bunsen burners available, wrought iron filigree in the lab, nothing like you would see today.
That was rather interesting and... but the facilities were adequate for what I wanted to do. The centre of the Wistar Institute at that time was hollow from the roof to the floor as a kind of appealing architectural feature for the interior of the building, and in that open space, four sides of which consisted of laboratories, in that huge open space, there was suspended a huge whale skeleton, it was enormous, and that also fascinated people who came in. I mention that only because it stood outside of my laboratory, and so I have a vivid memory of the whale skeleton sitting outside of my PhD dissertation laboratory on the second floor of the Wistar Institute, including in the little lab I had in the animal colony.

After several months I did indeed isolate mycoplasmas from the middle ears of these animals, but it also turned out that the middle ears were infected with another microorganism, a very strange microorganism, who's name escapes me at the moment, but it's not terribly critical, but this microorganism was of interest because it had properties of mycoplasmas, yet it was a bacterium. It was investigated to a large extent by a German woman scientist who immigrated to the UK and worked at the Lister Institute in London, and her name was Emmy Klieneberger-Nobel, one of the famous names in the beginning of the research done on mycoplasmas.
This strange organism, which is called streptobacillus moniliformis, had features shared with the mycoplasmas whose details are not terribly important at this point, but because of the shared features, that people thought that mycoplasmas could arise from streptobacillus moniliformis, because it had a large bulge on part of its anatomy, of course it's a microscopic organism, and people thought that the reproductive units for mycoplasmas might be contained within those bulges on the part of this microorganism. That was the connection; there were other connections as well. But although I isolated both organisms, I don't... I never really established the etiology of the disease during my career there, although I did find out that it was present in virtually all middle ear infections. I also learned to my surprise... I remember being told this by my chief, Warren Steinbring, who came to me one day and he said, 'You know, Len', he said, 'you're the only one in the department who has ever isolated mycoplasmas free in nature. All of the mycoplasmas used in the department were cultures that were obtained from other investigators around the world, but you have managed to isolate one free in nature', and I was puzzled by this, I didn't realise it, but that's a satisfying thing to know.

I also should mention two important things about the Wistar Institute at that time. One was – and they're important because I interacted with these people during my stay there – there was one laboratory run by a man, a well known man at that time called Edmund Farris. He was well known because he wrote a famous book called The Biology of the Laboratory Mouse, I think was the title, and it was kind of the bible of those who did research using mice. In addition to which, Edmund Farris ran what I believe is correct to say, the first artificial, that is human, Artificial Insemination Institute in the United States, and that was what housed the laboratories on the top floor of the Wistar Institute. And I did interact with the folks there and became fascinated with what was happening, because Edmund Farris had his major... his success was largely due to the availability of the Wistar rats, in particular, virgin female rats. Because at that time there was a test to determine pregnancy in women, unlike the tests that are done today, which then of course was rather crude. It involved taking a morning urine specimen, inoculating it into a part of the anatomy of a virgin female rat, and then two or three days later, opening the rat and looking at its ovaries. If the vessels, the blood vessels surrounding the ovaries were swollen and red, it meant that the... that the... that estrogen and other hormones produced by women at the time of conception, were now being made in greater quantities and easily identified by this method. It was called 'the Aschheim-Zondek test', a test that's no longer done. With that capability, Edmund Farris was able to determine, of course, the ovulation time of a woman who wanted to become pregnant, and was very successful in doing artificial insemination. The sperm was contributed by graduate students and medical students at the University of Pennsylvania. This was a very successful enterprise. I remember distinctly women coming up the stairs, this great set of wrought iron stairs that's... that's iconic for the Wistar Institute, carrying a young baby in order to show it to Dr Farris and express their pleasure with what he had succeeded in helping them do.

Farris also learned how to determine the viability of sperm under the microscope by various techniques, so he was quite a character. He was a very short man with a very strong personality, a kind of Napoleonic gentleman. That of course was another source of interest to me because of the biology involved, but he suffered terribly, because ultimately some enterprising newspaper reporters... reported this facility in negative terms, and threatened to close it down, because the people who were actually doing the insertion of sperm into the women who wished to be impregnated, were using... the people who were doing this were men who were using instruments of course to do this, and they were not physicians. And so the medical society finally decided to insist that a physician do that part... part of the procedure which they did do.
Subsequently, another impasse occurred, and I remember this pretty distinctly, the catholic leadership in Philadelphia opposed this, for reasons that escape me at the moment, they opposed it violently. It was reported in the newspapers and Farris's operation had to be closed down, which was one of my first exposures, I guess, to ethical considerations in biology, and whether that was the right thing or the wrong thing to do.

The second facility had an even greater impact on me. It was, for reasons unknown to me, a gentleman from a major pharmaceutical company established a laboratory on one of the remaining floors of the Wistar Institute, and I think it was also on the floor occupied by Farris but on the opposite end of the building, so they were quite distant, and that fellow was a virologist. This was my first contact with people in virology. It also attracted two or three of my friends at the University of Pennsylvania who became graduate students in that facility. And because they were so close to me physically, and also as friends, I visited them frequently, and I learned... and what they had also there was a cell culture facility, and they were culturing cells in fermentation tanks, the first time I had ever seen this done, and I believe they were pretty much the first people to grow cells in fermentation tanks, which was a very fascinating thing to see – to grow human and animal cells in large tanks, and then to retrieve the cells and do various studies with them, with the viruses, was... was again a very exciting experience. So my interests were continuing to develop in those directions as well. There were other events that occurred in respect of, kind of, cell culture works that they were doing that also had some influence on my thinking.

My next step of course was to find a position. Well, Warren Steinbring, my boss at that time, about a year before I left, before I was finished, he decided to accept a job at the University of Texas, in Galveston, Texas, with a world famous cell culturist by the name of Charles Pomerat, who was a pioneer in cell culture. And Warren, because we were... by this time we were to be good friends, not only as a student and teacher, but actually very good friends, he discovered that there was a place for me in that laboratory, and I accepted that opportunity.
My wife and I travelled to Galveston, Texas, found a small apartment there. I believe by this time my wife was pregnant with the first of our five children, and because of various connections with Pen and the University of Texas, I recall that I was given the name of a woman paediatrician who could help with my wife and the newborn. And I arrived at the University of Texas in Galveston, technically I was part of the department of microbiology there, but... and I had a small lab in that department, but I also had a... I had a laboratory, not quite a laboratory, but a shared space I guess is the best way to put it, in the laboratory of Charles Pomerat.

Charles Pomerat was probably one of the two or three most interesting men in my life in respect to his... his abilities. He was not only a cell, a good cell culturist, but he was also expert, hard to believe, in architecture, marine biology, and two or three other disciplines in which he lectured at the University of Texas. He was technically professor of anatomy. He was a very charming fellow, he just mesmerised people, and they met him because of his ability... his ability to express himself in very interesting terms. He was very outgoing. He was also a master cook, especially of Japanese cuisine, only because he had been, I think I was told, the first biologist to go to Japan after the war, and he met the then pioneer Japanese cell culturists and learned about their equipment, which was fantastic equipment, some of which he brought back to his own lab, glassware, this was pre... before plastic ware was introduced into this discipline, but Charlie Pomerat brought back glassware from Japan that looked more or less like jewellery, it was so beautifully crafted, and some techniques that he used in his laboratory. The facility then gave me the opportunity to learn from a master, and I did.

My goal at that time was to look for viruses in the human tissue, because it had just been discovered that in the adenoids and tonsils obtained from humans, a new class of viruses was discovered called 'the adenoviruses', of which there are several dozen, if not a greater number than that by now. Well, that seemed to be a very fascinating observation. The viruses didn't seem to be directly involved with the disease and people from whom it came, they seem to be hiding in the cells and maybe popping up from time to time, nobody knew, but I decided to work with them, especially because I have access to the cell culture facilities, and because those working with the cultures at that time... I'm sorry, working with... who had discovered those viruses in Washington, Bob Huebner by name, and Maurice Hilleman, another significant person in my professional life, had... were working with these viruses and had indeed discovered them.
But Charlie Pomerat had fantastic cell culture facilities in which to do the kind of things that I couldn't... was trying to do, namely, to infect cell cultures with these viruses and then to see what... how the cells behaved, by see I mean: taking advantage of Charlie Pomerat's worldwide skills, known skills, in what's called 'Phase Contrast Time-Lapse Cinemicrophotography', a long word that simply means that you're taking picture through a microscope of cells that are kept in chambers, and the pictures are taken one frame per period of time, let's say 30 seconds or a minute. And we now... many people now know this technique, Time-Lapse Photography, where you see a flower at the bud stage, then bursting into full bloom over a period of a minute. So that's the kind of thing you can now do in Charlie's lab, under the microscope – through the microscope, I should say – with cells, which allowed for the discovery of things that otherwise could not have been discovered. For example, Charles Pomerat, by this method, and I think probably could not have been discovered by any other method, discovered that the nucleus of the cell rotates like a wheel. And, in fact, it was theorised that that's how materials made within the nucleus, that is proteins or whatever, are... escape from the nucleus through the pores in that nucleus as it rotates, a rather obvious possibility. It was later learned that this is not quite true. In any case, that's an example of the kind of things that were being discovered at that time, and I was really enjoying this experience very much.
I also met Morris Pollard, who was in another department at the University of Texas right near Pomerat's department, and he was a major figure in the field of biology, we became very friendly, and I learned a lot from Morris Pollard about virology. The work that I did with Charlie Pomerat allowed me, as I said earlier, to interact with a lot of interesting people, and to learn a lot of techniques that were very helpful to me in my later... later part of my career.

One of the interesting things that happened I believe a year before I came to that laboratory that's worth mentioning, because it was still vibrating in the laboratory when I arrived, was a discovery made by a Chinese-American named TC Hsu, H-S-U. TC as he was affectionately known was a worker in Charlie Pomerat's laboratory at a time when it was thought to be true that humans have 48 chromosomes, so that will give you some idea of how primitive our knowledge was at that time which was in the early 1950s, I'm sorry, middle 1950s.
TC's project was to find a way of actually counting chromosomes in cells and culture. Previously people tried to do it in the cells that were dividing in tissue, which is very difficult because you have a three dimensional material and you're looking for a cell that by luck you happen to see dividing, and by luck are able to stain its chromosomes and count them, and that's why 48 became the popular number although it later turned out to be wrong because of the difficulty of doing it. But when you have single cells sitting on the floor of a bottle dividing, you don't have the obstruction of cells on either side, rather top and bottom, and consequently you can do all kinds of tricks.
Well, to shorten this story, TC was trying out a number of different ways of doing this, different solutions and chemicals, when he accepted a job at the Cancer Institute in Houston, Texas, which is just about 50 miles north of Galveston, and he carried these experiments with him, of course, to Houston. But while doing this he… and going back and forth between the two labs in his move, one day he walked into the lab at Pomerat's facility, and under the microscope the chromosomes and a single cell spread out and easily counted. They were not sitting on top of each other like a stack of straws, they were actually spread out. If you imagine a stack of matchsticks all piled on top of each other making it very difficult to count them, and now you see them spread out, separated from each other on a flat surface, easily countable. Well that was a eureka moment of course for him, and he was told by his technician who had set the experiments up for him up for him, how she did this. He went back to Houston, tried to repeat it, and failed, came back to the Pomerat lab, tried to do it again in Pomerat's lab and succeeded. In the Houston lab it didn't work, in the Pomerat lab it did, why? After some worrying and exploring, they discovered the technician had made a mistake, the technician had used, instead of the solution that TC had designed, somehow or other she had simply autoclaved or sterilized Galveston tap water, and that's what worked. We later learned out why – it's a very interesting and important story, because it tells you how accidents, and I'll describe several other accidents later, how accidents yield important results.

The accident here was, not only did the technician use Galveston tap water, but by this time, the city of Galveston, which had a rather corrupt government at that time, it was well known throughout the United States. The water supply for Galveston, which is a city on an island right off shore from the mainland of Texas, its water supply is supplied through a large pipe running under Galveston Bay from the mainland to the island, and that's a rather large diameter pipe, and that's the source of Galveston water.
Over the years corrosion occurred in this pipe, allowing Galveston... sea water to enter and mix with the fresh water. It so happened that the city leaders were persuaded not to make repairs in this pipe because it would have been a situation that would have annihilated all of the sellers of fresh water to residents of Galveston, so they paid off the city leaders not to repair the pipe. Well, that was a huge plus for science, because the osmolarity of the water that the technician had mistakenly used was hypotonic, which means that it allowed the cells to swell, and that's what provided the conditions for spreading the chromosomes. To this day people who use that technique, and there are thousands, when they make up the solution to provide the spreading phenomena, proper osmolarity, are essentially making Galveston tap water of the 1950s.

During my period in Pomerat's lab I met a fellow scientist who was very important subsequently in my career. This was a fellow by the name of Paul Moorhead. Paul was an expert cytogeneticist, which means he studied genetics by staining chromosomes and looking at their morphology and other characteristics. Paul and I became very good friends. By this time I had produced a number of time-lapse films of the effects of adenoviruses on human cells. In fact, I still have those films and I'm looking for a home for them at this time since they have some historical value in respect of some other considerations. But Pomerat's lab was a hot bed of activity, not only because of his personality and the approximately dozen or more visiting scientists that came through that lab during the two years that I was there, I met a lot of interesting people. There also are a number of very humorous, in most cases, stories about Charlie Pomerat that I think make interesting anecdotes. I'll mention one or two very briefly.
He had funding from several military sources who were funding him for research on anaesthetics and other things that had some connection with... military medicine. And in his, in Charlie Pomerat's laboratory, he would have at least ten microscopes set up with cameras above the microscope facing down a long tube that ran down to the microscope itself, and electronically controlled, taking a photograph every 30 or 40 seconds in order to produce these time-lapse cinematic images that he was so famous for. And consequently, when you entered his lab you would hear the clicking of a dozen or 20 of these cameras going off at any one time and people adjusting the focus, and consequently it was a kind of fascinating place to be in.
On one occasion three or four military arrived to inspect the facilities, to see how their projects were going, and Charlie Pomerat had a... a habit of holding a meeting every morning at about 11 o'clock in which the entire lab came in to discuss their work, one person did it each day of the week, a different day of the week or, and if visitors were present they were invited so that he held forth, which he loved to do, he loved to have an audience, and he could hold forth and comment on what was being said and say, make some profound statements. It turned out that several military arrived one day, toured the lab, and started asking him questions. Charlie Pomerat wore in the laboratory, a long white apron type laboratory coat, it wasn't a standard laboratory coat, it was like that used by a butcher or a barber in those days. The military folks kept asking Charlie questions and he would respond, 'I'll answer them after we tour the lab in our meeting at 11 o'clock. We have no secrets in this laboratory, everything is open to the public. I will answer all your questions, but please wait until we get up to the level.' 11 o'clock we'd go up to this long boardroom-like setup, this was a long table around which 15 or 20 laboratory members sat and there are now invited military guests. Charlie would always appear after everybody was seated to make a grand entrance, and he did so. As he strolled into the room, at the other end of the conference table, sat a lady from Germany, a technician, by the name of Ursula, and Ursula started to snicker and we all looked over at her, she was kind of overt about it, and then we turned our eyes toward Charlie as he entered the room, and what we discovered was that in addition to his white coat, this apron like thing that he wore, he also wore white duck pants, and each stride that he took, exposed a slit in the trousers that revealed his polka-dotted shorts. To everybody's astonishment, here is this very respected scientist striding into his office with his shorts exposed with every stride. Well, he realised what was going on, looked down at his exposed shorts, opened them even wider and pronounced, 'As I told you up in the laboratory, we have no secrets here', which was a perfect statement of course. But this is typical of him. He was just a brilliant recontour, and an amazing personality.

After these really good years spent in Galveston, I had exhausted my stay there, because I had come there on a fellowship that provided me with a salary, and that fellowship I think was two years if I remember correctly. So my two years were about to be finished. The fellowship gave me an enormous salary at that time of I believe, 55 hundred dollars a year. It was enormous because as a fellowship, and in those days it was tax exempt, so the salary was really several thousand dollars more in respect to what it would have been if it was taxable. So it was a good salary, although I should say parenthetically that my wife who was an artist and had a very good job in Philadelphia before we left at an advertising agency, was making $10,000 when we left Philadelphia, so we actually had an income far less than what she was making. In any case that was sufficient for us to have... to start our family. We had two children while in Galveston.

So it was now necessary for me to move on, look for another job, and I sent letters to former professors and friends in Philadelphia and others. One of the letters fortunately was sent to a former teacher of mine who I really well respected, liked very much, his name was Warner Henley. Warner was a world renowned virologist as was his wife. They worked at Children's Hospital in Philadelphia. And it was at this time that the Wistar Institute underwent a major change. It was decided by a committee I believe composed from some people from Pen and others, that they should look for a permanent director of the entire institute and set a policy for research activities there that would somehow be more structured than what had existed heretofore.
They hired Hilary Koprowski, an internationally known and respected virologist, who was a Polish ex-patriot. And Hilary came to the Wistar Institute, not from Poland, because he had migrated from Poland to South America where... and then from South America to New York State where he worked for a major pharmaceutical company, and it was at that company that he left in order to become director of the Wistar Institute. And this, of course, was all well known to Warner Henley who suggested to Hilary Kaprowski that because Hilary was interested in establishing a cell culture unit at the Wistar Institute that he might get in touch with me.

Hilary was a virologist, he was a polio vaccine pioneer, he knew that cell culture by this time was important, and the field was by this time was becoming important in the lives of many people. So I happened to be very fortunate in entering the field almost at its inception, I should say its renaissance, because it technically began in 1900 with some significant events occurring between 1900 and 1958 which is when I arrived at the Wistar Institute, but I'll return to those significant events later, in a later context. Also Hilary was... knew many of the world's leading virologists, many geneticists, he also had a personality very much like Charlie Pomerat. He was an exceptionally good host. He was well spoken. He was a charming person. An excellent researcher, lots of foresight, that's on the plus side. On a minus side, he was known that if you crossed him in any way that offended him or went against his wishes, he could be a very serious foe. And that side of him was also known. But it should be said that he was a charming person, and I... I, on the whole, enjoyed him as a boss with some exceptions that are referred to later.

So Hilary did indeed hire me, and we, my wife and I, took our two young infants in an automobile and drove from Galveston, Texas to Philadelphia with one infant in the back seat of the car, this was a sedan so it had a back seat, in which I fashioned a platform so that my young son could play back there. And my young daughter was so... so young an infant that we had her in a drawer suspended under the dashboard of the Pontiac car that we drove to Philadelphia.
They were perfectly comfortable, and of course at that time there was no such thing as belts or seats for kids. In any case, we made it to Philadelphia. We rented a house there while we looked for a permanent home, and started my work at the Wistar Institute.

My job technically was to operate a central cell culture facility to produce cell cultures for use by other members of the institute. And I should say a word or two about the structure of the institute. Hilary brought with him to the Wistar Institute several people from the pharmaceutical company in, that he left, and all of them actually became good friends of mine. He also hired several other people in building the labs, and I should say parenthetically that when I arrived in 1958, Hilary had gotten sufficient funds to remodel the entire institute. To do away with the museum and to build laboratories and conference rooms, and rebuild the library that existed already at the Wistar Institute, a very interesting 19th-century medical library, an anatomical library, so that we had to wait, as I recall, about six months before the construction was completed.
During that time I shared laboratory space in a semi-circular shaped room, which was an old anatomical laboratory, with several other of the scientists who worked there and their technicians, we just sort of spread out over this semi-circular shaped table that ran underneath the windows on that floor, and it was large, this was a very large room. Of course very little could be done there. We used to have a saying that it was very difficult to do cell culture in that room because the construction had been such that it allowed the cells to grow in a growth medium that contained 10% plaster, to give you some idea of the primitive working conditions through that six-month period. Of course it was worth the wait because we knew that we were going to end up with very beautiful luxurious labs, and we did.

Hilary Kaprowski was a pioneer in polio vaccines. In fact, that's not widely known for reasons that I'm unaware of, but he was the first actually to produce and test a live virus vaccine, contrary to the popular belief that it was Albert Sabin, it was not Albert Sabin, it was Hilary Kaprowski.

One of my memories at that time is that Jonas Salk walked into the lab, this primitive lab, while we waited for the renovation being finished. And so I was introduced to Jonas and ultimately we became... we became well known to each other. But at the initial meeting, since by this time he gained a considerable... considerable notoriety but was not really known to the public as well as he was of course after the vaccine was accepted. But we did become somewhat casual friends.

The move then was made to the permanent lab, I had very good facilities. We had then – what we don't have now – we had what were called, are called, sterile rooms. They were very small rooms outfitted with work surfaces and ultraviolet lamps. These small rooms lined both sides of my rather large lab, and it was in these rooms that you did your sterile work with cell culture, of course the... one of the main problems with culturing human and animal cells in bottles and flasks is to keep out microorganisms, because if they fall in the soup in which the cells are growing, they will grow better than the cells and foul up any experiment you are doing by contaminating the cells. So the purpose of these small rooms was to achieve that goal of maximum sterility.
We did not have what we now have today, which are filters of such small diameter holes that they can filter out bacteria, they're called 'Hepa Filters', they did not exist. We relied substantially on ultra violet lamps, which of course kill whatever is on a surface but not what's not under a thin surface. And those lights were turned on every night in these small sterile rooms, turned off the next morning, and people worked in these... I think I had five or six of these small workrooms.

I started to do what I was hired to do, namely start to grow the kinds of cell cultures that people in the Institute wanted, and to also take charge of my ancillary assignment which was to manage the media production facilities, because most of the people in the building, not all, but most were working in virology, and by this time, this renaissance of cell culture had exploded and all... this was actually what I have called frequently the 'golden era of virology', because virologists discovered that because, obviously viruses required... require living cells to replicate, and replication is vital to most studies of viruses, not all, they needed to learn how to do cell culture. And because I was hired as an expert in the area, I played some role in education, but mostly in providing the cell cultures themselves, in great quantity sometimes, and also managing the media production facility. Of course there were several technicians who actually did that kind of work.
So as... this was of course not a very stimulating job because it was after a couple of months, rather routine, and I found myself wanting to do some research. At that time Hilary and... Hilary and I had agreed that I could do some research, I could pick a project and do what I wanted if I paid attention to my... the major reason for being hired, and I agreed to this because it gave me an opportunity to do research under really good circumstances and without having to look for funding. At that time Hilary had an umbrella grant from the National Institutes of Health. It provided a sum of money that covered the kinds of things that I was doing, namely core facilities, that is facilities and activities and reagents that the whole institute used, and that... those were the funds that supported my activities, not the research, it's critical to say that as I'll make clear later.

Having set up the laboratory that I was hired to prepare, and after several months having it running properly, I learned from Hilary that he was looking for someone who was skilled in cytogenetics. At this time we now understood clearly that humans didn't have 48 chromosomes, they had a mere 46. And consequently that gave rise to a whole new field of what we call cytogenetics, that is looking for chromosome anomalies, that is if you can stain and look at the chromosomes individually and determine whether parts of them are missing, and that became possible very quickly, that you could trace those changes to several kinds of human pathologies. It is now a huge field, but at that time it was in its embryonic stages. And for... because of the relationship between cell culture and virology, which as I said earlier at that time gave birth to the subsequent 10 years of the golden age of virology, when the virologists and cell culturist married and gave forth all of the modern vaccines that we have today, virtually all of them.
As a consequence of Hilary's interest in hiring someone with that kind of background I suggested that he contact Paul Moorhead who was still at Charlie Pomerat's lab in Texas, he did, and the result was that he hired Paul, and Paul established a lab at Wistar which later became very important for my work, my subsequent work.

So having now set up the laboratory and supplying people with the cell cultures they needed, and media that they wanted, I now had some free time to do some research. And one of things that I decided to do was based on this ferment of activity that was now occurring in the field of virology and cell culture, where viruses were now being discovered, new viruses that caused cancer in rodents and mice, and in rats, all this done principally by using cell culture technology.
So it occurred to me that because people were finding viruses that had some relationships and in some case actual cause of cancers in lower animals, that it would be an interesting project to look for viruses in human tumour tissue, cancer tissue. And so I pursued that goal. The... Thinking about how to approach it, it occurred to me that obviously I needed to get tumour tissue, cancer tissue from operating theatres, and discovered that was very easy to do because I was... the Wistar Institute was right across the street from the University of Pennsylvania hospital where cancer surgery is done routinely, and because of Hilary's contacts there, and some of my contacts there, we could easily arrange to get tumour tissue which is, or a small piece of which is usually used for pathology purposes, but a substantial proportion of that tissue is simply incinerated. And so we were able to get tissue easily from this cancer material.  

So my next requirement was to find normal human tissue and one of the major problems was that by this time it was known that tissue taken from some human adults, which you might acquire during surgery, would contain viruses that were either unknown or already known. There are some viruses like measles or mumps, that can hide in normal cells, once having recovered from those ailments, and, of course that would foul up my work. If that happened, I would be misled. It was also known that these kinds of indigenous viruses, as they were called, rarely, if ever, found – although I should qualify that and say that it’s rare rather than never – found in human embryonic tissue. That's tissue from human embryos. Consequently I was determined to get tissue from human embryos in order to continue these studies.

Before I go beyond this point, there are two other things that I need to mention in context of the time relationships and I'll return to this experiment that I just described in a moment. The first important point is that by this time, my third child, daughter, Susan Hayflick, was born and when I went... I had arranged with the obstetrician to obtain the placenta at the birth of this daughter for the purpose of culturing the amniotic amnion tissue, which by this time was known to grow fairly well in cell culture and had also been known to sometimes undergo a very important phenomenon called 'transformation'. By that it is meant, at least at that time it was meant – today the term has become corrupted to a point where you don't know what it means unless you query the user of the world – at that time it meant the acquisition by a cultured cell thought to be normal of cancer cell properties, including the key property of immortality, namely the ability to see the cell capable of cultivation continuously.

At the turn of the century, when cell culture began, it was thought over a period of several decades that when cells are put in culture, they have the innate property of immortality, just like bacteria. If you put a bacteria in culture, you can carry it, that is you can transfer it from test tube to test tube, or culture to culture, for ever, essentially forever. And that philosophy was carried over to the field of cell culture and I was exposed to that philosophy and accepted it, like everyone else did. However, most of the cultures that were set during this 60-year period that is prior to my work... the cells that were cultured failed to grow, or to replicate beyond several passages, that is removal of the cells from one culture vessel to another when they fill the floor of the first culture vessel.

You can isolate cells very easily from your own person or from volunteers, usually without too much pain. And, for example, I've done it to myself and I'll illustrate it. You can pinch, for example, part of your tissue like your wrist until it's a bit numb. Then you pull up one hair with a forceps, so you have a pyramid of skin, then you knock the top of that pyramid off with a sterile scalpel, with a bit of pain obviously, but easily endured, and you take that hair with its attached skin, put it into a vessel that contains an enzyme called trypsin. The trypsin dissolves the substances that keep cells together in a tissue. Very much like a brick wall and what you're doing is dissolving the mortar in a brick wall and releasing the millions of cells, and there are millions of cells, in that tiny scrap of tissue, and now you take those cells, put them in a growth media.
The media consists of chemicals that are well known, that you might expect, like amino acids, certain salts, sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphorous, etc. And because we do not know, for most cells, certainly normal cells, what their growth requirements are in chemical terms, we have to cover our ignorance by including in the media serum from an animal. Usually about 10% of the volume of the growth media consists of serum. It might be humbling to realise that your own cells, or human cells, grow very well in serum from a cow, a horse, or several other species. You do not need human serum to grow human cells, although they will grow in human cells, but that obviously is much more difficult to obtain, more costly. So generally people use bovine serum as the cover-up for ignorance and that continues to this day.

So the cells are... now you have 1 million cells or more, you put them into a rectangular vessel, for example, and then you add the media that I've just described. The culture vessel is then stoppered with usually a rubber stopper and there are more sophisticated ways of doing this today, but this is in general how it's done. And you lay this flask on its side so that the long side of the rectangle is flat to the surface of the incubator in which you put the culture.
So now you have the cells essentially settling down on to the floor of this long side of the flask that you laid flat on the surface of the incubator. In a couple of hours, the cells, because of their weight, although they weigh very little, will settle down to the floor of the flask, stick to the glass surface and begin to spread out. They are in a spherical form at this time. In a couple of hours, they spread out and in a day or two, they begin to divide, so that within a week or so – these are rough numbers – the cells have divided to the point where they have covered the floor of this single flask and then they do something very important. They stop dividing because the signals that they receive, when they touch neighbour cells, tells them to stop dividing. Prior to that, of course, there is much denuded glass so they have plenty of room to divide. Unlike cancer cells that will continue to grow to some extent when they receive that signal, and they'll grow on top of each other to some small extent, normal cells won't do that unless you use some very sophisticated conditions that are not relevant to this story.
Now, if you want more cells – they have stopped dividing because they have covered the floor of the flask – it is then necessary, if you want more cells and that's a key part of the story, you pour off the spent media. The cells remain behind because they're stuck to the glass floor. You then introduce this enzyme called trypsin, which does the same thing it did in the initial scrap of tissue and that then releases the cells from each other and from the glass surface. And now, for example, you can divide them into two equal parts, introduce them to two equivalent size rectangular bottles and start that process all over again. That in laboratory jargon is called a split, or a subcultivation, and I'll be using those terms subsequently.

In the following week, if it takes a week for these daughter culture vessels to become what we call 'confluent', which means they've covered the whole floor and have stopped dividing. In the second week, you can now make four vessels and then the next week eight vessels and then 16, 32, 64, in each subsequent week. Well, if you do the math, you can easily see that within a few weeks, you're going to be overrun with bottles for which you have no real use, since most experiments don't involve thousands of bottles. What you can do with the surplus cells each week is freeze them and that's very important. You can now... there are techniques for freezing cells in a viable or living state, so that you can recover them or resurrect them months, years, decades later and that's an essential point. That's called 'cryobiology', or 'cryogenics'.
So that technology of freezing cells crept into the field actually from veterinary medicine, where the exact technique used in cell culture was lifted over from veterinary practice in circumstances of artificial insemination of cattle in the field. In fact, the preservation under cryogenic conditions is usually best done in liquid nitrogen, which is extremely cold, about -196 degrees Celsius, which is equivalent to putting your finger, if you were foolish enough to do that, into a fire. It's that cold. You get the same disastrous results. And so that technology was just beginning to enter the field about this time and it exists even to this day with very little change. You can also preserve the cells at a temperature of dry ice, which is much warmer, it's about -70 degrees Celsius. And you can also, of course, preserve them at that temperature in an electrically driven freezer. So you have those three options. Liquid nitrogen is best because there are no moving parts. You top up the liquid nitrogen every three or four weeks and you don't have to worry too much about failure, although it does happen occasionally.

So that we now have the technology for subculturing cells for long periods of time, freezing them or preserving them, so that they can be resurrected at a much later date.  That was about the state of the technology at the time that I am now discussing. In addition to which I have already mentioned, but will re-emphasis the observation that rarely, with human cells in culture from normal tissues, will a transformation occur that means that the normal cells that you've cultured now show cancer cell properties, namely the ability to undergo unlimited cell cultivations, to have the appearance or the cytology of cancer cells, to have biochemical properties of cancer cells, etc. So this phenomenon is very important. It was recognised at that time as being important. Why? Because if you could understand how a normal cell suddenly transformed into a cancer cell, you would have a new approach to doing research on cancer biology. You wouldn't have to use whole animals, certainly not humans, but you now had the possibility of investigating cancer at the cellular level in bottles, which allowed for all kinds of experiments. So that concept has to be understood in respect to the importance of what we call transformation.

I also should mention, since it's become more popular in recent months, as the result of a book, describe the 'HeLa' cell. This is a cell population derived from a black woman in Baltimore, Maryland. Her name was Henrietta Lacks and the name of the cell population derives from the first and second letter off her first and last name, HeLa. And there a book was recently written called The Immortal Life Of Henrietta Lacks. It's been very popular in the United States. It's been on the New York Times bestseller list for many weeks now, probably soon in other countries. And the author, a woman who I know, I spent maybe 12 or 15 hours on the telephone with her discussing the early days of the HeLa cell and it's cultures since I knew the man who discovered them, namely a man by the name of George Gey. And so I was able to give her a lot of the historical background for her book. But this cell culture is important because it was the first immortal human cell culture. The first immortal cell culture actually came from a mouse and it was derived in the early 1940s. It's called 'L929'. So we did know about these immortal cell cultures. We knew a few of them existed, by the time I started my experiments. And we also knew of the importance of transformation, at least theoretically.

About this time, as I mentioned earlier, my wife gave birth to our third child and I purpose arranged with the obstetrician to obtain the placenta and amnion. And because my laboratory was right across the street from University of Pennsylvania Hospital, where my wife delivered, it was very easy for me to take the tissue to my lab, which I did do to my wife's disappointment, in not having me by her side throughout her recovery. But she soon recovered. And I immediately cultured the amniotic tissue using the technique I described earlier, exposure to trypsin, etc.
And after several weeks of culture, I saw what I was certain was, and which later turned out to be true, a transformation occurring. So that these normal amnion cells had now converted to an immortal cell population and in keeping with the recommendations for naming cell lines at that time, recommended by the Tissue Culture Association in the United States, I named it WISH, which stands for the first letters of the following four words, Wistar Institute, the name of the institution where the observation was made, and the first two letters of the name of the donor, Susan Hayflick. And that cell line was described by me in an article and published in the journal Experimental Cell Research and the cell line became very popular.

In order to keep my research activities in a proper temporal perspective, I need to make another aside and that is to discuss an entirely different research subject in which I was involved at about this time and it will become clear in a moment why it's important. The research activity has to do with my knowledge of the mycoplasmas that I described earlier that were the focus of my PhD dissertation because by this time in the early 1960s, it had been discovered that cell cultures in many labs were contaminated with these organisms. The questions were twofold, at least twofold. Where was this contamination coming from? These organisms are microscopic. They're the smallest free living organisms. Because they're free living, they can grow in the same media that you're using to culture your cells and you don't want them or anything else in there to confound your experiments. Secondly, how do you get rid of them?
Well, because I was maybe one of a half a dozen people in the United States at least and I think also in the UK there were a couple of people, who knew how to grow these animals. Many of my colleagues who knew about this and were working in cell culture – and by this time there were increasing numbers – would get in touch with me and say, 'Hey, Len, can you help me find out, I'm having trouble culturing my cells, can you help me find out whether they're contaminated with mycoplasmas.' There was no way I could say 'no', of course, and so one aside, I was culturing people's cell cultures, samples of which were sent to me, or brought to my lab, and I was probably testing three or four a week and then keeping records and sending the results so it occupied a substantial proportion of my time. But I was happy to do it because these were all friends of mine.

So because of the reasons that I explained, I wanted to get tissue from human embryos because they presumably lacked interfering viruses and that's what I was looking for in the cancer cells. Well, that was very difficult to do. First of all, you... at that time you didn't have to get permissions, the kinds of permissions that you can today, so it wasn't necessary to get permissions, but it was necessary to arrange things so that you were called on the telephone from a local hospital – notably again the University of Pennsylvania Hospital, which was a huge facility – to be alerted when that tissue becomes available, when an embryo is surgically aborted. The cancer tissue was available almost on a daily basis, so we sent somebody over to the cancer department every day at the end of the day and usually picked up one or two specimens.
But the embryonic tissue was an entirely different story. So in a sense, we had to have people in the paediatric unit pay attention to what we wanted and that was done by convincing the physicians there of why it was important that we get this tissue rather than to incinerate it, which was usually done. And to have cooperation with the nursing staff, etc. And those things were arranged, but as you can well imagine, the telephone would ring saying that embryonic tissue was available at random times, usually five minutes before the end of the working day, which would necessitate calling your family and telling them you won't be home for two more hours because you needed to process the tissue immediately. Of course, that's facetious, but it's usually what happened, Murphy's law at work. So the cultures were set only when... two or three hours after the phone rang which happened sporadically. So what I had done was to initiate culture every time we received an embryo at these random times, set the cultures and did the subcultivation process as they grew out and kept records of the numbers of times that I would do what we call a split or a subcultivation.

It's important now to say that the split ratio, which means from a mother bottle you can make, of course, two bottles, three, five, ten, 25, some... virtually any small number. To keep the mathematics simple, and indeed we started out being very simple, we cultured... we subcultured the cells once a week, or perhaps, I think it was twice a week, since they reached confluency in about three or four days. And that was called subcultivation, or split, and so we kept records of this. That's essential.
With the tumour tissue, we didn't do that because surprisingly, you might guess, the tumour tissue would grow very rapidly. We'd have no trouble subcultivating it and we could keep accurate records, so that turned out not to be true. We cultured approximately 500 human tumour tissues, specimens, none of which replicated more than half a dozen or 20 times, something in that range, 20 subcultivations. That was a bit of a surprise, although a couple of them, namely tumours from human neuroblastomas did in fact transform and become immortal. But that was one or two out of 500. That wasn't too much of a surprise because as we were beginning to learn not only from my lab but other labs, the acquisition of cancer cell properties is not an immediate event. There are many properties that cancer cells have, starting off with properties that we still don't understand to properties that we do realise, like size, shape, chromosome structure, things on a larger scale, plus their final acquisition – we think it's final – is the acquisition of this property of immortality and I'll have more to say about that much later. So that wasn't a big shock, but it's important to say because most people think that if you're... because cancer cells are generally referred to as being immortal that they believe when you first put them in a culture, they're immortal and they're not.

I have to go back now in time and finish the mycoplasma story which is key to another research area that suddenly became important. So these two important research activities were occurring at the same time and the two discoveries that I made, and I believe it was in the year 1960, occurred virtually at the same time. The mycoplasma story following my testing of cultures for friends developed after I had established some of these normal foetal cell cultures and learned of their sensitivity to human viruses. The human cell strains, and I will define the word cell strain to mean a normal cell culture, which as you will later learn has as its principle property the fact that they are mortal and can only replicate a finite number of times, whereas cancer cell... whereas cell populations with cancer-like properties, namely these transformed cultures, I call 'cell lines'. It's important to understand those two words are used differently in literature today and, in fact, the past 20 years, for reasons that I cannot understand. People do not realise the importance of using those two terms, or any other two terms, to differentiate between transformed cell cultures and normal cell cultures, whose differences are so vital. Generally people don't... they may understand the difference – I think they do – but they use the same terminology for both, which makes things very confusing, both in the literature and in the spoken words.
So returning to the knowledge that by this time I had that is that the normal cell cultures were exquisitely sensitive to viruses – remember that I'm in an institute where virology is key... is a major concern, research in virology – and so I learned straight out that the cells were particularly sensitive to replicating the polio virus, because Hilary was working on polio viruses. I could easily get a sample from down... down the corridor. I also had friends by this time who were working at Merck in West Point, Pennsylvania, my former employer. They were working with Maurice Hilleman, a very well-known virologist, one of the men who discovered the adenoviruses and a man who's generally been called the father of most vaccines. He was the one who commercialised most of the well-known vaccines at that time at Merck. And so I had access to those folks, to whom I sent samples of my cells and they learned that they were sensitive to the virus... viruses that I didn't have available to me. And so that exquisite sensitivity led me and others to believe that these cells could be used to isolate other unknown viruses, which of course was my purpose in using them for testing for cancer viruses, but I didn't know of their virus susceptibility at the time I first started.

During those early years, along with a very well-known virologist from the UK, we discovered a new human common cold viruses. This gentleman was a world expert on human... on what are called rhinoviruses, common cold viruses. They now have a different name. And we published this and I believe it was in Lancet. So that was an important bit of knowledge.
 

The virologists began to hear about this exquisite sensitivity of my normal cells to human viruses and one of the ones who heard about it was a man by the name of Robert Chanock, who was employed as a major scientist at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the NIH in Bethesda, Maryland. He knew Hilary Koprowski. I didn't know Bob at that time at all and he asked Hilary whether Hilary could arrange for he, Bob, to come up to Philadelphia from Washington and get a culture of one of my diploid cell strains, normal cell strains, for his use. And also, by this time, many other friends were asking for cultures for the same purpose. Of course I agreed. And Bob showed up at my lab and I had prepared a culture for him and while the preparation was taking place, he... I asked him what kind of... what work he does. 'Well', he said, 'I'm working with an unknown organism. We don't know its biology, but it's called the Eaton agent, named for a man whose full name is Monroe Eaton, working at Harvard and Boston.'

Monroe Eaton was working for many years with this unknown organism in the belief that it was somehow concerned with a human disease called 'primary atypical pneumonia', better known popularly as 'walking pneumonia'. And as the name suggests, it is a pneumonic condition and which it is... it causes symptoms that don't usually don't commit you to a bed for long periods of time, but you feel draggy and washed out and whatever term you want to use for general feeling of debilitation, but still capable of carrying on your life, but with this serious problem of pneumonia, but not like other microbial pneumonias that can be fatal. This is rarely fatal, but it affects millions of people. At least at that time, the people most affected were young people who assembled together, for example in a college dormitory, or in a military barracks. So it was a great concern to the military, not only in the US, but in other countries as well.

And I asked Bob what he was doing and he said he's working with this Eaton agent and he started to describe... I had heard of this agent when I was a student at Penn, so it wasn't totally unknown to me, but he gave me more information. Bob told me that the mystery is that this agent which we're almost sure is a virus cannot be cultivated. We've failed to cultivate it in cell culture. It can be cultivated in embryonated chicken eggs, which was a fundamental tool for culturing viruses prior to the introduction of cell culture. And even to this day, most flu vaccines are produced in embryonated eggs because most but not all strains of flu viruses cannot grow in cell culture. That's a generality. So Bob said... told me that Monroe Eaton and he, Bob, have passaged this mysterious organism in embryonated chicken eggs and that's how they work with it. And what they learned was that this agent had an affinity for the trachea of the developing chick embryo and consequently if you made antibody to this mysterious organism, which you could easily do at that time, you could attach a fluorescent dye to the antibody and the antibody would stick to this mysterious organisms which itself is stuck to the trachea of the developing chick embryo and it would light up with this fluorescent light using the proper microscopic conditions of what's called 'fluorescent microscopy'. So you could actually see where it was on the lining of the trachea and that was an important way of knowing, a) whether you were growing it, b) the kind of pathology it was producing, etc.

And then Bob told me that was very important. He said, 'The mystery is that this organism and the disease itself seems to be amenable to treatment with broad spectrum antibiotics.' Well, that was known, and still is known, not to be a possibility with viruses. Viruses simply are not affected by any known antibiotic. They're susceptible to some chemical agents, but not to the then known broad spectrum antibiotics and that was essential. Well, it occurred to me when he said that, and of course he was talking about a pneumonia, that my knowledge of mycoplasmology was such that I knew as everybody in the field knew that this class of organisms produced pneumonias in lower animals, in mice, rats, pigs, chickens, turkeys, etc. And I said to Bob, 'Well, have you and Monroe Eaton considered – and others working in the field, there are a few more – considered the PPLO which they were known then?' And Bob said, 'PPLO, what are they?' Well, as he educated me about Eaton agent pneumonia, I then educated him about PPLOs in the next ten minutes and we came to the obvious conclusion. Bob would send me embryonated egg yolk in which this hypothetical organism was to grow... was growing and I would test it for mycoplasmas.

A week later, the samples arrived and fortuitously... again my stories have several instances of accidents, not only in time, but in people's appearances, etc. Fortunately a couple of weeks prior to Bob's visit, I had a visit from a fellow who was a pioneer mycoplasmologist in the United Kingdom. He worked at Wellcome Labs. His name was DG ff Edwards, the double F standing for 'ffarrington'. And he was very well known in the field. He was a pioneer like Emmy Klieneberger-Nobel and in addition to another gentleman by the name of Ivan Freund from Copenhagen, or I should say from Aarhus, Denmark, were the pioneers in the field and it was an honour for him to ask to visit me. He actually came to visit people at the University of Pennsylvania, namely Harry Morton, who as I explained was the University of Pennsylvania's expert on mycoplasmas.
And he came over to visit me and I frankly remember why he paid me that honour, but he did come over and we got to chatting about the media in which these organisms were then grown. Harry Morton had developed a medium that I was using and Professor Edwards said he didn't think that medium was very good and here's why, he said, and he gave me several hints. He said, 'One of the things you need to include in there is whole serum, not a fraction of the serum', which was named Fraction A that Harry Morton and his graduate students thought was essential. Edwards felt that you needed the whole serum and maybe even other elements that were unknown and he persuaded me to experiment with different media because I was in a position of isolating mycoplasmas from samples sent by friends... tissue culture samples sent by friends. And so he gave me an opportunity to test things, new media, to see whether all of my experimental media grew, all the mycoplasmas – or maybe one didn't and the others didn't – which would provide a clue as to what the central elements were since they were varied in the media that I was testing.
That was fortunate because I was in the process of doing that when Bob's yolk sample came to me and sure enough, on one of the media that I was fooling around with, mycoplasmas grew. It didn't grow on the other formula that I was experimenting with. So immediately I knew that media should be used for further subcultivation of this organism. Now, it wasn't a big shock to learn that mycoplasmas were isolated from the yolk material for a very simple reason and that is that many of the samples that were sent to me to be tested for mycoplasma and that were coming from the laboratory of virologists were yolk samples containing mycoplasmas. Because their virus preps were contaminated with mycoplasmas. Mycoplasmas are also not infrequently found in chicken yolk material, so they had picked up chicken mycoplasmas in the yolk of embryos in which they thought they were only passaging a virus. So that's why... And also the same thing occurred with the cell cultures that were sent to me. Many of the cell cultures sent to me were known to contain viruses by the investigators who sent them to me and in which I found mycoplasmas, so this was not a stunning eureka moment. It meant that, well, this Eaton agent could still be a virus contaminated with the mycoplasma that I happened to pick up on a new media. Well, I told Forrest Gunn on the phone immediately and told Bob what I had found and he was excited, of course, and I tried to caution him and say, 'Look, for the following reasons, let’s not get too excited.'

It then became necessary for me to transfer this isolated mycoplasma from the ager plate on which I had isolated these colonies and the colonies, I should say, are microscopic. You cannot see them with the naked eye. So what you do is you cut out a block of this ager which is gelatine with sterile scalpel and you flip it butter side down, that is the side containing the colonies, on to a fresh plate and you push the block over the surface of a fresh ager plate so that the colony on the block breaks up into individual particles of mycoplasmas and seeds the daughter plate with many more colonies. And that you do serially and that's how you carry the organisms and that's how you work with them.
So I immediately started to do that with no success. I worked on it for several months, meanwhile Bob's calling me every few days, 'Are you succeeding? Are you succeeding?' No, I'm not succeeding.' Finally, I went to Washington as a consultant to a company there called Microbiological Associates whose president was a good friend of mine and hired me to help them with their cell culture production facilities and brought with me this culture that I couldn't transfer in an effort to try and continue that in my new... in this new laboratory where I was spending the summer in... in consultation. And, of course, I was very close now to Bob's lab. And I continued these efforts.
Finally I got it to pass, but by this time I'd returned to my home in Philadelphia. It took me a couple of months to succeed and it was now necessary to try to determine whether those new mycoplasma colonies that I'd isolated were known mycoplasma. Well, that in principle was easy to do because we had serum from Eaton... from walking pneumonia patients. We had serum early in the disease from a particular patient and serum after they recovered, so that the number of antibodies present were very few in the beginning of the disease, but copious at the end of the disease. And those antibodies, those protein structures could be linked to a fluorescent antibody, as I explained earlier. And then we hoped that if we bathed these new colonies with fluorescent antibody not only to the acute and convalescent serum of known patients, but also to antibodies directed toward known mycoplasmas, we would then have a way of knowing whether this was a different one and whether it was, in fact, associated with the disease itself which would be very likely if you can show that there's an increase of antibody fluorescence from the acute stage serum to the recovery stage, because that means that you've found antibodies increasing to that particular organism associated with that particular disease, so it was a very important thing to do.

It's necessary to jump back to the cell culture story because by this time I was also becoming inundated with dozens of requests for my human diploid cell strains by virologists, really all over the world. And also I now realised – and I'll return to this later in more detail – that these cells could in fact replace the then used cells, used for the experiments and production by Sabin Salk and Koprowski for the production of the polio vaccine because the cells that were used by these three folks at that time were primary monkey kidney cells. By that I mean cells from a monkey's kidney isolated by trypsin from the kidney tissue itself, put into culture and never... not subcultivated and that's a key concept. Once they're passaged, I call it a strain. If they're not passaged... if they're the original cells from the tissue, it's called a primary cell population and that will become key later.
What was developing at this time – so many things happening within a framework of 18 months – is that people were beginning to realise that those primary monkey kidney cells contained unwanted viruses. They contained indigenous viruses like the ones we knew could be found in some human adult tissue. And many of those viruses had behaviours that were unknown and if they contaminated the vaccines that these men were making, it would be... could be a disaster. By this time I had proven that my cells were absolutely clean. They had no indigenous viruses whatsoever by every test known.
I mention all of this only to try to give you some impression of the ferment in my lab learning more about these cells, teaching people now coming to my laboratory for a week or two to learn how to handle the cells, distributing them, trying to make a vaccine in them and simultaneously trying to work with this mycoplasma story with Bob Chanock. It was impossible for me to pursue... I had to make a choice. Do I work with the cells or do I work with the mycoplasmas? I chose the former and by chance, another chance observation, the Journal of Bacteriology arrived on my desk about this time and described the very procedure that we needed. It was described in a letter to the editor, so it was no more than a page long article. I do not recall the authors. And they described a very simple method of removing the colonies from an ager plate – mycoplasma colonies – and having them now resting on a glass slide that you can put under a microscope. Well, that was perfect because now if we could do that, and this described how to do it, we could now stain the colonies on a glass slide and see if they fluoresced or not by the technique I just described.

Well, I didn't have time to try this... this technique because of an incredible amount of time I was spending on the human diploid cell story. But I knew that there was a colleague at NIH and another institute different from Bob Chanock's who was also an expert in mycoplasmology and I caught him on the phone and I told him. His name was Mike, Michael Barile, and I said to Mike, 'Mike, do me a favour, I want to put Bob Chanock in touch with you. Here are the reasons why. Teach him how to take the colonies off the agar and put them on a glass slide because we want to the following. And explained what we intended to do.' 'Oh, sure', he said. And indeed he did it. That will be important a little later.
And to complete that part of the story which I think I should do at this time, we did indeed prove by that technique and some other approaches that my isolation was a new mycoplasma never seen before, and b) it indeed fluoresced to several paired sera acute and convalescent from an equivalent number of patients which came close to positive proof that this was the etiological agent of human primary atypical pneumonia.

I should say there was an interesting anecdote that occurred during this period of mycoplasma work that my boss Hilary Koprowksi came into my lab one day. He had learned about my working with mycoplasmas and, of course, it was known that mycoplasmas contaminated cell cultures and he was worried that I would spread it all over the institute or spread it in my lab, but I knew enough about these organisms to take the proper precautions. In any case, he came into my lab and he said, 'Len', he said, 'I didn't hire you to work on the mycoplasmas. I hired you to work on cell cultures, to provide cell cultures to the institute, make media and all the rest of it and I would appreciate it very much if you stopped your work, whatever work you're doing on these organisms.' Well, I didn't. I disobeyed him.
By this time, or I should say a few weeks later, we had all the information we needed to write a paper and to not only suggest but almost hint that we had proven the cause of primary atypical pneumonia and, in fact, I think we went so far as to say that in a paper. So Bob called me one day and said, 'Len, I'm going to make a first draft of the paper.' I said, 'Great.' I said, 'Send me the first draft. I'll massage it for you and then we'll go from there.' A few days later, he calls me again. He says, 'Len, I've got a problem.' 'What's your problem?' 'While working on the paper, Mike Barile came to my office and I told him I'm working on a paper and Mike said: oh, am I a co-author on the paper?' And Bob was puzzled because he knew that Mike's contribution bordered on the trivial, if not outright trivial, as I explained what he did. And Bob, I don't know how seriously Bob took Mike's suggestion, but it later turned out that because the importance of this discovery reached higher levels by word of mouth at this time, the director of Mike Barile's institute – I don't recall his institute, it was separate from that of Bob's – got wind of this. And in concert with the director of Bob Chanock's institute, his name was Bob Huebner, they, for reasons of course unknown to me, decided that Mike Barile will be on the paper. There was some power play going on at that level. And it was decided that Mike should go on the paper.
Well, that was bothersome to me because if Bob Chanock and I were co-authors and he could be senior author, fine by me, it would be apparent to anyone reading that paper who the mycoplasma expert was and who the Eaton agent expert was. It didn't have to be mentioned. But with Mike on the paper, it would be questionable who did the key concept of realising the relationship between the Eaton agent and the cause of disease, which I later named 'mycoplasma pneumoniae', for obvious reasons. And who did that work if Mike's name is on the paper? Well, I then made a fatal mistake. It later turned out to be fatal and I'm still struggling with it, by the way, and that is I agreed because of my heavy involvement with the other work that I described, I just couldn't spend the time to sort that out and I agreed to have Mike on the paper. Bob had said, 'Well, he's having trouble with his boss who wants him on the paper.' And I said, 'But Bob, what he did was trivial.' He said, 'I know it was trivial.' I said, 'We'll give him an acknowledgement in the paper. That's fine, but to be a co-author, it's going to be a problem for me, not for you, but for me.' He understood that and I was unsuccessful.
The compromise was that in the body of the paper, it would be stated who isolated the organism and if you read the original paper, you'll see my initials attached to that statement. But, of course, people don't read the entire paper. They read the title, they read the authors, then they read a summary of it. So very few people in the long run, as I learnt to my consternation in subsequent years, didn't realise the aspect of my contribution to that paper, which in my judgement was fairly significant. And I've been suffering from that burden for the past 50 years.

Even today, I am struggling with someone who wrote the obituary for Bob Chanock who unfortunately died about a year ago. The obituary I discovered was printed in the newsletter of the International Organisation of Mycoplasmology, so it goes out to every mycoplasmologist in the world who's a member and most of them are. It was also printed in several medical journals about a year ago and it's hard to believe – I won't go into the details – but I'm having... and in the obituary it was stated outright that Bob Chanock discovered mycoplasma pnuemoniae. In fact, a couple of years after the paper was written, Bob was given several awards for this discovery, many of them were significant cash prizes. Not that I care about the cash prizes so much, but I was a young kid at the time. I was in my early 30s. I didn't appreciate what I now appreciate, of course, and that is the recognition that scientists seek for their observations. I thought I was doing something to help humanity and that belief held forth for a couple more years into my cell culture research that I greatly regret. I thought the reward that you get was helping humanity, not being rewarded for some financial reason, or for recognition. It's hard to believe in today's scientific environment.

My isolation and identification of the new mycoplasma, as mycoplasma pneumoniae, of course resulted in an important publication in the prestigious journal called Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in the United States and because it was a rather important discovery, it reached the front page of the New York Times and most medical journals wrote about it, so that the notoriety was quite... quite broad. Some interesting anecdotes that occurred was that after the paper... about the time the paper was being published, we were interested in naming it and I recalled distinctly that Emmy Kleinberger-Nobel, the woman from London who was one of the pioneers in this field and with whom I had been exchanging correspondence by mail, of course, pre-computer days. Emmy wrote to me congratulating me and said, 'It should be named mycoplasma Hayflickiae' and I wrote back and said, 'No, that's not going to happen' and I was very sincere about that.
My motivations at that time, although they're now beginning to change, was to do things to help people and to... not with any other motivation, that is financial motivation or self-aggrandisement. That was not my motivation at any time during those formative years, but I soon learned as a part of a the Wistar Institute and now interacting with senior people that slowly my motivations, or at least my understanding of what science was all about, was beginning to change and that a financial motivation seemed to be emerging as an important motive. Certainly individual recognition was beginning to develop in my mind as being an important motive that was driving the entire field. So I mention that because that will become more apparent as this discussion continues.

Another interesting anecdote is that one day after the publication appeared and the newspaper articles were written, of course I was identified as part of the... a member of the Wistar Institute... my laboratory door opened and in walked the director, Hilary Koprowski, with his right hand extended wanting to shake my right hand and to congratulate me on this discovery. Of course I couldn't help but recall his former entrance into my laboratory warning me not to work any more on the mycoplasmas, so there was some satisfaction in having Hilary come in and completely reverse his stand after the institute got an enormous amount of publicity because of this discovery.
 

I then directed some effort toward getting the organism named and I was unfamiliar at that time with what turned out to strict taxonomic rules in biology. I knew something about them, but not all the details of course. I decided, because Bob Chanock was unknown in the field of mycoplasmology and I knew virtually every player in the field, I told Bob I would... that we should name the organism Mycoplasma pneumoniae for obvious reasons. That was not much of a decision. And I thought to myself, we should do this democratically. Rather than my naming it or my naming it with Bob, we should, in order to gain as much acceptance as possible, we should... I should solicit agreement on the name from all of my colleagues and so I wrote a letter, a circular letter to I think 20 or 25 of mycoplasmologists from all over the world, mostly from the United States and the UK, Denmark, and asked their... told them what had happened. I think by this time most of them had read the original paper. They all responded in the affirmative, of course, because their name would now be attached to a paper and that was, I suppose, to some extent flattering.
The paper was written... actually it wasn't a paper, it was a letter to the editor of Science magazine, which of course has worldwide circulation and they accepted this letter in which we pointed out the discovery and the naming of the organisms. And it was signed by the 25 mycoplasmologists, including Bob Chanock. Again, in order to be democratic, I made an easy decision and that was to have all of the authors listed alphabetically. It so happened that Chanock's name was first and my name was somewhere in the middle. That didn't matter to me for reasons I mentioned earlier. The paper was published and then I got a letter from one or two taxonomic experts who objected to the fact that the naming of this organism was over the signature of so many people and that I should understand clearly that according to taxonomic law, the organism would be referred... the isolate would be referred to in the future as Mycoplasma pneumonia chanock et al, which disturbed me a bit, until a very strange event occurred that very few people know about. And that is that one of the students who worked with me as a graduate student in Penn, whose name was Norman Somerson, was a close friend of mine and he is the one that encouraged me to apply to graduate school at Penn in order to get my PhD. So we were rather close and Norman, by this time, was working at Merck, I believe, and was a bit unhappy with his job. So I learned from Bob Chanock that Bob wanted someone familiar with the mycoplasmas to join his laboratory group. Prior to that, I should have mentioned earlier, that after my isolation of Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Bob sent several of his leading technical staff to my laboratory in Philadelphia for training and so I trained his laboratory staff in mycoplasma technology and it does have a bit of an interesting technology, so that... that was another contribution that I made to his laboratory efforts. During that period of time, as I said, Norman was unhappy at Merck and I learned of Bob's interest in hiring someone and so I suggested that Norman get in touch with him and the two did indeed meet and the upshot was that Norman was hired by Bob Chanock.

During the time that... that Norman was working with Bob, which was prior to the publication of the paper on naming the organism, Norman wrote a paper along with several other co-authors. I don't recall whether Bob Chanock was one of the authors or not. He very well may have been, but Norman's name was the first name on the paper. I don't recall the substance of the paper, but it so happened that Norman who, of course, was one of the signatures to the organism naming letter, knew of that happening and while that paper in Science, naming the organism, was in press, the paper that Norman wrote, a scientific paper, appeared a couple of months, or maybe a month, maybe as few as a few weeks... my recollection is dim on that point. However, it's important to say that that paper by Norman appeared before the one in Science and in that paper, Norman mentioned Mycoplasma pneumoniae. In fact, that paper probably involved some work he was doing with that organism. I'm almost certain of that. Consequently taxonomic law reads that those that... the person who first publishes the name will get credit for the organism.
Consequently, Norman Somerson's paper, having appeared prior to the Science letter, then became the authoritative paper in respect to the naming of the organism and it was then called Mycoplasma pneumoniae Somerson et al, eclipsing the rule that would have applied to the actual naming of the organism in the letter to Science. Norman was very embarrassed about this. He had no idea that the publication of his paper would appear before the Science paper. There was absolutely no way for him to have known that. Scientists generally don't know the precise... at least in those days, the precise month that an article will appear. So he can certainly not be accused of trying to steal thunder from someone else. That was certainly not the case, but I think that it is an interesting anecdote that most people in this field, certainly the elder generations, have never heard.

Because the medium that I had developed on which I first grew Mycoplasma pnuemoniae was successful in that respect, I and most people in the field began to think that that media formulation should be used universally and it was and, in fact, still is. It's called under my name 'Hayflick's medium', which is customary. And, of course, it's been modified over the years by people who tweak the formulation one way or another, but in any case it's still widely... widely used. The other aspect of this story is that... because this media seemed to be so, so good, I had been testing other sources of mycoplasmas and as I indicated earlier, was testing for friends, samples sent to me.
During the course of testing those samples, I isolated several organisms that I couldn't identify. And during my efforts to identify it and I should say parenthetically that while doing all of this, I'm still working with the human diploid cells and they are... on which I'm spending the majority of my time and only incidentally working with the mycoplasmas, so other people, by this time, were attracted to the field because of this discovery and began working... to work with these organisms and someone else isolated the same organism that I had isolated unknowingly and named it Mycoplasma orale which is a very common mycoplasma species found in the throats of humans. Mycoplasmas are found in about 25% of normal people's throats. So finding a mycoplasma there is no surprise, but this was a new species and because I was so busy with other things, I really couldn't focus on this identifying what later turned out to be a major organism found in human throats, Mycoplasma orale.

Another interesting sidelight that occurred at this time... I mentioned earlier, a man's name Maurice Hilleman who was a co-discoverer of this large group of viruses called the adenoviruses. He made this discovery when he was at Walter Reed Hospital in Washington DC while I was at Charlie Pomerat's lab in Texas. By the time I returned to Philadelphia, to the Wistar Institute, Maurice became vice president of vaccine development at Merck and he became known worldwide as probably the world's best vaccine maker and he was indeed the producer of many major human virus vaccines. He was a wonderful guy, complicated personality. I enjoyed his company very much despite the fact that his... one of his main characteristics that some people were not... didn't approve of is that he punctuated most of his sentences with four-letter words. Very much like your Mr Ramsay in the UK who is... is using the same kind of language to correct errors in failing restaurants.
So Maurice had this characteristic which I found not disturbing and sort of funny. It was so bad I remember that in his office at Merck, his secretary sat outside the wall that separated his actual office from her chair and typewriter and a hole was put in the wall between... that separated the two of them, so that... so that a little door could be closed when he chatted with visitors using his foul language, so that this secretary would not hear him. I mention this because one day, soon after the publication of this paper and prior to that, Maurice and the people that worked for him... there were two people that worked for Maurice who were graduate students with me at the University of Pennsylvania, so of course I knew a lot about what was going on there and they had cooperated with me in sending me virus samples to be tested on the cell strains that I discovered, so there was a rather close relationship. We were also... those two men were... we were close socially as well. So one day I got, and as I indicated, the diploid cells were sent to Maurice early on at his request so that they could use them in research on vaccine development in order to overcome this serious problem that I'll return to later, in which primary monkey kidney cells had a large number of unknown viruses that... that posed a risk to vaccine development if they would remain in a vaccine.
One day I got a call from Maurice, which was quite unusual and I can remember his words which I won't repeat entirely here for reasons that I just explained. He said, 'Len, is there anyone else at that institute who's doing any work but you?' I said, 'What do you mean?' 'Well', he said, 'you've come up this year with the diploid cell strains and now you're in an entirely different field and you've discovered the aetiology of walking pneumonia.' I said, 'Well, I have no excuse for what I did.' And he said, 'Well, I want a culture of those mycoplasmas that you're working with, after some other colourful sentences.' I said, 'Sure, send somebody down and they're yours.' That stands out because Maurice was, of course, a very senior person and to have him recognise my work – I'm still a very young fellow – was impressive.
And Maurice himself was a very impressive person. Indeed, a book, a biography was written about him a couple of years ago that's worth reading. He was born and raised in Montana in the Midwest in the United States and it's hard to believe that he grew up to be as great a virologist as he was, coming from that kind of... sort of common origin and was capable of tangoing easily with people like Jonas Salk and Albert Sabin, etc. So this... this was impressive and I began to have other interactions with Maurice over the years after that phone call.

After having received the mycoplasmas at Merck, Maurice and his colleagues set about to make a vaccine, of course, as did other major pharmaceutical companies who requested cultures from me. And it turned out for very sophisticated technical reasons that are unnecessary for me to describe, all of them were unsuccessful to this day, so there's really no vaccine. That's not a very serious problem because as I indicated at the outset, the agent was amenable to treatment with broad spectrum antibiotics.
I should also mention one other interesting anecdote and that is that after this discover, the NIH [National Institute of Health] held a conference on walking pneumonia and it was very well attended. I have pretty vivid recollections of that meeting. It was held at the Clinical Center Conference Hall which was a huge hall at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, and I recall sitting... coming into the conference and there before me on the stage, for the first time, I have... I am now looking at some of the great names of that time in virology, names that I had read about frequently.
And I was sitting, I remember, either on the back row or one of the last rows in the auditorium when a gentleman started to come through the aisle toward me, took a seat next to me and then introduced himself as Monroe Eaton and, of course, I was surprised and honoured to be sitting next to this fellow. And we started to chat and he told me that for the ten years prior that he had been working on this agent that bore his name and whose biology was unknown... although it was known that it must be a microorganism of some sort. He suffered enormously because the virology community, mainly the leadership, felt that he was not doing proper research in order to identify this virus... this alleged virus. And indeed his career suffered, he told me. Advancements in rank at Harvard, where he worked, were denied for long periods of time and he emphasised this impact on his career. And he... then, one of the speakers got up and started to talk and he then had to lower his voice and he whispered in my ear, 'Hayflick, I want you to know that your isolation and identification of this agent as a mycoplasma has significantly benefited me in respect to my work now being accepted by the leading lights in virology.' And I was really astounded to hear that because again I'm learning at this point what the values are. And, of course, I thanked him and we then remained quiet as the conference began and it was quite interesting because the leading lights in the field who were speaking at this conference all apologised to Monroe Eaton publically for their... for what had transpired in the past in respect to their views about his work, which was rather satisfying.

I'll now move from the field of mycoplasmology, although I did further work in the field and published several more papers after this initial event. I also should say that now that I understand what the values are, I never... have never actually received an award for that discovery, other than having received the presidential citation from the president of the International Organisation of Mycoplasmology and I believe, in about 1972, at an international conference in Jerusalem. The president at that time was a man by the name of Eyvint Freundt from Aarhus, Denmark, who was one of the three or four founders of the field and so this was... it gave me, of course, some great satisfaction. But it was Bob Chanock who received most of the awards, financial prizes, etc., something that I should say annoyed me, but not to the extent that it worried me or affected my health. I have just learned to live with those events.

The cross currents of events in my laboratory at that time were numerous and so now I'll shift to the work that was being done with the cultured normal human cells, which was happening simultaneously with the mycoplasma events that I described earlier. So that you can get some impression of how active the laboratory was, for that two year period, everything was happening at the same time. And the two year period is 1959-60. The paper on the mycoplasma discovery and the discovery of the human diploid cells strains occurred in 1961, the same year.
At about this time, as I had indicated earlier in describing the technique of growing cells in culture and continuing their propagation for long periods of time, this significant event occurred that I need to describe in some detail. It may be recalled that I mentioned how cells are subcultured from an initial culture made from intact tissue and the cultures upon reaching confluence, or covering the floor of a flask, then stopped dividing and now it's necessary, if you want more cells, to remove them with trypsin from the original culture, divide them into equal halves, put them into bottles and that can be done each week so that the number of bottles can be doubled perhaps twice a week, so that you end up very quickly with more bottles than you can deal with and you can freeze the excess cultures at every... what we call population doubling. And that concept is important as I'll soon describe, so let me define that term now.
Population doubling means precisely what those words say. It does not mean the doubling of a single cell. If you initiate the cultures, as I did, with a million cells, that's the first population. If they double, you now have two million cells and if those two million double, you now have four million cells. We're not talking about the doubling of a single cell. That was a problem – still is a problem – in people's understanding of what we did. It later became a very important fact in respect to some issues that will surface later.

Cultures that I had established from human foetuses as described earlier, those foetuses arrived at erratic periods of time and, of course, I kept records of when they arrived in the labs and how many splits or population doublings were... they were undergoing. And these cultures were kept in an incubator, of course, at human body temperature. Because so many people were working with cell cultures at the Wistar Institute at that time, although this was certainly not unusual, we had what was called a 'walk-in incubator'. Ordinarily you would have an incubator about half the size of a refrigerator, but we had what was called a walk-in incubator, which as the name suggests, you could actually walk into as a room. It was kept at that temperature, body temperature, which was tolerable for many minutes, when you walked in there, and each researcher had several shelves assigned to them on which their cultures sat. That walk-in room happened to be next to my laboratory and that's where I kept these cultures.

Each day I would go into the walk-in incubator and look at... raise the culture vessels up to the light – there were several lights in this incubator room – to see the condition of the cells and also remove them and put them under an inverted microscope to see how the cells looked. And there... for weeks and weeks, they were beautiful. You can easily tell that they're dividing because you can actually see with the naked eye the chromosomes during the period of time that the cells are dividing, which is a good indication of their health, because they're dividing happily. And this went on at first for several months and one day I walked into the walk-in incubator, looked at a couple of cultures, held them up to the light and with some practice, you can tell by holding a culture up to the light generally how their health is, but not specifically. And I took those cultures back to my lab, put them under the inverted microscope and looked at the cells. They didn't look right.
That wasn't a shock.  It was just accepted by me because as I think I indicated earlier, the mentality at the time was that we do not know how to grow cells indefinitely as the... as the dogma said because we don't understand the constitution of their nutrient requirements fully, which is why we add 10% animal serum as a cover-up. And indeed a large fraction of the field at that time was busy determining the nutrients required by cultured cells, so it was a highlighted area in the field at that time and therefore people casually accepted, as I did, that when you saw a culture that was unhappy, it either was a result of our ignorance of how to culture them, or some technical failure.
And so I thought to myself at this point in time that perhaps the technician who was handling these cell cultures had made a mistake, perhaps the glassware was not correctly cleaned, because at that time glassware was used over and over again and the cleaning procedures were unbelievably complicated. There were pages written that were adhered to by various laboratories all over the world describing how they washed their glassware compared to other people and it was a kind of art form. So that... that was also part of the mentality of why a culture would fail. So this... upon first notice, although I made a record of it, didn't impress.

As the weeks turned... went by and I accumulated – I don't recall specifically – let's say 20 cultures from 20 separate embryonic donors, foetal embryos. It's also important to say that during these during these culturing procedures, I learned that the tissue that was best was lung tissue. It was best because it gave rise to a cell type called 'a fibroblast'. That cell is found universally in our anatomy and the anatomy of other animals. It's a structural cell, although it was considered for years to be a kind of weed compared to specific cells like liver cells or kidney cells or heart cells that have specific functions. Fibroblasts are not weeds. They have enormous biochemical... biochemical reactions and produce substances like collagen and other materials, so they're very active and important cells and not at all weeds. But they do grow well. It's important to know that a normal cell will divide every 24 to 32 hours under optimum conditions and... and this, of course, accounts for the necessity to subcultivate them every three to four days.

So records were kept, as I indicated, of this particular event and a few weeks later, the same event occurred in another culture. I don't recall the precise number of cultures in which this event of... this event occurred. And the event was that the cells looked bigger. There were many fewer mitotic figures, that is fewer cells were dividing. And as the weeks went by in those particular cultures, there was no division occurring at all. But the cells didn't die, they continued to metabolise. That's an important observation. And we knew that because the media in which cells are generally grown contained a pH indicator. And neutral pH, which is their favourite pH condition, produces a colour that's rosy red and when they're metabolising, that neutral media becomes acidic and the culture turns orange and then yellow. And although the cells in these cultures that weren't dividing seemed to be metabolising because the media turned yellow, we had to change the media every week or two now, although we couldn't subculture them because they weren't dividing any longer, the... it was apparent to us that they were not dead, just sitting there metabolising.
I can't recall with accuracy the number of times we saw that... those events in... in cultures from individual embryos, but the number got increasingly greater and looking at my records, I then realised an important point and that was that the cultures that had stopped dividing – let's say from three or four of the 20 that were in the incubator – were the oldest ones. That is they were ones that were derived from embryos received about ten months or so roughly prior to this event. The other ones, received a week ago, a month ago, three months ago, were happy and it's important to say that the same technician was culturing these weekly, or semi-weekly and the same pool of glassware obtained from our storage area was used, so... and the same pool of culture media. So it became obvious that there was something about a cell culture that was older producing this effect.

I failed to mention earlier something that I regret having overlooked and that is that one of the main issues in respect of the research that I had planned was to make sure that the cells that I obtained from these foetal sources were normal. By this time, as I think I mentioned earlier, it was known that the 46 chromosomes is the true number of chromosomes for humans. And, of course, many people in the institute knew about my work as I knew about their work. We often met and discussed activities and because I... one of the variables that had to be determined in order to prove that my cells were normal was their what's called 'cariology', which means their chromosome number, not only the number of chromosomes, but the shapes of the chromosomes, how they look. At that time, that was critical in saying that... that a cell was normal. So I asked Paul Moorhead, my good friend at the Wistar Institute, to help me in establishing that these cells were normal in respect of their cariology, their chromosomal configuration and Paul happily did that for me. And he did that study for every cell strain that I subsequently worked with and I'll return to that issue later. But Paul was a very significant personality in this story. I had frequent conversations with him. He was a very bright man. And in fact, he suggested several experiments that were very critical and I'll discuss these subsequently.

Well, the observation that the two or three cultures were not behaving properly, suddenly stopped dividing after ten months or so, was no great shock, but when I looked at my records and discovered that they were the oldest ones, my ears perked up because that seemed to be inconsistent with what I had been taught and what I believed. As time went by, this phenomenon became more obvious as the cultures that were still dividing happily at that point themselves began to then stop dividing. So that it became perfectly obvious that the oldest cultures were the ones that... in which division capacity had stopped. And that was... that seemed to be a true case, but needed to be proven because again, at that time, one of the other reasons invoked for failures of cultures to continue to divide was the appearance of viruses. Virology, as I said several times I think, was now in its renaissance and many virologists were working with cell cultures in which research could more easily be done than in animals and viruses were always on my mind because most of the people around me at the institute were virologists, or working in some way with them. So that was a serious consideration, what’s causing the cessation of mitonic activity in these cells.

I had a conversation with Paul and we decided to do a critical experiment. It may not have been our first experiment to prove that this... that there was no virus present, but it was the most important one. At that time, although today it sounds strange, the way... we had... we just learned of a way of distinguishing male from female cells in culture. It was learned at that time by a Canadian investigator by the name of Barr, B-A-R-R, that of the two X chromosomes in a female cell, one of the X chromosomes does not disappear – I use that term advisedly – during the time that the cell is not dividing, what we call interphase between mitosis.
So that chromosome remains intact and is stainable, unlike a male cell which only has one X chromosome, of course, that female X chromosome that's visible is called the inactive X chromosome, inactive genetically. And as I said, stainable, so that when you stain cells, you see Barr bodies or inactive X chromosomes, you know it's a female cell. Well, that was critical because by this time, of course, the embryos that we were culturing came from both sexes and we knew which was male and which was female, so we designed an experiment in which we took, let's say, a million male cells from the 40th population doubling now knowing that these cultures underwent about 50 population doublings before they stopped dividing. That's critical. We took, let's say, a million female cells... sorry, a million male cells at the 40th doubling and mixed them with an equal number of female cells at, let's say, the 20th doubling and then we kept unmixed cultures of each sex as controls, cultured, subcultivated every week like the mixture, side by side in the same incubator.
What we soon learned was that the mix... the cells in the mixture could be cultured as long as the female cells. That is the control female cell culture. While the male cell control culture had stopped dividing many weeks before that event occurred. And when we looked at the mixture at the time that it had stopped dividing, all the cells were female.

What does that tell you? Well, it tells you many important things. It tells you that... that what caused the cessation of mitotic activity in the male cells in the mixed culture could not be a virus unless you invoke the exceedingly unlikely event and that is that some virus could distinguish between male and female cells and because we know that that's highly improbable – I won't say impossible, but I'll say very highly improbable – you can exclude that as an explanation. Furthermore, you... on the same basis, you can exclude technical error, which if it occurred could not possibly affect only one sex cells and not the other. You could also dismiss the theory that it had something to do with media composition for the same reason. Why would media distinguish male from female cells? Certainly an extreme possibility but highly improbable.
And that was pretty much the key experiment of the several that we did in those days to prove that our cells were normal. Of course, Paul's findings in respect to the side of genetics indicated clearly they were normal. But this male-female experiment which we at first because of the way I just explained it, we called this experiment the 'dirty old man experiment' for obvious reasons. I should say that we also did the 'dirty old lady' experiment with the same result. So we were pretty convinced that this was not an artefact of culture, that the cells' failure to divide after roughly 50 population doublings was due to some kind of internal cellular mechanism and not some external artefact like virus, media composition, culture failure, phases of the moon, anything else that you could invoke. And so this, of course, flew in the face of the dogma that said that all cultures have the potential to be immortal.

The next series of events had to do with further convincing ourselves that this was a correct interpretation because Paul and I were both about the same age. We were still young men, starting our careers. And because I knew many of the major personalities in the field of cell culture – by this time I had been teaching the annual tissue culture course that my former boss Laurence Steinbering had brought to the laboratory when I was a student at Penn [University of Pennsylvania]. I was now involved with actually teaching in that course and through that mechanism had met most of the major figures and could easily talk to them and approach them.
Several of them, I remember distinctly one individual in particular, that was George Gey, the man who discovered the HeLa cell and a balance salt solution which was part of the technology that has his name to a particular formulation – George and I were pretty close friends, we had met each other at the annual cell culture course in addition to which his mentor, a man by the name of Warren Lewis, another pioneer in cell culture, had retired from two or three institutions, including Johns Hopkins, where George Gey worked, and Warren Lewis was still living and working in his laboratory on an upper floor of the Wistar Institute during the events that I just described and I got to know Warren. Of course, he was a highly-respected man in his 90s. His wife was still living. She was also a well-known scientist and George came to visit them frequently and I would meet him on those occasions.
George, who by then knew about my work, said, 'Lenny, you're going to get yourself in a lot of trouble.' He was a very outspoken fellow which I admired. 'You're going to get yourself in a lot of trouble if you publish this because there must be some error going on here.' I said, 'George, you know the experiments that Paul and I did. We can't see any hole in these experiments.' 'I don't care', he said, 'there's something going on, you know, this has been known for 60 years that cells are immortal.' And furthermore he reminded me of something that I should address now and so I'll make this diversion, and that is that there was a key experiment done in the field of cell culture in the mid 19... actually, in the early 1900s, from roughly 1910 or 11 up until the 1930s, early 40s. This key experiment, known to many people, even many people in the public, was an experiment done by a man whose name is Alexis Carrel.
Alexis Carrel was an unusual personality. On the good side, I suppose it can be said that he raised cell culture to a level of visibility by the public and by scientists in general. I think that was... probably can be called a good thing, but he probably had more negative things about him than excellent qualities. First of all, in the non-scientific realm, he was essentially a fascist. He was working – he did the work that I'll describe in a moment – at the Rockefeller Institute in New York which it was then called. The work he did was to claim that he had cultured cells from a chick heart for over... for close to 40 years. Well, of course, that flew in the face of my observations. How is it possible for chick cells to replicate so many times, over 40 years and apparently, although he didn't know this for sure, apparently remain normal. As I say, that was not known for sure, but what was known was that there were no transformed chick cell populations known in the 60s when work with chick cells was very widespread throughout the world. One couldn't culture chick embryo fibroblast more than 15 or 20 population doublings. That also argued against what Alexis Carrel had changed.
Going back to his political stance which has some bearing on these scientific events, he published a book that became widely read called Man: The Unknown in which he expressed his right-wing fascist viewpoint and indeed his serious anti-Semitic attitude. I should say, as an aside, that I was involved with another gentleman in this field to persuade the authorities in Paris to remove his name from a street named in his honour in Paris and I'm happy to say that we were successful about three years ago. Alexis Carrel, to finish the political side of his career, left the United States and became part of the Vichy government as a Nazi sympathiser.
Returning to his laboratory work, he was a surgeon by training, a physician. In fact, he won a Nobel Prize, not for the cell culture work that I'll describe in a moment, but believe it or not, for a surgical knot.

His work in cell culture began in about 1910 or 11 and it was about that time that he initiated this culture from a chick heart... embryonic chick heart cells and he was... he believed, strangely enough... and because this was a very serious problem in cell culture until the antibiotic era, the problem being the frequent contamination of cell culture with bacteria from the atmosphere. As you worked on the cultures, you had to open and close vessels, bottles, and frequently bacteria would fall in, contaminate the culture and your experiment was finished, so major efforts were made, prior to the antibiotic era, to prevent this from happening. All kinds of procedures were conducted. Carrel felt that everything had to be painted black in order to reduce the likelihood of contamination. Not only the rooms themselves, floors, ceilings and walls, but also the workers themselves, who were gowned from head to foot in black attire looking like Ku Klux Klan figures roaming about this large laboratory facility.

Carrel also was one of the first... I doubt that he was the first, but he was one of the first biologists at least to take advantage, if you can call this an advantage, of the public and publicity and he encouraged the press to visit his laboratory, which they did almost on an annual basis to pay homage to this so-called immortal chick cell population. And there have been many articles written about this, these events, and several books indeed. One that I remember specifically, to give you some idea of the notoriety that he achieved, occurred one year when reporters from the New York World Telegram, I believe, came to his laboratory on the anniversary of one of the years of age of so-called immortal cell strain and published an article saying that it was still happily dividing and that Dr Carrel said that if you kept all the cultures – as I explained earlier, although these cultures were not done in the same way that I described earlier, but the ultimate events are pretty similar – that if you kept all of the cells that Dr Carrel had kept over these years as the cultures were divided, they would... and this is more or less a direct quote, they would have created a rooster big enough to cross the Atlantic in a single stride. That'll give you some insight into the kind of publicity that he enjoyed and apparently it provided either some personal satisfaction for him and the notoriety probably resulted in financial support for his research being increased.
The last thing I'll say about his search for publicity was that after Charles Lindberg flew the Atlantic alone for the first time. He was not the first to fly the Atlantic. He was the second, in fact. Lindberg returned to New York, of course, with a ticker tape parade, his notoriety was worldwide and as you may know he was trained as an engineer. By this time, Carrel had directed his research toward efforts to preserve intact organs, whole intact human organs in the lab. That is an entire liver, to keep it... keep the liver functioning as an intact liver in a vessel in the laboratory. Consequently, he needed someone knowledgeable about... essentially about plumbing. How do you provide nutrient through the arteries and veins within this organ to keep it alive as long as you possibly can. And whether this part of the story is the correct interpretation or not, I don't know, but he got in touch with Lindberg and hired Lindberg who was a worker in his laboratory for quite some time on the... on his efforts to keep an intact organ alive using some of the engineer principles allegedly known to Lindberg.

I also failed to mention that in the construction of his laboratory, Rockefeller, he had a balcony built above the lab with, I believe, a glass... glass between the balcony and up to the ceiling. But this balcony allowed him to encourage writers and journalists to visit the lab, walk down this balcony and try to see these strange black figures roaming around the laboratory – that is, a black laboratory – doing cell culture.
The downside of that gave to the field of cell culture something that it's only recently, in my judgement, outlived and that is a feeling of 'black magic', that cell culture was a black art. That indeed existed for decades, well into the... certainly through the '60s and possibly even into the '70s. No one can measure this accurately but in my judgement, it lasted for a very long time and most of the people, certainly in the '60s, knew this very well.

Alexis Carrel was very well known for this... this alleged immortal jigsaw population and because of that, I was faced with an explanation of his work because it flew in the face of what I had found. In one of my early papers, I described an event that took place about a year or two after my first paper describing my... my discovery – to which I will return in a moment because I'm following a thread now that should be completed before I return a few years prior to this event in order to make sense out of these crosscurrents that are occurring at that time.
So to complete this story, several other very important things occurred that led me to believe that Alexis Carrel had made some kind of error. The major event was when I was teaching at the University of Puerto Rico in '63 or '64. After my paper was published – during which time I was still dealing with the Carrel story and trying to understand what happened – I gave a lecture at the University of Puerto Rico, a public lecture after teaching there for a couple of months. After the lecture a woman came up to me and introduced herself as a former technician in Alexis Carrel's laboratory at the time of the events that I had been... that I had mentioned in my lecture and I was stunned. I said, 'You were?' She later identified herself as the wife of the dean of the School of Dentistry at the University of Puerto Rico and I said, 'For goodness' sake, we have to have a chat', which we did have and she told me the following interesting story and that is that she arrived in Alexis Carrel's lab in the mid-20s and, as a young woman in the lab, being trained by senior technicians and ultimately getting the privilege of seeing the so-called immortal jigsaw population. She was, of course, very interested in that and all of the things or events surrounding it and began... actually rose in her responsibilities, somehow became associated with caring for this culture and announced one day to her superior that the culture itself had some peculiar properties.

At that time, trypsin was not used to prepare cultures. You took, in this case, a tiny piece of a beating chick heart from an embryo and a scrap of tissue no bigger than a pinhead. You then placed it on a glass slide or in a culture vessel. And indeed Carrel himself invented a vessel that bears his name, it's called a 'Carrel vessel'. It's no longer used. It's a drum-shaped glass container with a neck slanting upwards from the rim of the drum and it makes culturing a bit more easy than the vessels that were used previous to that invention. However, those are now obsolete.
The cultures then were prepared by putting one drop of the extract of a chick embryo... you would take a chick embryo, put it in the barrel of a syringe before it formed bones so it was all soft tissue, press the plunger of the syringe barrel... down the syringe barrel and, of course, that would macerate the tissue, you would collect it in a test tube half filled with the media that I described earlier. However, it didn't contain serum, it would just contain the salts that were necessary for – or that were thought necessary – for growth. That media... that part of the media is called 'balanced salt solution': sodium, potassium, calcium, etc.
And that mixture of macerated chick embryo and the media is then centrifuged – spun at a high rate of speed so that the heavy particles settle to the bottom – and then you remove what's called the 'supernatant fluid', which is the clear fluid on top of the packed garbage at the bottom of the test tube. And you use that fluid which contains, hopefully, all of the nutrients extracted from the chick embryo that a chick embryo cell would need. Perfect logic and, in fact, it does work.
So, one drop of that is put on top of this pinhead-sized piece of chick heart or any other tissue and then you add a drop of blood plasma. Blood plasma still contains the clotting elements and when you put that drop of chick plasma onto the drop of chick embryo extract, a clot forms, like a blood clot. However, there are no red blood cells there; there are very few left from the embryo and none in the plasma. So it's a clear clot and it acts as a glue gluing the scrap of tissue onto the surface of the slide and, simultaneously, providing the cells with all the nutrients they need. Put into the incubator and then what happens is rather complicated but for this story, what's important to know is that the cells begin to divide at the edge, around the rim of this explant, which is the technical name for it, an explant.
So you now have cells dividing, you can see under the microscope, coming out as a sheet of cells as they divide in the perimeter of this explant. After a week or so, the cells have divided to the point that they reach the perimeter of the clot and now you need to subculture. The way you do it, using this primitive technology, was to take sterile scalpels, cut the pie-shaped culture into quarters, remove each quarter and embed them each in a separate clot, as described, in four different vessels. And, of course, you can repeat that, as Carrel did, for some 35 or 40 years. And this was the way this culture was carried.
When this woman became knowledgeable in Carrel's laboratory about this culture and looked at it one day when it had just been... after a couple of days after transplantation, she called over her superior and said, 'Look here, what's going on? I see at the margin of this clot, a tiny island of cells separated by a millimetre or more from the main culture in the centre of the clot, and I know from my experience in this laboratory that cells do not migrate away from the centre explant and then build another mini explant or mini collection of cells one millimetre away with nothing between.'
'Oh', said the superior, her superior, 'don't worry about that, that's nothing. We don't worry about that.' And so this woman took the advice of her superior and after several months or years, she became more and more puzzled by this event that she observed many times and couldn't figure out how it happened. By this time it was 1929, stock market crash, people... 20 million people are out of work and after our young lady said for the umpteenth time, 'What's happening in these cultures', her superior said, 'If you want to maintain your job here, you will ignore what you are wanting to discuss.' Well, of course, everybody wanted to maintain their work and she did as directed.
And this is the story that she told me and she ended by saying, 'Your interpretation of Carrel's work is correct and what I had said during my lecture is the following.' After reading his papers... although this certainly wasn't proof, it was suggested only. Carrel showed in many of his papers – he published several papers on this culture, maybe several dozen – each time he fed the cultures, twice a week I recall, in the next day or two, there was a burst of mitotic activity. Now, you could easily argue that that's because they were fed fresh media and that encouraged them to replicate. The other interpretation is that somehow, the culture was being re-fed with new cells and that was my interpretation because the method of centrifugation in those days was so primitive that the probability of fresh cells still remaining in the fluid portion of the embryo extract was great, and that each time they did a sub-cultivation and put in one drop of embryo extract, they were in fact adding fresh cells. And that would explain the observation that this woman technician made in respect to islands of cells distant from the actual culture in the centre of the clot.

A man by the name of Jan Witkowski – Jan is now at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories as a... he works with Jim Watson but he manages the conference centre there. Jan, who was working in London, received a grant – I believe, from the Wellcome Foundation – to do some kind of investigation of Carrel's claim. And he wrote a series of four papers in a journal called The History of Science in which he went into this question as... deeper than anyone I know and he, of course, published these four papers.
But Jan went one step further. He argued that Carrel knew about this but by this time, Carrel's notoriety associated with this immortal cell culture was so great in the public domain that for this to be discovered and presented to the public would be a scandal of major proportions and affect his career negatively very much. And according to Jan's interpretation, this was the case. The other argument that I made was a bit more conservative and it said that Carrel didn't know about this, that the technicians were trying to protect his reputation. So, you can essentially take your choice as to what the truth might be but anyone interested should read these papers written by Jan Witkowski.

These cells, this so-called immortal cell culture, was terminated, I believe in 1942 or thereabouts, after something like 34 years of allegedly continuous cultivation. So I was more or less having this conversation and this woman gave me a lot of confidence that my original interpretation was close to being correct. And what further supported my contention was that many people, including a good friend from Stockholm, a man by the name of Jan Ponten did a series of experiments with cell... with chick cell cultures and found none of them capable of going beyond 15 or 20 population doublings.
Another significant event in this regard is that another major personality in the field from the University of Toronto, a man by the name of Parker, I met at a cell culture conference early on, Raymond Parker was his full name. He published several important books on tissue culture technology. I sat down with Ray Parker at this conference in the mid-'60s I believe it was, and he said... and of course, he knew about my work and about the controversy with Carrel and he said, 'Len, I need to talk to you about the Carrel story.'
He said that he spent a sabbatical year or so in Carrel's laboratory in the 20s – he was a much older man than me – and Ray said that: when I came to Carrel's laboratory I told him, you know, your technicians are preparing embryo extract every three days. It's a task that they need not do as frequently as that. What we do in our laboratory in Toronto is to make the embryo extract and put it in the refrigerator and it lasts us for a couple of weeks and this minimised the amount of work our technicians have to do.
'Oh', said Carrel, 'that won't work at all because the nutrients necessary for the replication of my immortal cell strain will be destroyed upon refrigeration which is why we prepare it twice a week.' And Ray went on to say that when he made this proposal to Carrel and argued to at least try it, Carrel finally agreed and Ray prepared the embryo extract along with the technicians and after outing it in the refrigerator and introducing it into this immortal cell culture, the immortal cell culture began to look weary and tired and failing. And Carrel said, 'You see, I told you that if you put this embryo extract in a refrigerator, the nutrients are destroyed.'
Well, that also explained and supported the contention that putting the embryo extract in the refrigerator would kill the living cells that we proposed were present in that media because it was well known that if you put living cells in a refrigerator for 24 or 48 hours, they won't survive. In order to preserve cells, it requires a much more sophisticated technology and a temperature far lower than an ordinary refrigerator. So that persuaded Carrel, of course you can believe to be correct and it persuaded me and many others to believe that we were on the right track in respect to our interpretation. So that was a key meeting I had with Ray Parker.

We now had convinced ourselves of the authenticity of our finding that the failure of the cells finally to stop replicating must be due to some internal cellular phenomenon, and not to some external artefact like a virus or culture technique problems and any other external cell argument that you might propose for reasons that I describe, in particular, in a male-female experiment.

The next step, obviously, was to interpret our results in some context as is customary in scientific reporting and to publish our studies. After trying to understand this phenomenon further, one of the things that occurred to me was that it might be possible that cells and culture are unable to make some essential constituent in culture that they're only capable of making when they're in the animal or, in this case, the human body. And that that... and what is happening, theoretically, is that that unknown constituent molecule would be diluted out by the fiftieth population doubling. It would be made by the tissue that you initiated the culture with and over a period of 50 population doublings, it would be diluted to the point where it was inactive. So this was a tenable hypothesis.

I did the mathematics in respect to this argument and proposed that if the molecule is hydrogen, the smallest molecule... if the initial cells in the population – that is, the primary culture – consisted entirely of oxygen... of hydrogen, then what is the likelihood that  a hydrogen molecule would end up in the... after 50 population doublings? And the answer is: after knowing the weight of a single cell – and you can determine that if you know the weight of a million cells, which is easy to do; you simply do the math and you know the weight of a single cell – and by doing those mathematics, you come to the conclusion that in order for a cell of the fiftieth population doubling to have in it a single hydrogen molecule from the start of lineage, that would be impossible. The molecule would have been diluted out far earlier than 50 population doublings.
It's important to understand that 50 population doublings, using the number 50 sounds trivial, but if you do the mathematics, you're talking about two to the fiftieth power. Two to the fiftieth power is roughly 10 to the fifteenth power. And if you do more mathematics, you learn that two to the fiftieth power is equivalent to 20 million metric tonnes of cells. That is a big number. And, if you want some context in which to appreciate that number, you may recall and old children's fairy tale involving a king who offered a prize if one of his subjects did some major favour for him, which did indeed happen.
The subject said to the king, 'I want in return for this favour, a grain of wheat put on a checker board; one grain on the first board section and then double it for 64 blocks.' Well, of course, well before the 64th block, you reach a number of wheat grains, more than have ever been produced on this planet. So that gives you some idea of the powers of numbers. That... that became a critical point later as I'll mention. That is the point that it could not be that a molecule bigger than hydrogen would survive after the fiftieth population doubling.

Also during this period of time, as I mentioned earlier in my description of how you preserve cells in liquid nitrogen or in super cold conditions... during the period that we were writing our paper, I had described and derived 25 cell populations. 25 different so-called diploid, which means the normal number of chromosomes... the term diploid means, in the case of humans, 46 chromosomes. And I may use that term frequently. That the cells can be preserved in liquid nitrogen.
In the early days during the time the paper was written, we had... liquid nitrogen storage was not known in cell culture and we stored our cultures in a deepfreeze, in a... well, later... later in a CO2 freezer. But when the paper was being written, our cell strains were stored in an electrically-driven deep freeze with a temperature near that of dry ice, -7 degrees Celsius. So, during the writing of the paper, that freezer failed and all of the cultures described in my original paper published in 1961 were dead by the time the paper was published.
During that... when I was informed of the failure, of course, it was very disturbing and I simply started to make another cell strain which, by that time, was an easy proposition. I knew very well how to do it, access to human embryonic tissue was still easy and I'll return to that issue in a moment. But the reason I mention this is that during the time these cells were frozen before we lost them in the freezer failure, we had withdrawn ampoules of cells at various population doublings.
Just to make it simple, if you took an ampoule of cells at the twentieth population doubling that was frozen, reconstituted them in a culture vessel and then continued to subculture them as usual as they divided, you learned that the cells had a memory. They remembered at what population doubling, in this case let's say 20, and they would go on to undergo 30 more doublings. If you reconstituted one at the tenth doubling, it would have 40 left. If you reconstituted one at the fortieth, it would have ten left. Well, that was an amazing observation and the only way I could account for that is to argue that the cells had a memory, they had a mechanism for counting the number of population doublings. That seemed really bizarre but, nonetheless, you had to consider it and I did and this is a substantial part of one of my original papers.

Now, returning to the original paper which has a very interesting story, Paul and I are still very hesitant – he was the co-author with me on the original paper. There are actually two papers that describe virtually everything; the first one was authored by myself and Paul, the second one was authored by me alone. We were still, with some trepidation, worried about publishing this work, young men starting their careers, you make a major error like this and you're finished. At least, you'll suffer considerably. Consequently, I decided to do, 'an experiment', that you won't find reported in the paper.
I decided that because I knew several of the major grey eminences in the field at the time, I would pick up the phone, call them and tell them that I would appreciate it very much if they would accept a culture of my normal human cells, culture them in their lab under their expert guidance and that if this was, let's say June of this year, that you would call me in December of this year and tell me that the cultures I'm sending you – if you agree to it – next week have stopped dividing. 'Oh, okay, we don't believe that at all but, as a favour to a young scientist, we'll do it.'
So I sent cultures, I think, to Harry Eagle – a major personality in the field whose name is given to a media formulation that he developed that's very commonly used, even to this day – George Gey, of course, and I don't recall who else I sent to. Sure enough, December came around, the phone rang from all three of these gentlemen; 'Len, the cultures you sent us have stopped dividing.' Well, I figured if that has occurred and if I'm wrong, when I go down in flames, I'm going to have very important company. That you will not find that story in the Materials and Methods section of the paper.

So Paul and I decided to publish. We wrote the paper, it was a rather long paper because in it, we not only described the phenomena that I've just described, but we described the virus spectrum of these cells which was the broadest known at that time. The cells seemed to be capable of replicating every known virus and some that were unknown, as I explained, at that time. But I still had one nagging problem and that nagging problem was that another senior personality in the field, a man by the name of Theodore Puck who was then working at the University of Colorado, a very well-known personality in the cell culture field – he had written a kind of mini text book on how to do culture, he had a course that was very popular outside of the national course and he had made some significant observations.
The reason I worried about what he had published is that he had been working also for years with normal human cells, yet this giant in the field had never found... had never had a clue to appreciate what had happened to my human cultures and my interpretation of those events. This was very puzzling and I didn't know him personally at all at the time and it was worrisome.

A few weeks or months, perhaps, before we decided to submit our paper for publication, I discovered that... that Ted Puck was giving a major lecture at the annual FASEB meeting in Atlantic City, New Jersey, just a few hours from Philadelphia. And the FASEB meeting, the Federation of the American Society of Experimental Biology, drew at least, in those days, 15,000 to 20,000 biologists. A huge meeting, and Ted Puck was giving a major address at this conference. And I... so I decided to go to this meeting.
I went to the meeting, entered the hall, a huge hall at one of the big hotels in Atlantic City, took my seat, listened to Ted Puck talk about his cultures of human cells and the major work that he was doing were efforts to understand their nutrient requirements. And he, even in his publications, described in very... in 13 point type, a font that's hardly legible, the methods that he used to screen all of the amino acid components and the serum components used in his culturing of human cells to be sure they didn't contain any toxic materials and to learn that they were beneficial for the cell culture, because he argues strenuously that these normal human cells were very fastidious and required utmost determination of optimum conditions for growth.
I, on the other hand, was using media purchased from commercial sources, never tested any further in my laboratory and I was using essentially off-the-shelf commercial material that was never studied in any way near what Ted Puck was doing and that was part of my worry. So after Ted got finished with his lecture, questions were requested and, with some fear, I raised my hand in this enormous hall and said, 'Dr Puck, in the course of your research with human cells, have you ever observed that the cells can be sub-cultured frequently and then suddenly lose their capacity for replication?' And without hesitation, he said, 'Oh, of course, we see this frequently but obviously it's because of our failure to determine, with the accuracy necessary, that the media components are without toxic components.'
And I sat down because it was then obvious to me that he had missed the whole point and that I was home free, essentially because what he had seen... and he went on to say, 'Furthermore, when that happens, we simply go back to our freezer and withdraw an ampoule of cells and continue our work', which, of course, made sense in respect to what he was doing but it confirmed what we had found. And that was a great relief.

We wrote the paper and because Ted Puck was one of the few people working with what allegedly were normal human cells, although he did not identify them as such, as we did thoroughly, as thoroughly as could be done in those days... I should also say that one of the things that we did that you cannot easily do today because of regulations and ethical considerations, although this was not at that time considered to be unethical... In order to demonstrate that our normal cells were indeed normal and not... had no cancer cell properties – and you'll find this in the original paper described – we took one or more of our human diploid cell strains and, through our surgical contacts at Pen, at the hospital, we inoculated, or they inoculated into terminal cancer patients – cancer patients who had no more than six months to live – in one arm, inoculated under the skin, a million born normal human cells and on the other arm a million or more HeLa cells.
Now, HeLa cells, remember, are a transformed population with significant cancer cell properties and in fact derive from cancer tissue from a human cervical carcinoma. And what we discovered is what we hoped to find, in fact, and that was that the HeLa cells inoculated that side began to grow in a tiny nodule as big a matchstick head and then they were excised surgically so that no damage, no further damage, was done to these patients who did indeed volunteer or had their legal guardians approve of what we were doing; this was not done sub rosa. On the other arm, we found that the normal human cells simply dissipated; they produced no nodule and they just disappeared, which was further evidence, at that time in interpreting these kinds of events, of the normality of these cells.

When we were working with Mycoplasma pneumoniae, we needed to do something called fulfilling Koch's postulates. Robert Koch, a German scientist, established some principles in respect to how you prove that a disease is caused by a particular agent and his rules went something like this. Of course, you must isolate the agent and identify it first, then you must inoculate it into an appropriate animal and this, in some cases, as with pneumoniae, a human, and then you must prove that disease is produced and then you must isolate the organism from the disease and prove that you have the same organism. Those are Koch's postulates.
So, Bob Chanock and I had an opportunity to do this because in that era, there were, at the Political Centre in Bethesda, prisoner quote volunteers end quote; federal prisoner volunteers on whom experiments were done. In our case, it was not a serious breach of any ethical consideration in my judgement because what we did was to take the culture that I had discovered, grow up the mycoplasmas in a solution and instil it into the nares, into the nose of prisoner volunteers, hoping to reproduce primary atypical pneumonia. Now, that wasn't a fatal disease if indeed the prisoners came down with it because we could treat it immediately with antibiotics and that would be the end of it.
It turned out that the culture that... my culture was negative; it did not produce the disease. After I had by this time isolated a fresh culture of Mycoplasma pneumoniae from a patient at the University of Pennsylvania and grew that up, that one did produce disease. The reason the first one failed is a very well known phenomenon and that is when a microorganism with... that produces some pathogenicity is passaged many, many times as this agent had been by Monroe Eaton and Bob Chanock, that it will lose its disease-producing capability. And apparently that's what happened.
So, my strain, although it has been deposited in a central repository for microorganisms in the United States called the American Type Culture Collection and in the United Kingdom and Germany and several other countries, that strain did not produce disease for the reasons that I mentioned. And so, the ethical considerations, as you can see, were quite different. No committee approval was required as is required today.

In our efforts to interpret these events and put it in some scientific context, after having ruled out the possibility that the cells were running out of some important nutrient that they couldn't produce in cell culture, and after eliminating virtually any explanation we could think of in conversations with a bunch of people at the Institute – most of them knew about our work as we did of theirs – I don't recall with... with certainty who first proposed an answer, whether it was me or someone else is a bit foggy, but essentially unimportant because whoever, whether it was me or someone else... we became excited about the explanation that this had something to do with ageing. And the reason we thought that was a good idea is because we could not exclude it. And it made... since ageing, the biology of ageing, was in a very primitive area of research, nobody knew virtually anything about it at that time, we thought this was a good way out of the trap of explaining, putting our work in some context. That's how insignificant we thought that interpretation was and indeed it was stated in the original paper. Of course, my next paper that I authored alone pretty much convinced us, or came close to convincing me at least, that we were being told something about the ageing phenomenon in respect to this event but we didn't take it all that seriously in the first paper.

So, returning to the story in respect to the publication of my first paper in 1961, the evidence that I wanted from Ted Puck was right on target and Paul and I were convinced that we should publish this paper. And because Ted Puck has published all of his work in a journal called the Journal of Experimental Medicine, we decided to submit our paper to that journal. That journal, in fact, was published by the Rockefeller Institute which had the interesting connection with Carrel who published all of his papers in that journal, and so we felt that was an appropriate journal for this work.
The paper was written and, as I say, it contained several... several themes. One, of course, was the major thing which is the finite replicative capacity of normal cells, the virus spectrum and we also suggested that the cells could be used for the production of human virus vaccines because, by this time, the state of alarm in respect to the use of monkey kidney had reached such a crescendo that people were really worried, and I'll return to that issue shortly; that is, people producing vaccines were getting very worried, including Salk and Sabin and Hilary Koprowski.
The paper was submitted and because Paul and I were unknown in... in the biology field and because Hilary Koprowski had an international reputation and knew many of the people on the editorial board of the Journal of Experimental Medicine, he wrote the covering letter to our manuscript, describing what he thought was important about it, and the paper was submitted. I now have a recollection that while we were writing the paper, we in fact invited Hilary to join us as co-author. He refused. It was customary in those days to at least make that offer to your chief. He did not accept the offer, I think largely because, at that time, he was really sceptical, as most people were, about our results. That didn't bother us to any extent.
In fact, I remember one day in my periodic reporting to him about my work was that I began to tell... I told him about the virus spectrum, about the finite lifetime. I also told him that I had discovered a way of making the cells pile up, not as a single cell-layer thick, which looks very much like the skin that would come off your back after sunburn, a very thin, single cell-layer thick, which is usually the way it grows on... on the floor of a flask. But then under certain conditions, you can make the cells pile up to become ten or 12 cells thick and look very much like a tissue and we reported that as well in this paper. So, as I made my frequent reports to Hilary, I remember one time he said to me, 'Len, one day you're going to come in here and you're going to tell me that there's nothing that these cells can't do.' Of course, he said that jokingly. But he was very interested in what we were doing, mainly because of its becoming increasingly clear that there's an opportunity here to replace monkey kidney.

The paper was written, Hilary wrote the covering letter, submitted it to the Journal of Experimental Medicine and we waited several months. My recollection is that we waited about six months before we received – or, I should say Hilary received – the letter which, of course, was given to Paul and me. I still have the original letter.
The original letter went something along these lines: 'We apologise for the long delay in reviewing this paper occasioned by spring meetings' – meaning scientific meetings which these editors apparently attended – 'but we find the paper unacceptable for the following reasons.' And, although I can't quote the entire letter with accuracy, I think I can quote the salient two or three sentences.

The first statement was that – and I think I can quote this pretty accurately – as anyone who has worked with cell culture will know, that cells cultured under the proper milieu in vitro will replicate indefinitely, which was precisely the dogma that we had thought we had torpedoed.
The next paragraph said: 'The suggestion that these events have anything to do with ageing is notably rash', end quote. The letter was signed by Peyton Rous, R O U S. Peyton Rous received the Nobel prize two years after our paper was rejected over his signature. He was well known and a well respected scientist. He not only discovered the Rous sarcoma virus, a virus of chickens that produces tumours, he also was the first to describe trypsin as an enzyme useful in cell culture and his description of trypsin lay unrecognised in the literature for about 15 years before it finally became rediscovered as a useful enzyme.
Well, that was a shock. Paul and I were pretty upset. The paper was lengthy and it described things in great detail and here we were faced with this rejection.

We then, I believe, spoke with Hilary who said, you should send your paper in now to Experimental Cell Research in Stockholm, Sweden, that's... the title is obviously appropriate for this paper. And my recollection is that he had a friend on the editorial board to whom the paper may have been directly sent, I don't recall that with any accuracy. But within six weeks, the paper was accepted without any change whatsoever. The paper was published, however, my recollection is that it was in press for about six months and it was during that period that the freezer failure occurred – electrical freezer – and we lost everything described in that paper.
So, during that time, I started another cell population since the first 25 were named WI one through 25 – WI obviously Wistar Institute. The next one would be called WI 26; it was from a male foetus and it was reasonably widely circulated, nationally and internationally.

Hilary Koprowski, because of his contacts in the field of vaccinology worldwide, was visited frequently by people in the field and we had frequently the pleasure of meeting these folks and now that my paper was published and by this time we had shown the good growth or, I should say, replication of polio virus in these cells, the polio vaccine community began to pay attention, especially because of some events that occurred just about that time that made the problems of monkey kidney even more serious. And that was that because of the problems with viruses found in those cells, manufacturers and, in particular Maurice Hilleman at Merck, were looking at other monkey species.
There are hundreds of species of monkeys. The Rhesus and the Cynamologous monkeys were the most common ones used but Maurice decided to explore other monkeys in respect to finding some that were free of these potentially dangerous viruses, one of which, at that time, had already been discovered to produce comas in people who were accidently inoculated with primary kidney cell fluids. These unfortunate people were usually, in manufacturing facilities, receiving an inoculation from a broken glass bottle containing cultured monkey kidney cells.
There are several people who were... it was pretty well know that that was the source and there were other people, one man in particular by the name of Karl Habel, a very well known, highly respected virologist, wonderful personality, went into coma one time and it was believed that his many years of working with monkeys and monkey kidneys was the source of his unfortunate disease.

As a consequence of these unfortunate events associated with the use of primary monkey kidney cells in the early 60s and the emergence of approximately 20 or 30 viruses... different viruses found in the cells and the necessity for tests to exclude them, and all of the other efforts in this regard, the... my proposal of using... or my normal human cell strains for this purpose, in particular WI-26, which became widely circulated for experiments that addressed this problem, the... there occurred another even that was even of greater consequence.
And that was that in efforts to explore the use of other monkey species for vaccine development and manufacture, and hopefully to find a species that lacked these dangerous viruses, Maurice Hilleman at Merck and a man by the name of Benjamin Sweet did experiments, I believe it was with the green monkey, cercopithecus aethiops, which revealed something very interesting.
I won't go through the technology in which this was discovered; that's rather detailed and irrelevant other than the conclusion. And the conclusion was that green monkey cells yielded a result implying that a new virus was present in the cells from... from rhesus and cynomolgus monkeys that had very strange properties. And they called this virus – I believe they were the ones who named it – SV40.  All of the viruses found in money kidney were given the name SV, standing for Simian Virus, and they were numbered. This one then received the number 40. And about the same time, events were occurring that would link with this observation at the National Institutes of Health.

There was a woman scientist who was working in what's called the Division of Biologics Standards, which at that time was the unit at the NIH, not at the FDA; they were not at the FDA at that time. This unit was at the NIH and its... its purpose was to approve or disapprove vaccines for sale in the United States. It was called the DBS, standing for the Division of Biologics Standards.
It was run by a man by the name of Roderick Murray, who was actually a South African by birth; a rather conservative figure. And in one of his labs this woman scientist, whose name hopefully will surface in minute or two, was in the process of testing vaccines submitted for approval. And in the course of her research – and, again, I won't go into the technical details – she inoculated some of the vaccine preparation sent for testing and approval into hamster cheek pouches. The hamster has cheek pouches in which it stores its food for later consumption or storage, so it packs its cheeks with these food particles. The cheek pouch is a particularly interesting organ because it's... it has very little in the way of immunity and, consequently, it can grow things that ordinarily would not grow in other tissues. And so, it's a very useful organ.
The lady's name is Bernice Eddy, E-D-D-Y. Bernice, who I was... who I knew well, at that time, inoculated polio preparations into the cheek pouch of hamsters and discovered that tumours were produced, which was quite alarming. Later developments – and these developments occurred rather quickly – showed that the virus... that there was a virus involved and that the virus was the same one discovered by Sweet and Hilleman at Merck called SV40. And SV40 has the alarming capability not only of producing tumours in the cheek pouches of hamsters, but worst of all, when introduced into cell cultures of human cells, frequently causes them to transform into cell lines or cancer cells. Obviously, very... obvious... probably the worst calamity you can think of.
Furthermore, by this time, in the early '60s, the Salk vaccine had been approved and widely used. Sabin's vaccine, I believe, was just also being used in many countries, including the US. And it was easy to learn that several million people worldwide had received those vaccines that contained, at no extra cost, SV40 virus, a huge worry.

That has been followed for many, many years in respect to whether those early vaccinees were in danger and the results have been equivocal. Books have been written about these events, scientists have fought each other in public about their interpretation of whether or not cancer incidents frequency... cancer incidences increased. The problem is that you don't know actually who received SV40 directly and you need... you would need to have records on many millions of people for a long period of time to discover whether the frequency of cancer occurring had in fact gone up, and we don't have that critical data. So, there's a lot of speculation.
So, I'll leave the matter there because this is a huge subject – books, as I said, have been written about it – and return to the story of the use of my cells, having mentioned this only to emphasise now the importance of moving away from primary monkey kidney, although I must say that that was a very difficult job, despite what I just described.

The monkey importation industry – and it was an industry – didn't want to see this changed. Many scientists who were worried about the use of normal human cells, Albert Sabin in particular... A few years during this debate, Albert tried to make the case that my normal human cells probably contained Hepatitis virus, at that time and still even to this day, a dangerous virus. He argued that, despite the fact that we didn't have accurate ways of detecting it in my cells, that it was possible that, although vaccinees receiving vaccines producing... producing cell populations did not do any harm to their current recipients, harm could show up in their children; that is, a generation could be skipped. Well, the same argument could be made about monkey kidneys, so it was a non-argument. I... in fact, Albert and I confronted each other in a British publication in letters to the editors, arguing this matter, along with a close friend of mine, who I'll describe in more detail in a moment. His name is Frank Perkins, a Brit who was the director of the equivalent of the Division of Biological Standardisation in the UK. He was located up at MRC in Hampstead.

Another event occurred that was really bothersome and that was an event that occurred at the NIH in which a meeting was held by I think it was four or five major personalities at the NIH, including a gentlemen who was a well-known cell culturist. His name was Wilton Earle, E-A-R-L-E; a very well-known personality in the cell culture field. He worked at the National Cancer Institute; did a lot of very important work. And he headed a committee that the NIH established to address this question of whether a cell population like my cell populations could, in fact, be useful for vaccine production. One of the members was Karl Habel, in fact; he was not a cell culturist, so he cannot be guilty of what I will explain shortly as a serious problem created by that committee. It was Wilton Earle who was behind this effort.
The conclusion... the fear that was prevalent worldwide at that time was based on the belief that because primary cells were cultures that were introduced into a cell... a culture vessel and not subcultured, that they were safer than cells that were cultured continuously, as my diploid cells were. Their argument was, and this is stated in print by several influential British scientists and it was the conclusion of this committee as well, that when cells are cultured continuously, there is a greater and greater likelihood that they will transform into cancer cells, so they should not be used for vaccine production.
Of course, my work demonstrated that this was absolutely not the case; that we had cultured by now 26 human embryos, none of them spontaneously transformed, up to 50 population doublings each. Furthermore, I pointed out then and in subsequent meetings where this controversy existed for at least eight or ten years, that when people culture primary monkey kidney cells for vaccine production, if they're clever and want to save money, because monkeys are very expensive, they will introduce into the primary culture vessel as few cells as possible in order to make as many culture vessels as possible for vaccine production and rely on the fact that those few cells will eventually cover the entire floor of the flask and still remain a primary culture. Therefore, those cells have undergone several population doublings in that initial first vessel, despite the claim that... it's not the passage of cells from bottle to bottle; it's population doublings.
It's the number the times the cell population will replicate on the surface of a... on the floor of the flask; not the number of times you transfer. As a matter of fact, in our work, we have to reach approximately seven or eight population doublings before we reach the level of population doublings achieved by the astute manufacturer who seeds his vessels with as few cells as he can get away with. However, this was pointed out later only after this committee reached its conclusion that passage cells were dangerous and published it as a letter, I believe, in Science magazine.Well, I took great umbrage at this because by this time my paper had been published and it seemed to me that they were simply trying to torpedo my work.

Together with Charlie Palmer at... who I still had very good relations, of course, and whose name was well-known – mine was not – and Paul Moorhead and I believe also TC Hsu, who I mentioned earlier as the... one of the discoverers of the fact that humans had 46 chromosomes, we wrote a letter in response to that in which we were pretty cheeky about what we believed, and this, in fact, was published in Science. That started a trend of publications in which the forces on both sides were battling each other.
I might say in concluding, although I'll address this issue more again, that we triumphed because as of today virtually every human virus vaccine in the world is made in my cells in either WI-38 or in other cell strains developed in other countries as a matter of national pride. In the United Kingdom, the identical kind of cell population is called MRC-5, used also for vaccine production. But it was my laboratory that pioneered the development... the use of preparation of vaccines in these cells and, as I'll explain later, was a school in fact for a year or more that trained many people from Europe and Asia in how to make vaccines in these cell population... and Russia as well, which is another part of the story.

The reason I mentioned that WI-38 is the one that's used for this... for vaccine production in subsequent years is that the first strain that we made after losing the first 25, and that we named... I named WI-26, I thought I had produced enough of WI-26 in respect to frozen ampoules to supply what at that time I thought would be the world's requirements. Because it was then apparent that these cells were going to be widely used. But I was in error and failed to lay down as many ampoules as I should have, because of that miscalculation. And the next strain that was useful was WI-38 and I will explain how those... how WI-38 was developed, because that's critical for a large part of the story to follow.

So that this... these articles appearing in Science magazine laid the groundwork for this enormous controversy, and that is whether it's safe to use normal human cells for vaccine production. And as I said, we ultimately triumphed in respect to the fact that WI-38, a subsequent cell strain, MRC-5, and maybe one or two more, have been used for... have been used for the production of human virus vaccines. WI-38 and MRC-5 together have been used for the production of vaccines that have been used in over 2 billion people on the... planet, approximately a quarter of the total world's population, without any evidence of a side effect attributable to the cells themselves. I don't think that I can say it in more certain terms.
The... I also should say, parenthetically – and this is very important, as I will soon describe – that WI-38, at that time in 1962, which is when that particular strain succeeded, WI-26 and became more widespread in its use... that WI-38 could not be patented, despite our efforts to do so, because the patent laws in the United States and I believe in most other countries did not allow for the patenting of living materials, other than particular kinds of decorative plants and fruit bearing trees that were allowed to be patented. So, that when we went through the efforts of trying to patent these cells, knowing that this was going to be a serious problem, we failed.
Consequently, I delivered ampoules of WI-38 worldwide gratis to every... virtually every virus vaccine manufacturer in the world; I mean Russia, Japan, Europe, United States, all the major vaccine manufacturers... and Yugoslavia, I should say, whose director will come into play in... later on in this story.

These companies... taking Merck as one example; Merck has had... has produced its rubella vaccine... and I'll talk about this in more detail later, but I want to complete this story of the use of WI-38. Merck has had a monopoly on the production of a Rubella German Measles vaccine in the western hemisphere for a decade or more in addition to other vaccines produced in these cells: rabies, polio, measles, mumps, adenoviruses, etc., in which they have grossed several billion dollars.
Nothing in the form of financial remuneration has ever been returned to either Paul Moorhead... and I'm going to list the potential likely stakeholders: Paul Moorhead, myself, the Wistar Institute and the estate of the foetus from which WI-38 was derived – it happened to be a foetus to me from Sweden, and I'll talk about that... the reason for that later.

It's important to mention this because it will establish, hopefully, my mind set and the mind set of other people. I had no worry about this; it didn't mean much to me. I was doing what I thought was the right thing. And, in fact, I set up with Frank Perkins here in London a repository for WI-38 in which Frank housed several hundred ampoules of WI-38 that I brought here in a liquid nitrogen container on board aircraft, which is impossible today. The liquid nitrogen vessel in which I brought these cells to London, Moscow and other locations looks like a 500 pound bomb. It's made out of aluminium, double jacketed, shaped like a bomb, and weighs about 15 or 20 kilos maybe when it's full. And it wasn't easy getting that vessel through customs; we had all sorts of tricks for doing it, because to claim that you were importing into the UK living human cells would raise the eyebrows of customs inspectors, which we preferred to... not to see.
So, I will now return to the main theme, hopefully, having convinced listeners and viewers that the mind set was one of helping people, at least my mind set, and not profiting.

So, as the years... as time went by and respect to a continuation of this vaccine issue, I should mention my relationship with Frank Perkins, which was key to many of the subsequent events.
Frank Perkins was known to Hilary Koprowski because Frank obviously was working with vaccines, as was Hilary. And after Frank learned of my publication and the suggestion that the cells be used for vaccine production, arranged on one of his visits to Philadelphia to have... to meet me, which he did do. We immediately were attracted to each other's personality; he was a feisty fellow, a Welshman whose beliefs and attitudes towards people and science I thought was very humorous and insightful. And we struck a relationship, a friendship that lasted until his death about ten years ago.
So Frank and I became very close, and because of his capacity as the head of vaccine approval in the UK and his connections worldwide with his counterparts, he was an essential component in this vaccine story. Frank did some initial training with Roderick Murray at the Division of Biologic Standards; I think he was there for about four or six months learning what the... what the DBS procedures were before bringing them to the UK. And he resented terribly anyone saying that he was the Roderick Murray of England. Rod Murray was his complete opposite in personality; a rigid conservative, whereas, Frank was a very outgoing and outspoken person. So, that relationship with Frank was key and I have a huge correspondence file with wonderful letters exchanged between the two of us about the various personalities in the field and other technical considerations. 

So, this was also happening about this time, that is in '63, '64, and I had also now done more research on these cell populations. And because I had learned that 50 population doublings was the limit for cell cultures derived from human foetuses, and because I'd made this link with aging, it was obvious to do an experiment with tissue derived from human adults. I obtained tissue from human adults, which wasn't terribly difficult at that time, and determined the number of population doublings that they underwent. It turned out that as a group, the adult cell cultures underwent fewer population doublings than the cultures derived from human embryos did as a group. There were variations among individuals in respect to an association with age, but it was clear that there was a difference between the two groups. And, so, that further strengthened the argument that this may... that the phenomenon may be telling us something about aging. And that theme became now more important that interpretation.
The... and that resulted in my second paper. And I should mention that by now the first paper was being, to some extent, recognised, although I should say that it took at least ten years to overcome the dogma. It took ten years for most of the scientific community to agree that normal human cells have a finite capacity to replicate.

In fact, that interpretation was so convincing to a major personality, of the few there were at that time in the field of aging, that he, and his name is Nathan Shock, a man in the United States who's given credit for the establishment of research in... bio gerontology in the United States, meaning the study of aging... aging in its biological aspects, fundamental biological aspects.
Nathan learned of my work, invited me to the University of Maryland in Baltimore, which was actually part of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development at that time; there was not a National Institute of Aging in those days. And Nathan invited me to give a lecture there, which I did reluctantly because I still was not totally convinced that what I had found had anything to do with biological aging. But I did indeed give the lecture.
Nathan then pushed me along; he invited... had me invited to a meeting in California at a resort near San Diego, I recall, because this was my first visit to California, for that meeting, and I was impressed with the fact that, first of all, I had been invited and, secondly, I was mingling with only about 12 or 15 people at this meeting, that had to do with the epidemiology of aging. But there were no biologists there, other than myself, and I gave a paper and the people there were major figures in geriatric medicine. So I was quite impressed with that invitation. And Nathan remained a close friend until his death, and I had subsequent interactions with him that were very significant that I'll describe later.

Returning to the events in the laboratory in the early 1960s, I should describe the events that occurred after the freezer failure in which I lost all 25 of the original human... normal human strains that were described. And so, I invented a replacement called WI-26, and because all of the previous strains seemed to have the same properties, that we were interested in at least, one strain was sufficient to develop. And my goal was to lay down in our liquid nitrogen freezer, I think we had by this time, which was more... which was safer and less likely to... to force loss of cell ampoules we develop another strain.
Because the... there was WI-25, the obvious name for the one that I was going to make was WI-26. And that one was a male cell strain, which is important for a reason that will became apparent in a moment. The WI-26 I laid down in several hundred ampoules had early population doublings, maybe sixth or seventh doubling. And this was... that number I thought would supply the world's requirements for an indefinite period of time.
It turned out that I was wrong; that within a very short period of time, the worldwide demand for the cells was such that it was almost immediately apparent in 1961, the beginning of the year I believe, that WI-26 would not last long enough, although it was by then fairly widely distributed. So, we decided to do another cell strain and because WI-26 was male, we decided to make one from a female foetus in order to assure a likely way of distinguishing between the two.
One can make those distinctions on biochemical terms today that could not be made easily at that time. And because we had the Barr bodies in the female cells, not the male cells, that would be an easy way of making a distinction if there was confusion or contamination of one cell culture with another, which was a continuing problem – still is today – in the field of cell culture; that is, contamination of one culture with cells from another.

The next one would obviously be named WI-37. By this time, we had run out of our source of human foetal material from the University of Pennsylvania, and because Hilary had very good contacts with folks in Stockholm, the... and because surgical abortions were then become... were then more common in Sweden than in the United States, we had access to embryos from that source. The... since we decided that we only wanted lung material, it was only lungs that were shipped to us... shipped to my laboratory from Stockholm on wet ice. And it's from that material that we derived our subsequent cell strains.
WI-37 then was to be female and because female foetuses are more rare than male foetuses, it turns out that almost 25% more male foetuses are produced than female foetuses because there is much more foetal wastage among male foetuses than male such that by the time of delivery, there is an equivalency because there is more male wastage. So, therefore, we had to wait a rather long time as I recall to get a proper female lung. That arrived, I processed it, and I believe I laid down more... something in the range of 8 or 900 ampoules at the sixth or seventh population doubling, which I thought would last for decades. And, in fact, it turned... it would have been true if the following had not happened.
Of course, I gave a culture early on to Paul Moorhead, who required several weeks to do his studies in order to determine whether WI-37 was normal. He walked into my lab one day and said, 'Len, I have bad news: this foetus has a chromosome anomaly; a congenital anomaly', which is not unusual. 'Not a virus, but a chromosome rearrangement that indicates it's not normal and you should consider not using it', and I did.
Again, by this time, events had evolved to the point where we wanted to be very sure that the cell culture that were going to then distribute worldwide had to be absolutely normal. Furthermore, by... in discussions with people along the way, we wanted a cell culture that came from a foetuse's parents, did not have any serious pathologies; common diseases okay, but no cancer or obviously any congenital ailments. And those... we had to wait some time for those conditions to be met. And because we intended to name the one that turned out to be anomaly WI-37, those ampoules were discarded, they were never released, and the next one in numerical order, obviously, was WI-38. That was also... it was also important that the two numbers be different and that... and that... and because we learned that there were a lot of mistakes made by technicians who would often confuse numbers and make things very difficult in respect to identifying cell cultures. So, WI-38 was invented under those circumstances, and several hundreds of ampoules laid down for distribution worldwide. And those ampoules formed the basis for the production of billions upon billions of doses of vaccines.

Now, returning to the laboratory in 1961, before WI-38 was produced, at the time when WI-26 was still being used, we decided to make a polio vaccine using Hilary's... Hilary Koprowski's attenuated polio strains. And one of my associates at the Wistar Institute, who was... we were rather close friends for many years, was a man by the name of Stanley Plotkin. He was a physician who did not practice medicine as such, but was indeed a virologist, an excellent virologist. Stanley and I became friendly, and he at this time was looking... became interested in the question, as I did, of producing a polio vaccine on our cells in order to prove that they were both safe... that the vaccine produced in them was both safe and efficacious.
So, we undertook that study and I produced many huge bottles of cells of WI-26, inoculated them with Hilary's, I think, one strain – I don't recall now exactly the strain; there are three polio types – and produced the vaccine. Because of Stanley's title as a paediatrician, he had contacts at hospitals in the Philadelphia area and arranged for the vaccination of several children with this vaccine. And, again, this touches on the question of ethics. I also decided to vaccinate my then, I believe, four children with that vaccine as evidence of my confidence in its safety and efficacy. It was an oral vaccine and... containing an attenuated polio virus.
We were completely successful. The vaccinees were protected and we wrote a paper describing this. I was the senior author; the other authors were Plotkin, a man by the name of Norton, who was an associate of Hilary's, and Hilary. The paper was published in the Journal of Public Health, I believe, in 1961 or '62, and that set the standards for subsequent vaccine production and alerted the vaccine community worldwide to the use of these cells.
As a result of that, there... and my relationship with Frank, it became so important that the World Health Organisation began to recognise that this had worldwide implications. And they set a meeting... set up a meeting in Geneva to which I was invited along with Frank. It was organised by the then director of virology at WHO, a man by the name of Cockburn, C-O-C-K-B-U-R-N.
And this committee did a... has as its assignment was a very important thing. Its assignment was over the next three days of this meeting to write standards for the use of these normal human cells in the production of vaccines; that is, how to identify the cells, how to be sure they're free of viruses, how to be sure that they are not... do not produce tumours in animals, and all of the technical niceties that are required to be sure that you have a safe cell population for the preparation of vaccines to be introduced into humans.
And we did indeed achieve that goal. They were published within the WHO and were made available to other countries where people were now becoming interested in producing vaccines and WI-26, and by this time, WI-38, which I initiated in 1962. So that meeting was significant in that respect; it laid the first standards for vaccine production in a continuously proper or so cell population. Which was historically important; we had now moved from the... what was thought to be the only acceptable cells, namely primary cells as described in the NIH report that I mentioned earlier in which a select few people at the NIH felt that they were the only ones qualified to lay down regulations, which was very annoying.

The subsequent events centred around all of the activities necessary to have the cells distributed for use. The WHO funded me to visit several countries in Europe and also to establish another bank of cells in Moscow for distribution among Iron Curtain countries, which was not easy to do, through Frank Perkins' WI-38 repository at MRC in London. Frank distributed cultures within the UK and within Western European countries, and also South America as well as Mexico, I should say.

And activities then centred on the chromosomal characterisation of the cells, because it was by this time learned that as the cells approached their... their limited capacity to replicate, a state that I call 'Phase three' – I described the lineage of these cell populations as phase one, which is the period of the primary culture, phase two is the 40 or so period where the cells are actively dividing, and phase three is a period when the cells have stopped dividing.
People generally have called phase three the 'Hayflick Limit'; perhaps I should say a word about the derivation of that term. The derivation occurred in the mid-'60s by a gentleman well-known in the scientific field, at least that time, Sir Macfarlane Burnet, an Australian Nobel Prize laureate who knew about my work and, indeed, made a visit to the Wistar Institute to see Hilary at one time and I was introduced to him then. He went on to write books in several fields outside of the one that he was expert in, which, namely, immunology, and he did a book in which he discussed aging. And in that book, he called what I had observed the 'Hayflick Limit', which is the origin of that term. So, I have Sir Macfarlane Burnet to either thank or not for the use of that term.

Next events centred around establishing criteria for the karyology of these cells, which was thought to be very significant at that time. It was thought to be significant because of the worry that if the chromosome constitution of a normal cell changes after many subcultivations, as did happen in the later subcultivations of WI-38, that it would represent a threat and that it might appear to the genesis of a cancer cell population. That turned out not to be true, but there were a number of meetings held over the years to establish standards for chromosome analysis, which required the dedication of one or more individuals and pharmaceutical companies to do chromosome studies before the vaccine was released.
It is almost impossible to understand why chromosome standards were never set for monkey kidney or chicken cells; they were demanded of our human diploid cells. There are a number of other bizarre inconsistencies in the understanding of scientists in respect to what... needs to be approved and what doesn't have to be approved. The argument with the monkey cells was: well, we've been using monkey cells for so many years and there doesn't seem to be any cancer occurring in the recipients – and that's highly questionable because of SV40 – then they're safe. It was that kind of argument. Well, we had absolute proof that these cells weren't cancers because nobody in their right mind would inoculate primary monkey kidney cells into a terminal cancer patient, where we... in respect to what is possible to happen concerning unwanted viruses, dangerous viruses. But we had no trouble introducing normal human cells into cancer patients and... which we learned that there was no problem because it simply disappeared. And no one ever did that with primary monkey kidney cells. In any case, I don't want to belabour that point, but it's an essential point and had advocates on both sides for a number of years until the other side eventually collapsed.

Now the subsequent events that occurred involved the business of aging. Having introduced that as a possible explanation for what we had found, I recall not being terribly happy about becoming a biogerontologist. I recall being dragged screaming and yelling into the field by the president of the... then president of the Gerontological Society of America, a towering man who was at least six inches to a foot taller than me who approached me when I was invited to give a paper at the first gerontology, or GSA, society meeting that I attended. And he came up to me, he looked down at me, and he said, 'Hayflick, you are a biogerontologist whether you like it or not. We are fascinated with your work and I'm going to demand that you become a member of the society in the biological sciences section.'
And I was persuaded by this gentleman to join, which I did do. And I did it reluctantly, but as the years rolled by became more and more convinced that I was a biogerontologist because of subsequent events.

Subsequent events included the fact that other people who read my papers began to try to repeat my work and, indeed, in many cases were successful, but in a lot of cases were unsuccessful. And that was a worry. In fact, many of the vaccine manufacturers were unsuccessful in the sense that they were unable to reproduce the number of population doublings that I was able to achieve in my laboratory. Their cells died or stopped dividing after the twentieth or fifteenth or thirtieth population doubling, after I supplied them with ampoules at the seventh PDL, standing for Population Doubling Level. And that was a big worry because scientists need to have their work reproduced and it seemed as though many people were unable to do that.
We later... I later learned that the probable reason for this was the materials that they were using to make their culture media. And that varied from lab to lab, from country to country. I was buying it from a commercial source in the United States, which was not available to people in Europe or else was too... far too expensive for them to purchase. This became a significant worry and halted people's activities for several months.

Fortuitously, the laboratory across the hall from mine was occupied by a man whose name is David Kritchevsky. David is a wonderful personality, with a tremendous sense of humour. He lived close to me and, indeed, we... he picked me up each morning in his automobile and carried me to the Wistar Institute and I returned home with him because his house was a few miles beyond mine; very convenient for him to meet me and drop me off. Of course, I shared the expenses.
We rode together in his car for several years, which was a very nice experience due to David's marvellous sense of humour, analysis of people. He was not a cell culturist; he was a lipid chemist with a worldwide reputation. And through his lipid chemistry experiments, he dealt with media formulation of different lipid constitutions in feeding the rabbits that he was using for his experiments on cholesterol and other lipids.
Each... each of these media formulations was... was made for him by a company who compounded the chemicals into a tablet that was edible by rabbits. That was significant because during one of our automobile trips I told David about my problem and I said, what I.... I said, 'What I would like to do is the following.' I said, 'I know that this is heresy in respect to how cell culture media has been produced up to this day, but I want to do the following.' And before I tell you what the following is, I need to explain what was done up until that day in respect to media preparation. It was, in fact, almost an art form because there were different salts, different amino acids, and other components that had to be mixed together. If you did it all at once, it was argued, they would precipitate and you would get inactive components. You had to prepare the media in blocks of chemicals prepared as separate blocks, carefully, then mixed together at different temperatures; a very complex way of producing the media so that it turned that all of the components will be saleable.
Getting back to my car... my... and this was a kind of black magic. I have records from cell culture courses that consist of two or three pages of how you compound cell culture media. I said in my ignorance to David one day, 'Why can't – he was after all a major chemical chemist – why can't I take these... all these components, put them in a mortar and pestle, grind them up very fine, add water, and have my media?' He said, 'Hayflick, it's apparent to me that you've never had a course in physical chemistry, because that won't work. Those elements will precipitate.'

The media was described by a well-known biologist, whose name is Harry Eagle, and of course, it went by his name, Eagle's medium. The formula was published by Harry Eagle, but what he failed to publish, which was very common in those days, was how you put this list of ingredients together. It was like having a recipe for a cake that told you what the ingredients were, but it didn't tell you how to mix things together, at what temperature and how much time to bake the cake, etc, so that occurred to me to be a possible problem. 
 

The problem that I had was discussed with David Kritchevsky, a colleague of mine who had a laboratory across the hall, and with whom I drove daily in his car, because our houses were fairly close together, and we often chatted about mutual problems, etc. David was a world-renowned lipid chemist, and after hearing my problem he... he suggested a possible resolution, which turned out to be correct, after some glitches that I'll explain in a moment.
David's work, which needs to be described in order to understand why he made the suggestion, involved the preparation of various pellets to feed rabbits that he used to study in his lipid chemistry experiments. He was connected well with a company that simply took David's written list of ingredients, that he buried, of course, in his experimental designs. Took those chemicals, and put them into what's called a 'ball mill', which is a long cylindrical piece of equipment made... usually made out of some heavy metal, into which one puts either stones or metal bearings or metal balls, and also the chemical mixture of interest. This long device is then rotated on rollers, and of course, the balls are bouncing around and breaking the powder down to an extraordinarily fine dust, and that allows for the dissolution of those chemicals much more easily than if they went in in larger particle sizes. David wasn't too concerned about that for his work. After the powders were removed from the ball mill, they were then turned into large pellets and fed to the rabbits.
So, David and I decided to take the chemicals that I was interested in, because I had told him earlier, or had asked him why I couldn't take all of these chemicals, and there were about 40 or 50, put them into a mortar and pestle, grind them up and then add water? And he laughed, and said that he... it was apparent to him that I had no knowledge, fundamental knowledge of physical chemistry. I had suggested that more or less as a joke, in order to draw him out, for a possible explanation.

So, David put me in touch with a salesman, who was his contact person at this company, and the salesman became rather interested in my... in my potential resolution of this problem. And he worked with me rather closely for six or eight months, during which time they did indeed ball mill the components of Eagle's media, and after having done that we discovered, to our chagrin, but not a big surprise, that the media did not go into the solution.
There's a technical reason for it that I won't go into in great detail, other than to say that many of the amino acids were what we call salt, either a hydrochloride salt or a sodium salt. The recipe for the media called for the salts to be in one state and not the other. It was simply arbitrary. By changing the salt component of some of these amino acids, and that was either in a hydrochloride state or a sodium state, we got virtually everything to go into a solution, with the exception of one amino acid. I believe it was Cysteine. That one didn't go into a solution, as we later discovered by analysing the undissolved particles that we found after the ball-milling operation, and by changing the chemistry... the salt component of that amino acid, we did indeed get it into a solution.
So now we had what we call powered media, which provided opportunities to resolve this serious problem. First of all, by making a powder, and of course, in a ball mill you could make kilos, or even tons, which occurs with some materials, of a mixture like this. In the early days, of course, we made small amounts, maybe ten kilos or 20 kilos. As time went by the numbers escalated. The company involved was called the Grand Island Biological Company. It's now been absorbed by larger companies, over the years, and the company then made batches of the powdered media for me. It was distributed to several laboratories overseas, including Frank Perkins' laboratory in London, and the problem seemed to be resolved, because the two series of variables were now non-existent.
The first variable was the failure to have a recipe included on how to put things together. The second major variable was the different properties of water used worldwide for the preparation of media. There's enormous variation in PH and chemical composition, etc. So that now it was possible, for example, and I did this several times, for me to fly to London from Philadelphia and have in my breast pocket half a kilo of powdered media, sufficient to make 1,000 litres of media. Of course, I could put this in the post and send it by airmail all over the world, and people would have enough powdered media for months. In addition to which, they were told that this company is now manufacturing this media, and Frank and I are simultaneously testing each lot and after we approve it, it is then released to people, to customers all over the world. That became an industry for this company, and it solved our problems. The result of that was the establishment of the powdered media industry. Now, and in the past 45 years, a rather large industry is valued at several billion dollars.

This couldn't be patented, because there is... the media components had already been described in literature by Harry Eagle. The method of ball-milling was already well known, going back probably a century or more, so that there was nothing essentially unique about this other than putting together processes and chemicals already known to the public, although I have to say that I never seriously thought about patenting this. It never really occurred to me, although we did publish this in Nature magazine. I published it along with Frank, as what we thought was an interesting contribution to the field. And to this day, ball-milled media, powdered media is a major industry and a major component of the biotechnology industry.

Returning now to the cell... cells themselves, in 1962, as I mentioned earlier, I believe, I laid down several hundred ampoules of WI-38 to replace WI-26, which I found was not going to be available for the long period of time I had hoped. I should say at this point, or at least underline, perhaps, one or two things that I mentioned earlier, because they will be of extraordinary... extraordinary importance in about ten years' time, from the time period that I'm presently discussing, so they need to be emphasized.
The first thing is that in our original paper, and as I suggested – I did mention this but didn't emphasise sufficiently, that the difference between the behaviour of normal cells in the laboratory, in a laboratory culture, and cancer cells in a laboratory culture, is that the former are mortal and the latter cancer cells are immortal. And that they have direct in vivo, which means in the body – that is not in a bottle –counterparts. It's suggested, and I argued this case, that our normal body cells are mortal, and that cancer cells that are found to occur in the body are immortal. Although that aspect had already... had been known, cancer tissue had been transferred from laboratory animal to laboratory animal for decades. For example, mouse tumours could be transplanted from mouse to mouse, so over many, many generations, so the immortality of cancer cells was pretty well established in vivo. However, in vitro we only knew of two or three, principally the HeLa cell, so I established this distinction between cancer cells and normal cells.
I mentioned an underline at this point, because it became a critically important part of the cancer research field. Why? Because now you had an opportunity to grow normal cells in culture, expose them to chemicals, transform them into cancer cells, or perhaps expose them to viruses that cause cancer, like the viruses that we call oncogenic viruses, and under these circumstances you can study cancer at the cellular level, which prior to this work was very difficult to do. You didn't need to haul animals in order to make these studies, so the field of cell immortalisation, as it became known over the years, became a very large part of the cancer research effort. It still is today.

The second point that I need to emphasize that I don't think I mentioned, and that needs to be discussed at this point, is a practical one, and that is that when I did my work with the WI-25 and published the most important paper on this principle, the work was conducted without a grant or a contract assigned to me. I had neither. The difference between the two is important. A grant is a sum of money given to a researcher by a company, or the government in most cases, that is initiated by the recipient. The recipient, the scientist proposes the research project. It's submitted, for example, to the National Institute of Health. If it's successful you get a grant of money, and you do the research that you described in the grant application.
A contract, on the other hand, is a device by which the government scientists, often with the advice of academic scientists – or more often than not – have decided that some element of either aircraft manufacture, military, or biology is needed, but no one has proposed from outside of that institution to do that work or make that product. So the government now initiates a proposal for someone to come forth with a plan to produce or do the work that the government scientists say is needed, and usually there are obvious things that are needed. In this case, it must be emphasized that I had neither. I did not have direct government support for my work on the discovery of the finite lifetime of cultured normal human cells. That is very important, in respect to what happened about a decade later.

Returning now to the scientific aspects of this story, there was huge fermentation of activity in the mid-'60s. One of the first things that happened in respect to vaccine development, which will become more important in subsequent years, is that the military in the United States was well aware of the group of adenoviruses that I described earlier, some of which I worked with as a postdoctoral student in Charlie Pomerat's lab, and that several of these viruses within that group caused an upper respiratory disease in military recruits. This, of course, was not limited to the United States. It happened in European facilities of a similar nature, and in college dormitories, and it was very debilitating. It was like a serious common cold. It wasn't life threatening, usually, but recruits would come together and hundreds of them would have to be hospitalized or put to bed for a week, and this was enormously expensive, and all of the other problems that would be apparent.
The military decided to produce... to try to produce a vaccine to... to resolve this problem. They set about to do it. I was not directly involved, although they knew that WI-26 and/or 38 was capable of growing these viruses. They did get starter cultures from me, and did the necessary research to produce a vaccine, to try it out in the military, and ultimately discover that it was successful. This is an important point, because the laws in the United States do not require the military to have any product like that that they develop under contract to be tested and approved by either... by the then Division of Biologic Standards, which is the group at the NIH that approves civilian biological products.
So the military has this freedom to bypass the usual control authorities. Of course, they attempt to be as careful and critical as they can be. They're not trying to evade the law or to get away with anything, they simply by law have that power, and they took advantage of that. And in the early '60s, soon after I published my work, they produced a successful adenovirus vaccine, and I believe it's been produced off and on ever since, also in other countries in Europe.

I finally did get an invitation. My invitation was to come to the meeting and simply give a, I don't know, a five-minute or a ten-minute summary of my work – something, a kind of, a rather trivial role in this two or three-day conference, in which other personalities were given a half-hour to speak. I had the opportunity to decline the invitation, but that would have been cutting my nose off to spite my face, and so I went to the meeting. And in that five or eight minute period, which I think occurred possibly on the last day, pretty much gave them hell, and said, 'The resolution is before your eyes'. After two days of discussing this serious drama, I should say, parenthetically, that the Americans stopped polio production. Prior to this meeting, during this meeting, and I think for several months afterwards, all polio vaccine production ceased. I don't recall what happened in Europe. And since I wasn't... I was an academic and not attached to a company, the company representatives at that meeting, of which there were dozens, if not more than 100, couldn't raise their voices, because after all, their products must pass through the hands of Rod Murray and his staff. And so they were very meek, in respect to what they believed, and what they believed was that WI-38 was the answer.
Well, I had nothing to lose. I had no commercial connections. I... Hilary Koprowski was my boss. He was also promoting this idea, I should say, very actively, and I just decided I'm going to tell it like it is, and I was pretty forthright in... and not suggesting but urging them to stop using primary monkey kidney and to start using WI-38.

The issue that is of great importance to discuss at this point, requires that I go back a few years to pick up the story, and that is that I've emphasized several times the enormous demands for cell cultures that were made by people in the United States and Europe. And it soon became apparent that I was spending, and my technical helpers were spending an enormous amount of time and energy, and funds as well, Wistar overhead funds, which was indirectly supporting our work, such that my time that I wanted to use for my regular work was diminishing. At about this time, in fact it was rather early on, a fellow who I had known for many years, a cell culturist, who... who worked at the National Institutes of Health, a man by the name of Robert Stevenson, who was also a cell culture pioneer, but by this time he had an administrative job at the NIH. He was very influential in promoting the cell culture activities throughout the United States.
Because my cell cultures, WI-38 and WI-26, were used widely at the NIH, a government facility, of course, and by many government grantees who were now dependent on these cells for their research activities, made the demand for the cells actually skyrocket. Bob Stevenson came to me one day, I knew him personally, of course, from former meetings on tissue culture subjects, and Bob said, 'Len, look, we know that you're struggling to keep up with the demand for these cells, and it's apparent to you and to me that the NIH and our grantees are dependent on you as a source of these cells for their work. What about my preparing a contract for you – and the title of the contract is important, as will be shown later – to produce, store, and distribute? Those are the key three words – produce, store, and distribute – your cell cultures to properly qualified folks in the research, not only in the United States but even worldwide, as I recall the contract later was interpreted to cover. But this was a windfall because now, and of course this did indeed happen, I had funds, sufficient to hire another technician whose sole job it would be to prepare cultures, package them and ship them, and that was a big relief.
It's important to note at this point, the contract did not cover the development of a cell culture. It did not cover the research that went into it. It did not cover anything other than storing the ampoules, distributing them, and producing enough to meet the demand. And this will become an important issue later on.

My recollection is that this, as it later turned out, the awarding of this contract occurred, I believe, a month or two before I decided to develop WI-38, which caused a bit of a problem, because as events later developed one might ask the question whether WI-38 was developed under that contract? The answer is, in my opinion, no. Others have different opinions. In any case, I'll return to that issue later.
So we found ourselves now during a period, in the middle and late '60s, when great activity was going on worldwide in vaccine production, and I recall going to several meetings in Washington, the Pan American Health Organisation, and WHO meetings. The World Health Organization sponsored a trip that they wanted me to make to Czechoslovakia, Russia, Moscow, Leningrad, and especially to Moscow, where I spent two months teaching the Russian researchers how to prepare vaccines in WI-38. So this fermentation activity was going on. There were, of course, many people from industrial laboratories who were invited to my laboratory to learn the technique on-site. These are just examples of the kinds of activities I was involved with in the mid to later 60s. I've not said anything yet, but of course I must say something about, or as much about this, subsequently, and that is the impact that this observation had on the field of gerontology, or ageing. I have not forgotten that, obviously, but I will return to it subsequently.

In the late '60s I began... began to be concerned about several things. The evolution of my thinking, from that of a fresh post-doc in the early '60s and late '50s, that science was all about helping people, began to change slowly over time as I realised that the real motivations are not only that. I'm sure that, at least when I entered the field of biology professionally, many people like me felt as I did, but as time went by my thinking began to change from that in which serving humanity was the purpose, to observe the behaviour of other scientists who were now beginning to profit financially from their work, especially in other fields like electronics and engineering. And the biologists were the last to worry about keeping their skirts clean, in respect to financial profitability.

I also saw things at the Wistar Institute that confirmed these evolving thoughts, even to the point that I remember on one or two occasions thinking that I was... This is probably an extreme judgement, but I do remember feeling it, feeling as a fish in a tank of sharks.
That is an extreme statement, but it conveys the thought, and observing the behaviour of people in other situations as well. So I now became rather cynical, and one of the turning points was when a colleague walked into my laboratory one day, and said, 'Len, do you know about this?' And flashed a letter in my face, signed by my director, Hilary Koprowski, and the letter was addressed to a high official at Wellcome Laboratories, in the UK, who were known vaccine manufacturers, and the theme of the letter was the following: 'We at the Wistar Institute are willing to provide you, Wellcome Laboratories, with all the starter cultures of WI-38 that you want, and the technical knowledge necessary to produce polio vaccine. Sincerely yours, Hilary Koprowski.' Well, of course, this I never knew. It came out of the blue. I was never consulted. I think it's fair to say that I should have been consulted. After all, all these developments emerged from my laboratory, not from Hilary's.
Hilary certainly was supportive, but this seemed to me to be a kind of unacceptable behaviour, especially because I learned, I don't think through that, certainly not through that letter, but through friends, that the financial arrangements, the royalty arrangements that Hilary was wanting... had established with Wellcome, perhaps would revert to the Wistar Institute, to support the members of the institute. I was not technically a member of the institute. I was an associate member, assistant, or something like that. I was not at the top level of membership of the Wistar Institute. The people who were were the people who accompanied Hilary to the institute when he became director, and many other senior people, who certainly deserved to be members of the institute. People like Rupert Billingham, a very well-known immunologist who worked with Peter Medawar, who ultimately won a Nobel Prize for his and Rupert Billingham's studies, a famous paper by Billingham, Brent, and Medawar that describes immune tolerance. So, Billingham became part of our staff. A wonderful man, and he became a full member, as did other major personalities who worked at Wistar, but I was denied this. I was denied elevation to this title.

So now to learn that, to put it bluntly, all of my efforts, and they were serious efforts over, now in time more than a decade, had resulted in a product that would yield returns only to the full members of the institute and not to me, was to say the least, a bit bothersome, and it was at this point that I decided it's time to leave the Wistar Institute. I'm trying to recall the specific events that led to my acceptance of a full professorship at Stanford University, but in any case, there was ultimately a search committee established at Stanford, in California, by Stanford University Medical School, headed by Joshua Lederburg, the Nobel winner in the field of microbial genetics, and a search was made for a full professorship to be appointed in the department of medical microbiology at Stanford.
The result... Without going into all of the details, which are boring, the job was ultimately offered to me, and I was very enthusiastic about it, although I had other offers as well. I was offered the Chairmanship of the Department of Microbiology at the University of Vermont, and as I recall in one of my discussions with David Kritchevsky, with whom I was very close, the argument was made: would you rather be... would you rather manage Philadelphia Athletics, a baseball team that was always one of the worst, or play first base for the New York Yankees? So put in those terms, I decided that I'd rather play first base for the New York Yankees, and I ended up at Stanford.

And now the question arose, what do I do with the WI-38 ampoules that are still stored at the Wistar Institute? Not physically in my laboratory, they were stored in a basement area where all the storage facilities were kept, so that I had a serious decision to make.
It was also compounded by the fact that Hilary assigned one of his assistants to discuss this matter with me, what was to be done with the WI-38 ampoules, which by this time had become very valuable, certainly in scientific terms if not in monetary terms. And it was decided... decided through a meeting of several people, who met with me, mostly administrative types, that all of the cells should be kept at Wistar, I believe with the possible exception of six or eight that I would take with me for my work. Well, that didn't satisfy me at all. By this time, I felt that the decade of hard work that I had put into this business was now to be exploited by Hilary to benefit people, some of whom I knew, many of whom I didn't know, for the next ten or even 20 years. As it turns out, it's still benefiting people at the Wistar Institute today, up to today, and I'll mention that later, discuss it in more detail.
It... it was a serious decision to make. Ultimately, I decided that I was going to take all of the ampoules with me to Stanford until this matter was resolved, so that all of the stakeholders would have a say in their disposition. I was not the only stakeholder. Paul Moorhead had a hand in this activity. The Wistar Institute certainly did. The government may have, but that had yet to be determined. The estate of the WI-38 embryo had a stake in this matter, as... as we well know today, and in what has happened in respect to the ethics of using human tissue. Those folks in Sweden, the parents of WI-38 certainly had a stake in it, and those matters had to be settled. I felt that it could not be a decision made in the favour of only one of the stakeholders, namely the Wistar Institute.
With those arguments, I decided to violate the agreement that was written on paper for me to sign. I don't believe I signed it, in fact. I think I procrastinated until I had moved my home to California, and was about to drive with three of my children to California, so I don't believe I ever signed that document. In any case, it wouldn't have been legal... it wasn't a legal document to begin with. And I put all the ampoules into a liquid nitrogen transport vessel, which is a huge thermos jug type apparatus. It's a double wall of aluminium can, if you will, with a narrow throat, and I filled it with liquid nitrogen, put all my several hundred ampoules into the container, strapped it to the back seat of my Pontiac sedan. Two of my children sat next to it, and the third in the front seat, and off I went to California.

I remember when this issue reached the stage of being public, and involved a lawsuit that I'll explain in detail later, a page was sent to me in California from the Philadelphia Bulletin, a major evening newspaper in Philadelphia at that time. It's now defunct. The headline, as I recall, read, Wistar Institute Scientist Drives to California with his Children, and a Very Unusual Device. And it described, of course, this transport, not what my decision was. In any case, the trip to California was uneventful.
I had arranged previous to that, since my laboratory at Stanford was not yet even built – I had to build the laboratory there – I had made arrangements to store these ampoules at a facility in Oakland, California, called the Naval Biological Laboratory, where I had a good friend. It turned out that he was not such a good friend in respect to the fact that he delegated the storage of the ampoules that I had brought there to a subordinate, who for some inexplicable reasons that made me very angry, reconstituted several of the ampoules, just for fun, and to look at the cells without ever asking me for permission to do it. I was very disturbed about this, and it later came to haunt me, for reasons that I will describe later.
As time went by, and I was building my laboratory, I should also mention that I had a contract given to me at the Wistar Institute, a second contract given to me to... as a part of what was called, The War on Cancer. This was a huge programme that was a project that President Nixon honchoed, and it involved a substantial sum of money that was directed towards efforts to discover whether some or all human cancers were caused by viruses. The cause of cancer by viruses was a very popular idea in the early and mid '60s, so a huge programme was set up – multi, multi millions of dollars, and one of my roles in that programme was to establish a laboratory to test the cell cultures of the participants in that entire programme for mycoplasma contamination. That was also a help, because by this time I was also inundated with requests from friends all over the country, and out of the country as well, to test cultures for mycoplasma contamination. This, of course, was a relief in many respects, because I could assign a person to do this.
It's important to mention also that the mycoplasma contract, I think ended when I went to Stanford, but the... and the distribution contract, as I recall, also ended. I don't think that was carried to Stanford, so when my laboratory was set up I still had people asking for starter cultures. Many people from NIH itself, but despite the fact that I had no support for those, there was no way I could refuse my colleagues these starter cultures. One... a major scientific principle is that scientists must, if they can, help their colleagues, in respect to providing them with reagents and materials from their own laboratories, if they can do it. This is an unwritten rule, and that is what compelled me to continue to do the mycoplasma testing, although it did tail off significantly, and the distribution of WI-38.

I will return to this issue of the events that occurred during my early days at Stanford University, but this would be an appropriate time to pause – chronologically, we are now roughly in the year 1968-69 – and to pick up on another area of my work that actually began with the original paper in 1961, where I suggested that the observations that I made had something to do – may have something to do – with the fundamental biology of aging, in addition to its relationship to the immortalization of normal cells. So I will pause now and go back in time, because the events that occurred in respect to my contributions to the field of biogerontology ran parallel with virtually everything that I've discussed up until this time. Starting from the point when I think I last left the subject, and that was my relationships with Nathan Shock, often called the grand old man of American biogerontology.

The start of my involvement with the field of biogerontology was with my relationships with Nathan Shock, who you recall I mentioned earlier, in respect to his role as the pioneer biogerontologist in the United States, and the one whose laboratory educated virtually all of the then... not only geriatricians but mostly biologists, and Nathan was an extraordinary person. I should mention that one of his major contributions, a very significant contribution in the field, was to establish what is called the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging. As the name implies, this was a study of first men, and then women, who lived in the Baltimore area. Nathan's laboratories were at Baltimore City Hospital, although he was a federal employee. Aging was – whatever little was done at that time, at the NIH – was done through that facility. So that after becoming acquainted with several major personalities in the field, and serving as a participant at annual meetings, I met several of the people and learned about Nathan's involvement with this Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging. It was initiated, I believe, in the late '40s. It's ongoing to this day, and as the name suggests, it is a process by which volunteers of varying ages – I don't know what the minimum age for volunteering is, probably mid-adult life – they are followed for the rest of their life. Every two years, I believe it is, they go through a three or four day evaluation, both physically and mentally, with... using all of the – mostly non-invasive – tests that you can think of. And, as I say, not only physical, but mental, cognitive abilities. This is far better study – and it was one of the first ever done – and certainly, I think, the best one, by several criteria, in the world.
Many more have been initiated since then, started later, with different emphasis, but the BLSA is one of the best that was initiated by Nathan after a very difficult struggle with his superiors at the NIH, who saw no value in this. This was an attitude that was prevalent – throughout the United States, at least – at that time, and to the disadvantage of the entire field. After winning this struggle and receiving initial support for it, he found a physician in Baltimore, who... and this physician was well-connected with colleagues, many of whom were persuaded to volunteer initially for this study, and it has yielded enormously important results. It's far better than doing what's called a cross-sectional study, where you pick out a few hundred people of varying ages – or even of the same age – and study them as individuals, as years go by, and then compare them with each other. If you do that only at one point in time, if you do this examination, let's say, three months from now, and compile all the data you can on several hundred people of a particular age three weeks from now, and then do a study, the variables are so great that you rarely come to any solid conclusions. But following people through their lives and measuring all of their attributes every two or three years is the way to go. This was what Nathan was most known for, but for many other things, so his influence on my career at that time was quite profound.

The suggestion that I made, that the finite lifetime of cultured normal cells have anything to do with aging, of course, was disregarded by most people and thought to be a very foolish suggestion, and indeed it was considered... unacceptable by Peyton Rous, who rejected my original submission. 
But as the years went by in the '60s, I became more and more interested in the biology of aging, although I... as I said earlier, and I confess to the fact that I was disinterested in the subject entirely until these early events occurred and the laboratory observation was made. It became even more attractive when colleagues, namely George Martin and Samuel Goldstein, published papers a few years after mine, in which they not only confirmed my work, but George Martin went even further and confirmed the work in my second paper, where I showed that there was a difference in population doubling potential in the cells cultured from older adults compared to those cultured from human embryos, which suggested a relationship between the chronological differences in those two populations. Samuel Goldstein also confirmed this and extended it. George also extended the work to some extent. This was very gratifying. I recall vividly reading George Martin's paper – which was the first one to confirm what I had found – and intellectually breathing a sigh of relief that, well, someone out there has confirmed my work. Of course it's been confirmed thousands of times since, worldwide. There's no doubt about the phenomenon. And also, as years went by, the relationship to chronological age became more and more apparent. I believe I mentioned earlier that the preservation of the cells in liquid nitrogen resulted in my understanding that the cells had a memory, which was quite unusual and led me to the conclusion that the cells had some kind of counting mechanism. They must count the number of population doublings that they undergo when they're cultured in vitro, in glassware or plasticware now.
The second thing that supported this belief was that all of the foetal embryonic tissue that I cultured, from various foetuses, showed the occurrence of their finite lifetime happening between 40 and 60 population doublings, which was rather unusual. Why should they all stop replicating during that narrow window? So I, in fact, even later, named this unknown mechanism of cell memory. I called it a 'replicometer', because it was measuring replications. It was not measuring the passage of time, which some people early on confused, but measuring a number of population doublings. Of course I was in total ignorance of what was to occur about ten years later, which I will explain subsequently.

The relationship that this work had to aging was then picked up by many people worldwide, who pursued the study of cultured human cells – and other animal cells, as well – and in respect to understanding more about the biology of aging. It should be understood, if it isn't already, that folks working in the field of the biology of aging in the '60s were considered to be outside of the realm of the mainstream of science. The mainstream of science in general felt that studying aging was a total waste of time, that it would yield no significant results. With some exceptions – notable exceptions – it was ignored, at least in respect to trying to understand the fundamental biology of aging, and it's important for me to make some kind of definition of these terms at this point, because they're significant in respect to the events that occurred subsequently.
There is a very important difference between the four... four aspects of the finitude of life. The four are: death, age-associated diseases, aging and the determinance of longevity. That concept didn't develop in my mind until recent years, but it does have a bearing on the earlier events.
 It soon became apparent to me that a belief – not only later held by me, and certainly not initiated in my mind – was a correct interpretation of the biology of aging, and that is that age associated diseases, in themselves, studied – and even resolved – would not provide any insights into the fundamental biology of aging. And that belief, held by me still to this day, is based on the following facts. If... when the resolution of childhood diseases occurred – namely things like Wilms' Tumour, iron deficiency anemia, diseases and deaths caused by polio or other viruses or microorganisms – when those occurred during the 20th century, none of them revealed any insights into the fundamental biology of childhood development. It is... that argument pertains to the biology of aging. The resolution of any age-associated disease – namely the leading causes of death: cardiovascular disease, stroke and cancer – will not yield any information on the fundamental biology of aging. People who recover from those ailments continue to age. What probably will happen is that if and when those diseases are completely resolved, individuals will continue to age, but there will be a limit. The limit will be a life expectation increase from the present average life expectancy of about 79 or 80 years in developed countries to about 92 years. That will be the maximum.
Many people are surprised when you quote the actual mathematics of the situation and argue about the outcome of resolving major causes of diseases, and this can be determined mathematically with reasonable precision. If you resolve causes of death attributable to cancer, today, the additional life expectation that will occur is about two years. A value that most people would be surprised to hear, many people who I've quizzed on this will give you double figures of some sort. Likewise, the leading cause of death – cardiovascular disease and stroke, lumped together – will yield about 3.2 or so years of life expectation. At virtually every age that's true of cancer, in respect to the number I quoted earlier, and one then, by doing this kind of math, is led to the conclusion that the total increase that will occur yields a value of about 92 years. Now, of course, you can't resolve what we call stochastic events – that is, accidents, murder, suicide, wars, etc. – but from a statistical standpoint, and because most people do not die from those causes, it's a trivial number, which we probably could never exclude. The cause of death, then, will be – probably, because we really don't know – the loss of physiological capacity in some major organ: the heart, lung, kidneys, liver, etc. So we'll have to invent a whole new vocabulary to put on our death certificates.

The death certificates are very interesting in themselves. It was... it's important to understand in this discourse that the causes of death that I mentioned are causes of death put on death certificates. That's the key phrase.
When the causes of death put on death certificates – like cancer, cardiovascular disease and stroke – are eliminated, it says nothing about the fundamental biology of aging being eliminated. In fact, the causes of death are listed in an international document called the ICD, International Causes of Death, and it's updated frequently, mostly by statisticians. I don't... I'm not aware of biologists or geriatricians or physicians being intimately involved in the updating and handling of those numbers, which is very important. If you read the list of the 131 possible causes of death – which, as I say, are internationally accepted – you will find that it is illegal to die from natural causes, it is also illegal to die of old age, and if you put that on a death certificate you could go to jail, because it's illegal. Of course, I'm being facetious, but you can't choose those two, despite the fact that you find them frequently listed as the cause of death of some celebrity in the news media.

There are other important aspects of this... of this phenomenon, which I think bears discussion, because it has serious impact on the field of the fundamental biology of aging, and why it has been virtually ignored as a legitimate area for research. Another instance that comes to mind in respect to the status of the causes of death is Alzheimer's disease, a disease that was barely recognised 30 years ago, and through a series of very interesting events, mostly marketing events – certainly in the United States by the Alzheimer's Disease Association – it has become foremost in the minds of many people as a worry. Not that that's incorrect, it is a serious disease, but in fact it affects caregivers to Alzheimer's disease patients more than it affects the patients themselves, who are usually in such a cognitive state that they're unaware of their mental problem, but physically they continue to remain, usually, in... in a health state, which doesn't surprise me. When I first read a paper submitted to the journal called Experimental Gerontology – of which I was editor in chief for 13 years – a paper came in from statisticians in Canada who reported that, compared to an equivalent number of people without Alzheimer's disease, and who were as... otherwise, who were physically healthy, as the Alzheimer's disease patients were also, other than their cognitive incapabilities, that the Alzheimer's disease patients actually lived longer than the normal controls. Their suspicion was that this could be attributed to the better care that they had, because Alzheimer's disease patients are... usually have very good care, either by their families or by caregivers. So that concept is important to be understood.

The statisticians decided – 10 or 15 years ago, I don't recall with precision – that because Alzheimer's disease was now becoming so important, apparently, that the causes of death on their list, like senile dementia, should be telescoped into Alzheimer's disease as a cause of death, and that did indeed occur, which resulted in a sudden spike in alleged causes of death attributable to Alzheimer's disease. This worked, of course, to the advantage of the Alzheimer's Disease Association, whose work is important, it's useful, it should continue, but, on the downside, it is... they essentially are in a phase where, like most non-profit organisations, a substantial part of their motivation – at least by the leadership – is to maintain their... their leadership and their salaries, which are, if you look at their salaries, enormous. I'm not calling that an evil act, I'm just trying to emphasize why it's necessary – or why the marketing processes are as elaborate as they are – in respect not only to the Alzheimer's Disease Association, but many other foundations and so-called non-profit organizations.

In the case of Alzheimer's disease, they did a wonderful thing for the benefit of their field when they signed on the daughter of Rita Hayworth, the famous American actress, beauty, who was married to an Indian potentate. I don't recall his name at the moment, but their daughter became the spokesperson for the Alzheimer's Disease Association many years ago, because Rita Hayworth did indeed die with Alzheimer's disease. And that was a brilliant move. It, in fact, mirrored what occurred years earlier when the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis – in the United States at least – had President Roosevelt as one of its spokespeople.

Alzheimer's disease, over the years… and I should say parenthetically at this point that very few people die of Alzheimer's disease, despite what that association and others might want you to believe. There are many people who die with Alzheimer's disease, which is a critical distinction. The cause of death attributable to Alzheimer's disease in the minds of most people can only be made on autopsy, which is rarely done. Consequently, dying from Alzheimer's disease, although it might be written on a death certificate, is rarely established with definity, which brings up another related subject that should be discussed very briefly at this point, and that is that there is a very strong probability that anyone who dies – other than an obvious accident or gunshot wound – anyone who dies over the age of 85, roughly, has a cause of death that is, frankly, unknown. Usually folks who live to that age, and beyond, have multiple pathologies. What has occurred in the United States, I believe, has also occurred in most developed countries – probably not all, although the data and information on this is obscure – but what has happened in the United States in the last 40 or 50 years is that the number of autopsies have plummeted to a point where the only time that an autopsy is usually done in the United States is when the cause of death is suspect, or when there's some legal issue involved that needs further information. Consequently, our knowledge about the causes of death of individuals in old age is essentially a black box.

Bob Butler – the first director of the National Institute on Aging –  and I had decided to write a paper on this issue and try to encourage  people to conduct more autopsies, which is probably a losing  proposition. Unfortunately, Dr Butler died about six or eight months  ago, at a very young age – a tragic event in the lives of most of us in  the field – so we never did get to write this article. And he had  information, as a physician, that I, as a Ph.D., did not have, so I  don't know that that issue is going to be pursued, but it's very  important for people to understand that the causes of death in old age  are rarely established with absolute certainty. In fact, I did write an  article on this, in which I found that there were only two or three  situations in the world where researchers – in Israel, the United  States, and I think the United Kingdom – had assembled some small  number, 25 or 50, autopsies of older people, for their own research  purposes. They had funds to do it, because one of the reasons people  don't do autopsies is because it's costly. No family member would  probably want to do it just to satisfy some research curiosity, and  hospitals surely don't want to pay for those... for that kind of  examination, just to learn what caused death, when they're economically  stressed already. In any case, the studies that I'm referring to, that  did occur with small numbers of people, revealed something that was  probably not unexpected. A bit less than half of the populations that  they looked at, who were autopsied, died from causes other than what was  reported on their death certificates. Now that's significant, because  an enormous number of public health policies that are made by  decision-makers are based on what is believed to be very accurate causes  of death, at every age. If you're making a rule, or a law, or a public  health regulation based on the causes of death in older people, with a  50% error rate, you've got a problem.

In the 50 years or so that I've been in the field of the biology of aging, there has been a significant change that I have seen, not only in the meetings – the many dozens, if not hundreds of meetings I've attended worldwide – but also in the literature of the field, that Alzheimer's disease has, as I think I've put it even in print, become attached at the hip to aging. Why, I do not know. It's usually thought that because Alzheimer's disease is such a popular... area of popular discussion, and obviously care and concern, that it should be part of any discussion of the biology of aging. In my view, that's a non-argument, because there are more people who die in more definite terms from cancer and cardiovascular disease and stroke than die from Alzheimer's disease. As a matter of fact, if you do the math, if Alzheimer's disease is resolved as an alleged cause of death, even, then there will be an additional 19 days added to human life expectancy. So why Alzheimer's disease, alone, is often a part of meetings on biogerontology, or books written on biogerontology – not geriatric medicine, which is the study of the pathologies, the disease-associated pathologies of older people – then it's hard to understand why that attachment continues, and I'm often left bewildered by this development. If we're going to include Alzheimer's disease papers and interest in meetings on bio-gerontology, why ignore the other major causes of death – Alzheimer's is not a major cause of death – major causes of death, whose resolution would be far more significant.

Now I will return to my laboratory work done in the field of biology, fundamental biology of aging, and pursue this question of the replicometer, which I proposed as a name for some unknown mechanism that hypothetically caused cells to have the memory that they did, and to explain why there was a rather narrow window in respect to the number of population doublings that the cells underwent when derived from many different foetal donors. The next event that occurred in my laboratory, it occurred early on at Stanford, when one of my students, by the name of Woodring Wright, W-R-I-G-H-T – Woody, as he was known to all of us – had his... was working for his MD at Stanford, and also was pursuing a Ph.D. simultaneously. Stanford at the time had a program that permitted that possibility. Woody decided to do his Ph.D. dissertation in my laboratory. We welcomed him, and it turned out he was a very bright fellow, and he became familiar – of course, he already knew about much of my work – but he became familiar with my wish to pursue the question of the location of this counting mechanism. And Woody did an experiment that provided considerable insight into this question.

Woody discovered, through a technology that I'll describe very briefly, but I think it will be clearly understood how this experiment was done. Cells, of course, have nuclei. They have a central, round shaped, organelle in which is located all of the hereditary material, namely the DNA and the synthesis of proteins, or at least the language of DNA being translated into signals that provide for the formation of proteins, mostly extra-nuclearly. So our first approach, Woody and I had several discussions on how to do this, and he found that there was a technology developing then where you could expose cells to a chemical, whose name is Cytochalasin B. What the chemical did was to interfere with the mitotic behaviour of cells, that is, their ability to divide. What would happen in the presence of low concentrations of this chemical is that the nucleus of the cell would divide, but the cell itself would not, so that you ended up with nuclei dividing within the cell, because that's where the chromosomes are, and you'd end up with a cell with many nuclei. If you raised the concentration of Cytochalasin B the original single nucleus in a cell exposed in this way, to that chemical, would result in the single nucleus being expelled – physically expelled – from the cell, but still tethered to the remaining cell, which we call a cytoplasm, and that tether could be broken by centrifugation. That is, high speed circulatory movement in a gadget called a centrifuge. Now you end up with a bunch of nucleoplasts, namely cells without nuclei, and nucleoplasts, namely free nuclei. They are, for the most part, all viable... still viable.
Now you can do an interesting experiment. You can take the nucleoplasts from a young cell – that is a cell, let's say, at the 10th or 15th population doubling – and put it into the cytoplast from an old cell – at the 40th or 50th doubling – and you can also do the reverse of that plan, and then determine what these combinations of cells and different nuclei, old and young, you determine the number of population doublings that they're capable of. Now, what you learn is that the number of population doublings that they're capable of is a function of the population doubling level of the nucleus that was inserted into them. If you insert an old nucleus into a young cytoplasm, the old nucleus prevails in respect to determining the number of population doublings, and the reverse. Well, that clearly showed that the replicometer – the counting mechanism – was in the nucleus and not in the cytoplasm. Other experiments done with another of my post-doctoral students, Audrey Muggleton-Harris, also demonstrated more or less the same thing. These experiments were conducted at approximately the same time, but I believe Woody's experiment was a bit more definitive, and indeed we published this. We were confident of the results. It was, frankly, no surprise that the replicometer was in the nucleus because, after all, most of the governance of a cell's behaviour is a function of nuclear events. Of course we knew nothing more than the location of this counting mechanism.

Events that occurred in other fields of biology, distant from ours, that came together under, again, accidental circumstances. Very fortuitous circumstances, that resulted in an explosion of information and the resolution of the question, what is the molecular nature of the counting mechanism. A very interesting story.
The first event has to do with a discovery that was made in the early 70s, I believe, by a Russian theoretician, actually, by the name of Alexey Olovnikov. It was also, this belief... or this theory, also had important input from a paper published by James Watson. I'm... I'm certain the two researchers didn't know what the other one was doing, but they more or less thought about this possibility at the same time, although Alexey's thinking was far more on target. Alexey had left a lecture in Moscow, in which my work was discussed by one of the – actually – leading biologists in Russia at that time, and Alexey heard for the first time about my work, and he wondered about this question of why there was a finite lifetime to cultured normal cells. As he was wondering, he descended to a Moscow subway station and had a brilliant insight as he stood on the platform waiting for the subway train to arrive. At that time – to back up and give you some notion of what insight he had – you need to know that a puzzle existed in the field of DNA replication. DNA, of course, is the fundamental self-replicating molecule that contains all of the genetic information that yields, essentially, in the long run, an animal or a plant, or any living material. So it is the fundamental molecule of life. The question then arose that because it was understood, to some extent, how DNA replicates itself, which is one of its major capabilities... it was understood that the DNA replicates itself using an enzyme called a polymerase.
This enzyme runs along the length of the DNA molecule, which is quite long, and adds to it the nucleotides, or the chemicals, that compose this DNA strand. As it runs along the mother strand, if you will, it picks up the chemicals from the environment and attaches them to each other, and as it rides along the mother strand it reproduces the mother strand, more or less as the mother strand existed, although that's not quite accurate, but for purposes of a simple explanation, it's not necessary to know any more detail. The problem was that it became apparent that the polymerase that was copying the mother DNA strand did not copy the strand to the end. There are known reasons for this, it happens to do... it depends on the chemistry of the polymerase, so we knew why it didn't copy to the end, but we couldn't understand how that would continue to exist, because if the DNA strand is not copied in its entirety at each round of division, then ultimately you're going to be losing the end of the DNA strand and genes will be lost, because the DNA, obviously, is where all of your genes are located, and that would become very apparent quickly in any animal or plant, because it would lose major properties and the species would die... probably the species would never exist, under those circumstances. So this was a major puzzle. It was called 'the end replication problem'.

And it was a problem until Jim Watson and Alexey Olovnikov had the insights that I'm now going to describe. Alexey stood on the platform and thought to himself that the subway train tracks... which, in fact, resemble a DNA strand, one of the rails representing the mother strand and the other rail representing the strand to be copied, and they in fact attach to each other with attachments that look very much like the pieces that keep the tracks connected, so it had that analogy very clearly to Alexey as the subway train approached.
He then had the insight that if the train can only copy the tracks – or one track, in order to make the analogy perfect, but it's not perfect – then the rails would be copied only when the engine was moving, but the cars themselves, as they were moving, could also continue to copy as well. But the area under the engine at the beginning could not be copied. This was just his reasoning analogy, and if that continued, of course, the rails would become shorter and shorter. And then he had this brilliant insight. He thought, if the DNA has nonsense nucleotides, or nonsense chemicals, at its end, that did not provide genetic information – unlike the genes that occurred downstream – if you had thousands of them, then each time the polymerase failed to copy the end, it would fail to copy a piece of nonsense information – that is, chemicals that did not provide genetic information – and this would behave like a buffer, so that the ends of the chromosomes would not suffer loss of genes, because what would be lost, due to the inability of the polymerase to copy the entire strand, would not be of value.

Alexey Olovnikov wrote a paper about his theory that was published in a Russian journal and then, fortunately for him, it subsequently was published in an English journal. It wasn't widely read, since it was speculative. Of course, Alexey did no laboratory work to support his belief, but it turned out that he was absolutely on target. The next event moves us to a second field, and I will join the three fields at the very end. The first field is the story I just recited. The second story I will now disclose. The third story is my work, and I will join the three later. So the second story begins with the work of two women scientists in the US, by name Carol Greider and Elizabeth Blackburn, the mentor to Carol Greider when they were both at Berkeley, I believe, or at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories, laboratories that are directed by Jim Watson. Carol's a student of Elizabeth Blackburn's. These scientists were interested in a part of the chromosome called the telomere. Telomeres are found at the ends of chromosomes. They were first described in the 1930s, actually, 1940s, by two world-famous geneticists, who knew nothing about their role in genetics, but they did publish the observations that they saw... these structures, which stained differently from the rest of the chromosome. They wondered about their role, but they did nothing further to exploit the observation, so that became of interest to Carol and Liz. They also discovered that there was an organism that contained, actually, thousands of chromosomes, small stretches of DNA, in the thousands. The organism is a uni-cellular organism called tetrahymena, so it can be seen only under the microscope. It's a ciliated protozoan, I believe, and this, because it has thousands of chromosomes, it also has a proportionate number of telomeres. So it was, as we call, telomere rich, and it was a source of materials for their studies on the nature of telomeres.
 
And what they discovered was that as the... that the telomeres did indeed consist of a kind of nonsense words that didn't represent genetic information. Along the way, at one point in the work of Carol Greider, who was then at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Carol decided to visit her boyfriend, at that time, at McMaster University in Canada. She went there... her boyfriend was also a scientist. She visited the lab, and as a guest – the members of the department knew that she was a scientist – as a guest she sat in on some of their lab discussions, one of which was the work of a man by the name of Calvin Harley, H A R L E Y. Cal was a kind of scientific grandson of mine. He got his training in my system, while working with Samuel Goldstein, whose name I mentioned earlier, and Cal and I were... later became very good friends. We still are. Calvin presented his work, which involved my major observation of the limited lifespan of cultured normal human cells. Carol described her work, as a guest, with telomeres, and both of them decided that this... a good idea, in pursuit of the cause of the finite lifetime question, would be to pursue experiments, because each had the proper talents – and equipment, etc. – of what happens to telomeres during phase one, two and three of Hayflick's Phenomenon. And so they returned... Carol returned to her labs, they did the work, and got this absolutely fascinating result. The answer is yes, as normal human – and, as we learned later, animal – cells are cultured in glassware, plasticware, in the lab, normal cells, their telomeres get shorter and shorter. No loss of genetic information, because the telomere – the pieces, the chunks of telomeres lost – contain nonsense information, have no value, apparently, to the animal or plant. Well, this was a fundamental insight, because you could interpret that as a counting mechanism. It was learned that cells in phase three, at the later, very end of their ability to replicate, had much shorter telomeres than those at the beginning of the series. A profound insight.

There are three major streams of information that now come together. The first information or area of research was my discovery that human and animal cells have a finite capacity to divide or replicate in culture, and probably in vivo that is within the body itself, although I won't address that subject.
And the second area of research was the problem of what we called the 'three-prime overhang in DNA', which is the technical term, which means that as DNA replicates, as each round of cell division occurs, the mystery was that the DNA molecule would become shorter and shorter and shorter. And that implied that genes would be lost at each round of division if this happened, and so we knew genes weren't lost and there must be an explanation for that. It was Alexey Olovnikov, the Russian scientist, who, in an armchair, dreamt up an explanation for this phenomenon and I believe... and I described that earlier. That was also an effort to understand... that was also made by James Watson, the discoverer of DNA, the structure of DNA.
And a third area was what I just described, and that is the discovery by Calvin Harley and Carol Greider, who had this accidental meeting at McMaster University in Canada, to look at my cell system in respect to the behaviour of the telomeres, that is the structures at the ends of chromosomes that she was expert in. And lo and behold, she and Calvin Harley discovered that as the cells divide and get closer and closer to the point where they stop dividing, the telomeres, which are structures at the ends of the chromosomes so they're quite long, become shorter and shorter and shorter. And because they contain only nonsense information, they behave like a buffer, and consequently as they are lost at each round of division, it has no consequence in respect to the... any danger to the genes in the rest of the chromosomes. But what it does have an effect on is that as it... as these telomere structures are lost at each round of division and they get closer and closer to the DNA, the active and important DNA itself, they... it apparently triggers events downstream that tell the cell to stop dividing. It also tells the cell to do a lot of other things, but those are too detailed, but the major thing is that they tell the cell to stop dividing.

The convergence of these three fields, these three disparate fields, about which workers in each of the three knew nothing about the work of the other two, came together in the ways... the way that I mentioned; quite by accident, as you now can realise. It came very close to resolving all the questions that I was pursuing. We had reached a point where, first of all, we knew there was a counter – not a clock but a counter – and we knew that it was located in the nucleus – we had done experiments that located a nucleus – and it was at that point that Calvin Harley and Carol Greider met, and... and as I've recited it, essentially discovered the molecular basis for what I had found.
But there still is one very important remaining question, and that is that as I had discovered, unlike normal cells, cancer cells are immortal. How do cancer cells avoid this... this shortening-of-telomere problem and therefore stop dividing themselves? That was answered when Carol and Liz Blackburn discovered an enzyme called telomerase, a very unusual enzyme with strange and novel behaviour that I won't discuss, it's quite detailed, but what it does in principal is to do the following.
As telomeres are lost at each round of division in a cancer cell, this enzyme telomerase is expressed, activated, and what it does is to lay on the missing pieces of telomeres. Telomeres are composed of four chemicals, and these four chemicals are reattached to the DNA molecule at each round of division. When these four chemicals should be lost, it reattaches them, essentially, and consequently maintains the telomere length more or less constant, although actually there are some telomeres that are lost but they're never lost to the extent in cancer cells as they're lost in normal cells.
Consequently, a cancer cell is immortal because this magic enzyme telomerase is expressed and maintains telomere length essentially constant. So that answered the final question: how do cancer cells circumvent the inevitably of finitude if their telomeres have become shortened, which they do not, as I just explained. So these were phenomenal findings and they resulted, actually, in the year 2009 in the award of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine to Liz Blackburn, Carol Greider, and John Szostak for discovering the molecular basis for what I had discovered and also for discovering how chromosomes are protected at their ends by these telomeres.
So this was quite an astounding finding. It made headlines even in lay newspapers and of course in the scientific literature. And it finally gave final proof, I suppose you would say, or the final bit of evidence that persuaded scientists to believe what I had found, because there were... it took several decades before there were even a handful of scientists who believed what I had discovered because of the previous 60-year dogma that said that when you put cells in culture, they divided forever unless you made some technical mistake.

I will now switch to another, in my judgement, fascinating story that was extremely important in biology, in biology generally. And it all started when I was given a contract by the National Institutes of Health, when I first started my work in the early 1960s, to provide starter cultures of my cell strain WI-38, the normal human cell strain, to researchers especially in the United States, but, as it turned out, all over the world.
This contract was given to me by the NIH, because when I described my work and especially the sensitivity of WI-38 to human viruses and their use in virology and in other areas of research that required the use of a normal human cell, the demand for cultures for me to provide my colleagues worldwide was so great that I was beginning to spend full time filling orders and not doing the research I wanted to do.
The NIH came to my rescue, in particular a gentleman whose name is Bob Stevenson, who was an NIH employee, and he offered a contract to the Wistar Institute and therefore to me to provide cultures to people who wanted them, and with the monies from that contract I could hire a technician or two to do the culturing and the packaging and the mailing, so that decreased my burden considerably. And that continued until I left the Wistar Institute in 1968 and joined Stanford University.
But when I went to Stanford University, the contract ended, but it was picked up by the National Institute on Aging, from whom I had a large grant to do research, and the demand for cell culture still continued. The demand not only included researchers and academic institutions but people in commercial organisations, in vaccine manufacturers throughout the world. Virtually every major country had vaccine manufacturers and those manufacturers received the cells from me gratis. And in fact I sent... I don't recall whether I mentioned this earlier, but I was asked by the World Health Organisation to establish repositories around the world for... so that distribution could be made from those repositories and not by me, saving me a substantial amount of work. One of the repositories was in London at the Medical Research Council Laboratory – then in Hampstead; I don't believe they're in Hampstead anymore – and the major personality who ran that distribution, that collection, was Dr Frank Perkins, the gentleman who was charged with the responsibility of licensing all vaccines in the United Kingdom. And we became very good friends until his premature death; a wonderful man. So one must have an image of the worldwide demand for these cells, so that when I went to Stanford University, the contract read that I should be supplying only people working in the field of aging, because the contract came from that institute and that's what they... how they preferred to handle it. However, I was still receiving requests for cells from people not in the field of aging and people in commercial institutions who wanted the cells. And I couldn't deny them this, because there is a fundamental belief or rule – it's an unwritten rule, of course – in science that when colleagues ask for materials that you have that you must supply it; not that you must but you should supply them with materials, within reason, and this is a collegial arrangement that goes unprinted but well understood. And so I followed that... those rules and provided people who were not in the field of aging, including commercial establishments, with WI-38. And that was costing my grant money because I had to have my technicians help do that, I had to pay for the costs of the culture vessels that were mailed to these people, these non-aging requesters, and the mailing costs as well. And so I charged them the same amount of money as was charged for a culture by the American Type Culture Collection. This is a quasi-government organisation now located in Arlington, Virginia, or close by, Manassas, I believe, who supply American and foreign researchers with cultures like WI-38. So that that was a perfect arrangement for me to follow, and whatever they charged their customers – this is a non-profit organisation, remember, ATCC – I charged as well, without doing any mathematics of what I should be charging. And it was always a nominal amount. I believe it started out at $50 per culture. It rose, I believe, later to $75 per starter culture, which is a rather nominal sum for receiving this kind of material. And I kept accurate records of who I was sending cultures to, and thought to myself that one of these days, this has to be resolved, it has to be determined who these funds belong to, that is the funds that were received for preparing and mailing cultures to non-aging researchers and to commercial organisations.

Coincidentally with this activity, I also realised that some of the people to whom I was sending cultures were using the cells for vaccine development and potentially production of vaccines. It occurred to me that this might mean my being liable for some accident that one could only imagine, that the cells I would be sending to people would be used for a product or a test that would hurt or even kill somebody, and I became alarmed when I realised that this might happen.
And so I printed a little label that I put on every culture that I sent out that essentially said – of course, I had no legal authority for this but at least I had gone as far as I could go – and it said, in red letters, actually, that I was not responsible for whatever use the cells in this culture would be used for. That actually was the beginning of what later became a universal document in the United States, and probably worldwide, called: A materials transfer document, which, as the name implies, it became not only fashionable but legal subsequently when cultures were sent to people that they sign a materials transfer agreement, which is what it is actually called, an MTA. And that has become… is now standard operating procedure. But I pioneered that back in the early '70s – '70, '71.

Now, moving forward in time and going in a different direction, and then I'll tie these two directions together for a very important event. The second important event that will be tied to what I just described was the establishment of the National Institute on Aging, which became one of the several institutes that are part of the National Institutes of Health. The NIA was established in 1974. I was in fact very much involved in the establishment of that institute. It was the law that established it was... first reached President Nixon's desk and he vetoed it, but it was revived a year or two later, and Nixon ultimately did sign it and the institute was established; that in itself is an interesting story that I will not pursue. The... I became a member of the first council of the National Institute on Aging. The council is established by Congress to oversee the activities of the particular institute that the council is enacted for, and in fact I became the chairperson of the executive committee of that council, found... so I was a founding member of the council.
Of course, there was a search for a director of this new institute, and I ultimately found myself being considered for the directorship and ultimately asked to agree to become a candidate, which I did do, and was ultimately offered the position by the National Institute on Aging. I was asked to visit the institute, and in fact at that time there was a turnover in directors. The new director coming in was a man by the name of Fredrickson, Donald Fredrickson, who was at that time the director of the National Science Foundation; I'm sorry, not the National Science Foundation, the Academy of Science in Washington.
I met Fredrickson at his office there and we were... we drove to the NIH, and while driving, he said... oh, I had previously told the people who had made the offer to me verbally, to come visit and to be a candidate, a serious candidate, it turned out, because they actually made me the offer, I told them that I had a problem that I wanted to be resolved before I seriously considered this offer. The problem that I wanted to be resolved was the disposition of the funds that were raised, or funds that I received, to pay for the costs of the cultures that were sent outside of the contract, cultures sent to people doing research in the non-aging field. There are hundreds, including the NIH itself, by the way, and including commercial organisations. The sum of money was not an extraordinary sum of money. My recollection is it was about $15,000 or $20,000, so it was a sum that had to be disposed of in a... in an acceptable way, and it also was significantly meaningful for me to raise the issue and say, 'I want this settled before I become serious about this offer, because I don't want it to come back to haunt me in some way that would be unexpected for me.'
And so while riding in the car with Fredrickson, he said, 'I understand you have a concern that you want resolved.' I said, 'Yes, I do', and I explained it to him – he's not a biologist so he didn't really understand the details - because there was a key principle involved, and this was a very crucial key concept, and I might say, parenthetically, that it will not be resolved legally – despite my efforts for 45 years – it will not be resolved legally until June of the year 2013 by the Supreme Court of the United States. So with that tickler, I'll return to the story and then describe why it will be determined in June of 2013.
The concept is this: it is the question of title, that is ownership of a self-reproducing system. WI-38 is a self-reproducing system, of course. The cells are frozen in little ampules about that big that contain the cells, frozen, and the ampule itself, that entity has no real value. What is valuable is when you take the cells from the ampule, reconstitute them, put them in bottles, and then allow the cells to multiply so that you can produce a dozen bottles, a million bottles, or... so that the cells are increasing in numbers to extraordinary numbers capable of being commercially exploited for vaccine production or other products.

So the question is, if you own a cell strain or a cell line, which I just described, what do you own? Do you own only the initial ampule, which is essentially valueless, despite the fact that its potential is extraordinary? I say extraordinary when I tell you that vaccines produced in WI-38 – rubella, measles, German measles, polio, rabies, hepatitis B, and several other vaccines; mumps, measles, I think I mentioned – have been produced by the world's vaccine manufacturers and have benefitted more than 2 billion people, that is one third of the population of the planet. And this can be documented. I'm not pulling these figures out of what we call 'left field', I can document this and I have documented it. Well, this gives you some idea of the value, not of this first ampule but of the potential. That concept was unappreciated and never addressed in law. And this is the key problem that worried me: who owns WI-38 and similar cells? Now, today there are hundreds of them, maybe, probably thousands of them. And that question remains unanswered.

So when Frederickson was driving me to the NIH, I said, 'Please send to me your most intelligent and brilliant attorney, when you take over at NIH, to address this question.' 'Okay', he said.
The more I learnt about the job, the more I feared that it would not be of great interest to me, and one of the reasons was attributable to my friendship with Frank Rausher, the director of the National Cancer Institute. Frank had five children, as I did, and he said, 'Len, if you have five children, the salary as director of the NIA is going to be a problem, because it will not suffice to send your five children to university.' So that was a serious consideration because at Stanford, I had this... we as faculty members had this terrific perk, as we say, or advantage of a reciprocal relationship between Stanford and many American major universities, where the children of faculty members of one of these universities could go to the other university in this... in this informal system without payment of tuition fees. And so people from Yale could go to Stanford, people from Stanford could go to Yale, and that kind of... all for nothing or for minimal cost. And that was a significant sum of money, if you do the mathematics, for five children. So that was one consideration. There were other considerations that were... don't come immediately to mind, but they were important ones.
At about this time, there... I was sent a person, as I requested, to look into the matter that I have just described: who owns WI-38 and what is the disposition of these funds? The person that arrived in my laboratory, to my astonishment, was an accountant, a man who clearly had no biological background and no legal background, but he was, as we say in American English vernacular, a bean counter. And this gentleman had two assistants, and they wanted to know how their... particularly... they weren't interested in the question of title, they were interested in the question of the funds that I had put aside in a separate bank account, never touched, and they pursued that matter. They wanted all of the documents. And I told my assistants... I had a secretary and an administrative assistant at the time, I think I had two secretaries, and they had a separate office. I went in there with him, and he heard me tell them, 'Everything in this office is open to this gentleman, he has access to everything in any file, in any folder that I... that is found in this room or any other room under my control.' And they... he went to work.
After several weeks, I began to realise there was something fishy going on, because he came back several times, he seemed to be very serious, and the questions that he was asking me seemed a bit strange, until I finally realised that he was pursuing the question of my having... and I'll put it in a... in very basic terms to ignore the more elaborate description of what he said, but fundamentally he was about to accuse me of stealing government property because he assumed that WI-38 belonged to the government since it was distributed under contract. It was not distributed under contract to the people who paid for the costs of mailing and preparation. The contract never covered those people, which was why that... I established that in the first place. He interpreted that as having stolen WI-38, and even more fundamentally, his assumption that WI-38 belonged to the federal government, which was never ever established. WI-38 was never established under a government grant or contract. I established those... first of all, I made the discovery and established WI-38 without a grant and without a contract. The materials were bootlegged from overhead funds that the Wistar Institute had and that were used to fund my laboratory, whose purpose was to supply cell cultures to researchers within the Wistar Institute.

So here was this basic assumption made by this man who assumed that the government must own these cells. That was clearly not established, for the reasons that I gave earlier.
As a matter of fact, there are at least four stakeholders in a cell population. If it's human, one of stakeholders is the... is the person or the estate from which the cells came. The second stakeholder are the scientists who gave value to those cells, without which the cells would have no value. The third stakeholder is possibly the institution in which the research was done. And, finally, the fourth stakeholder should be the organisation or individual who funded the research. And this was my belief and my concern, that those stakeholders somehow should be satisfied. The investigation continued – it turned out to be an investigation – and this accountant did reach that conclusion, that I had stolen government property, to put it bluntly, although that was not the way it was written in his final report.
His final report, as it was made, made him go to the dean of the school of medicine at Stanford. I was in the department of medical microbiology. And I can only guess what this accountant told the dean. It probably went something along the lines, 'Do you know you have a thief over there in the Department of Medical Microbiology?', because the dean called me into his office, and it was a confrontational meeting that I never expected. I expected when he called me to have an opportunity to explain to him exactly what I've explained in the past few minutes in this... in this interview. But that didn't happen. He was in his office with his lawyer, which was a surprise to me. When I was at previous universities, lawyers were never part of the academic administration. Of course, that's completely changed today, and at that time it was just beginning to happen. And the first thing that I was told was, after they said that they had spoken to this accountant, that I should retain a lawyer. So it immediately made it a confrontational discussion, where I was now needing, according to them, to be assisted by an attorney, which never entered my mind. I thought we would be having a collegial conversation about the title to WI-38, the question of the disposition of the funds, because I clearly was not maintaining... maintaining that they belonged entirely to me. But that never happened, it was simply a confrontational meeting that didn't last very long, and I left and hired an attorney.
The report that this gentleman wrote was then leaked to the press, and one of the people who received the leak was a writer for Science magazine, Nicholas Wade by name. Nicholas Wade came out to California to interview me in the presence of my attorneys and essentially believed what the dean had been told by the... by the accountant and indeed published that in three or four pages in Science magazine, who then were very reluctant to print my reply, in addition to which the accountant did not give me an opportunity to reply before it was leaked to the press. So the press, the information that was published, was essentially that I had been doing illegal things, published in Science by Wade, the front page of The New York Times Sunday edition, and in many other publications, which essentially torpedoed my career immediately because people believed what they read and had never read my side of the story, which was quite a shock to me, because many of the scientists who began to avoid me are trained to look at data and to be precise in what they believe. But that never happened with an enormous number of my alleged colleagues. It was... however, there were many colleagues who immediately jumped to my assistance. It was an immediate determination of who was friendly and who was not friendly, an experience that very few people have when the determination is made within a matter of days. So from that standpoint, it was quite useful, quite interesting. People came to my defence who I never expected to, people did not offer any help and avoided me who I never expected to, so it was quite an interesting sociological experience.

I should say also that at that time, I was... I had been invited to present a paper at a conference on aging, an international conference on aging in Israel, when this exploded. In my absence on this trip to Israel, the NIH [National Institutes of Health] had arranged for people to come to my laboratory in my absence and remove and confiscate all of the ampules of WI-38. And they took them to the American Type Culture Collection, which is a storage facility for similar ampoules, and that was another shock, that these ampoules should be confiscated by the government.
So my trip to Israel was not as pleasant as I hoped it would be. I went with my wife and two of my children.

It turned out, quite by accident again but significantly, that the attorney that I had hired turned out to be a junior person who knew nothing about these issues that I was now involved with. My... my attorney happened to be friendly with another attorney who was an expert on the Privacy Act of 1974, an act that was... that in fact he was... as I say, he was involved in writing, and he, after learning about my case, he saw this as the first test for the Privacy Act of 1974. Remember, this is now the end of 1974.
And he wanted to prosecute the government for violating that Act in order to make it now a tested Act for which there was now legal evidence. And so he asked me whether he could represent me as my attorney to sue the government for violating my privacy when they failed to allow me to rebut the conclusions written by the accountant until well after the information was leaked; they finally did allow me to rebut it but by then the damage had been done. The... he furthermore said he would do this on a contingency basis, in other words, I could... I did not have to pay him until the matter was settled. If there were any funds involved, then he would... should be reimbursed for his time and effort. He also said that he would... he would hire on my behalf a law firm in San Jose, California who are experts on patent law. That was crucial, and those attorneys are also very highly skilled people; again on a contingency basis. By this... so now we brought suit against the federal government, against the National Institutes of Health – the National Institutes of Health, Education, and Welfare, which it was then called – and they of course were defended by the Justice Department, who is... which is the way our government works.
And so the Justice Department took the case to defend the government, to whom we had brought suit. They in turn brought suit against me for... for what they believed to be true, which is normal legal practice in the US. So the law... the contest was joined at the end of 1974 or beginning of 1975 perhaps and litigation began.

In the meantime, the behavior of the dean of the medical school and other people including the president of the university was such that I decided to resign from the university. Not because I felt any guilt at all, but having been for so many years in an academic setting, I knew that if I stayed at Stanford, and even if I won my case outright, there would still be a cloud over my head. If you're not in academic atmosphere, this would be difficult to understand. And I decided it would be to my advantage to resign. Some people disagreed with that decision, but I would not change it, even to this day. And so I did resign, because it became clear to me that I would now have to be spending full time protecting myself.
In addition to the lawsuit, the lawyer for the dean of the medical school, a man by the name of John Schwartz, turned my case over to the local district attorney of Santa Clara County as a police action, believing that they were involved with theft. So I now had not only Stanford to deal with and the federal government to deal with, I had the attorney... I had the prosecutor of the local county, which I think is clear meant that I was now spending full time fighting on three... three fronts.
Fortunately, the Santa Clara County issue was resolved rather quickly because my attorney – the lead attorney who took the part of the case involving the privacy issue – was very well connected locally, of course, and he found another attorney to defend me in respect of the Santa Clara County issue. And that attorney was very clever. He said, 'We're not going to do anything, we're going to cool it – as he said – and wait for the prosecutor to act, see whether he acts.' It turned out the prosecutor never acted, I don't know why, but perhaps he was intelligent enough to see that this was not a criminal act, I don't know, so that issue ended within three or four months.
But the next... but the issue involving the title to WI-38 and the violation of the Privacy Act of 1974 remained as a major issue and the litigation continued for seven years.

During which time of course I had resigned from Stanford and had, through some friends, been hired to do research at Children's Hospital in Oakland, California, very nearby. I applied for a grant to continue my research and won the grant, and the final step in winning a grant is to receive the money. The money was never forthcoming during – I'm talking now about this... during the seven years during which time discovery is going on, which means that each side is getting documentation and other information from the other side to prepare for the case, the suit, presumably a trial. And months went by. I knew I had won the grant, I was told I won the grant. The final act in winning a grant in the United States is for the council of the institute in which the grant is to be provided signs off on it.
Having been the founding member of that very council, and I was now off that council, I knew all the people, and I wrote to them and I said, 'I have been waiting six months for the money for my grant, it's not been forthcoming.' Without going into all of the details, the council decided at their next meeting that they would sit in their chairs and tell the... and explain to the director of the institute, who's always present, plus all of the reporters and laypeople who usually sit around in the room to cover the proceedings... Some of the proceedings are private and so they will ask people to leave, but most of them are public, open meetings. And they decided that they would start the meeting and then announce that they would not proceed with any activities of this committee until they learnt what happened to Hayflick's grant. Immediately, the director of the institute was called in. Well, he was there but he called in the director of the NIH [National Institutes of Health] itself, the top person, who said by phone after he'd learnt what the problem was, 'Please give me an hour or so to pursue this and find out what's going on.'
In one hour, he came back to the council meeting – this was all told to me later, of course – and said, 'The problem's resolved, Hayflick will get his funds.' I later learnt my attorneys learnt during this process of discovery that the following had happened. The major organisation that governs the National Institutes of Health is called the Department of Health, Education and Welfare. The director at that time was a man by the name of Joseph Califano, who ultimately became secretary of defence, I believe, appointed by a subsequent president.
So Califano was the chief person. We learnt in discovery... we saw documents, actual documents. One of the documents... and I've published this so it's now public information. One of the documents was addressed from Califano's chief attorney to his subordinates, and the memorandum said, and I'll quote it exactly, 'Please, shape up the disqualification procedures to deny Hayflick his grant.' Well, this was shocking. In the United States, the peer review system, which is what the system of assessing grant applications is called, that's the holy of holies. That is never tampered with. It is a... these are decisions made by scientists in good faith in respect to whether that applicant should receive the grant. There's never any outside influence, supposedly. And here we have a document with that statement written on it. So I can only assume what subsequent events were that in the mind of the director of the National Institute on... the National Institutes of Health went through. He must have said to himself, 'This is intolerable, we can't do this.' So I'm just guessing, of course, but what did happen was I finally did receive the funds.

It's very strange, because universities in the United States are in legal combat with the NIH [National Institutes of Health] constantly for issues involving overhead rates and all kinds of technical details about payment by the government for hundreds of different issues, whether it's legal or not, so they must file suit. So most universities who receive funds from the NIH always have one or a dozen suits against the government at any given time. They're not criminal... they're, you know, not criminal suits. This wasn't... this wasn't a criminal suit either, but when one person like myself brings suits against... brings a suit against the NIH, then you now know what can happen. There is an effort to cripple that person in one way or another, and they did make that effort, and I have the written evidence for it with the signatures of the attorneys on that memorandum. And this will be, as... I have referred to this... I have referred to this in print. It will soon appear in other materials and I'll talk about that later.
So now after... during the seven years of litigation, three critical events occurred. One... the first event was what's called the Chakrabarty decision of the Supreme Court of the United States. That decision was based on an issue raised by the... I believe it was the Monsanto chemical company, whose scientist, Chakrabarty, discovered a microorganism, a bacterium, that could digest oil and turn it into something that was nontoxic and not a danger to the environment by metabolising the oil. And obviously this was a very important organism that could be used when there were oil spills, etc., and so they wanted to patent it. But as I learnt in 1960, 15 or 20 years earlier, you cannot patent living things in the United States, and I doubt whether you could do it in other countries at that time, which is why WI-38 was distributed by me worldwide free to anybody who was qualified, who wanted it and to the... and to the pharmaceutical manufacturers who produce vaccines from which they made literally multiple hundreds of billions of dollars, which I can also document with no difficulty and from which I received, I think, one or two very nice dinners.
The Chakrabarty decision said, 'Yes, you can patent living things.' And that was a major breakthrough. It is the basis for all of the patents that have been going on for the past 20 or 30 years in respect of the biotechnology industry, for example. But WI-38 could not be patented because the legislation didn't exist then. So today, hundreds of cell populations like WI-38 are patented and people are making millions and millions of dollars from them.

The second significant event was the establishment of the biotechnology industry which developed between 1974 and 1980, during this period of litigation. So this... the Chakrabarty decision was very favorable to us because it for the first time said that a scientist, regardless of their employer, has... can patent their discovery. They may not own it ultimately, but they can patent it, and in Chakrabarty's case, of course, Monsanto owned it.
In my case, it's still... it was not then decided. So the second event that occurred was, as I say, the establishment of the biotechnology industry, where scientists like myself who had government grants or contracts would, in their government-supported laboratories, invent an isolated gene that would produce a useful product like growth hormone and insert it into a bacterium or a cell and then put that culture – it's a small culture, you can put it in a test tube or in a little ampule – put it in your shirt pocket, go down the street, rent a garage, and found a company like Genentech, Amgen, Cetus. All these start-up companies were begun in that way.
Well, I never did anything as outrageous as that. I mean, here these people are taking a potential multimillion, maybe billion-dollar product that sits in a little test tube, go down the street, and open a company. I mean, I didn't come close to being accused of that. So when the... when those companies learnt about my lawsuit, they immediately sent their attorneys to my attorneys to say, 'If Hayflick loses his case, we're dead, we're finished.'
And they said, 'We will file amicus briefs on Hayflick's behalf if and when his case goes to court', in other words: we'll file statements saying we agree with him that there are four stakeholders and the stakeholders have to be considered. So that was the second major thing that happened.

The third major thing that happened was an executive order by President Reagan, who said in an executive order that any... this became an issue even in the defence industry, where people who made things under government contract for the Defense Department could exploit aspects of it for commercial gain, and so it was also an issue in that respect, that is, title.
Reagan published an executive order that said: any things that are discovered in research laboratories under government grants or contracts may be exploited by commercial interests to the benefit of the public, and the purpose of this is to better increase the United States' advantages in international competition for materials and things like that, because other countries could come in and do the same thing, following the published... my published work, for example, and benefit from American taxpayers' money spent for that research for another country's benefit.
And this was one of the motivations for Reagan's... executive order. But a year or two later, that executive order was cast in concrete in a congressional law called the Bayh-Dole Act – B-A-Y-H, Dole, D-O-L-E, Act – in which it specifically stated that anything discovered on a government grant or contract or with taxpayers' funds, and in my case that was... that's questionable and I would take the position that it wasn't, but even if it was, the Bayh-Dole Act said that anything discovered in a laboratory with government funds like WI-38 could be exploited commercially, which I never did exploit commercially.
So those elements now forced the Justice Department into a corner, because even during this period of time, it became apparent to the... to the NIH [National Institutes of Health] that the biotechnology industry was terrific. It was now using research conducted by their grantees to produce products that had great benefit to the public. And so they embraced that concept on the one hand; of course, a huge organisation, they embraced it on the one hand. On the other hand, they are suing me for doing precisely what they have embraced, and they found themselves in an intolerable position.
In fact, they went on to do things that I would never have dreamt of. They hold science fairs once a year at the NIH. All of the people at the NIH are government employees. I was not. Everything at the NIH is owned by the government except the oxygen that they breath. Each year, the NIH has a science fair in which they ask commercial interests to come to Washington, to the NIH, and look at the discoveries that were made during that year in the hopes that industry will buy those discoveries. Well, I mean, that's going about as far as you can go. If you had... if the NIH had done something like that... anybody, any government employee or grantee had done that in 1961, they would have gone to prison for life.

So... many people have told me, and I find it hard... I find it hard to disagree, that we completely changed the attitude of biologists in particular toward receiving compensation for their discoveries. That had never been thought of when I was a student. You never did anything to make money in science. Of course, that began to change in the 1970s and then into the 80s, and today it's the foundation of multiple international industries. So I think I cannot be seriously challenged when I say that our lawsuit was instrumental in changing the attitude of biologists and many, many other people in decision-making positions. So when the government found itself in this position, they came to me more or less hat in hand asking for an out-of-court settlement.

By this time, I had for several years not been receiving a salary, had several of my children in university, using up our savings, and receiving $104 a week in unemployment compensation. So we were living on $104 a week, a family of five children. I went from full professor at Stanford to unemployment compensation line, receiving that amount of money. And I would do it all over again because I preserved the principle that I believed in, that there were... that there are several stakeholders in continuously propagable cell populations, and that was a significant element in my decision to have an out-of-court settlement.
My attorneys were, by the documents that we signed initially, obligated to take my case to trial, which I wanted to do, I wanted it established in law, but my family was by this time suffering. The attorneys would have had to pay an enormous sum of money to take this case to trial, and since they were serving me so wonderfully gratis, I didn't have the stomach to ask them to spend $100,000, which it would have cost them in their time and expenses, to take this case to trial, which is very expensive in the US and I'm sure in many other countries. And so we... I agreed, 'Okay, let's have an out-of-court settlement.'
The out-of-court settlement is public knowledge. It essentially said... it essentially had the goal of giving the government an opportunity to save a little bit of face. So all... by this time, during that seven years in the United States, and I think it's true in the UK, interest rates had skyrocketed. Interest rates during a couple of those years were 13%, 14%, 15%, so that the original $20,000 or $25,000, whatever it was that was in contention, or $10,000, I don't remember now, had reached about $90,000, in interest, in compound interest.
So the out-of-court settlement that we agreed upon said that all of the funds would be returned to me. The government said, 'Okay, we don't want the funds', which eventually went to my lawyers in their entirety, and they deserved every penny of it because it cost them more than $90,000; these are two law firms involved here. Secondly, the ampoules of WI-38 that they had confiscated from my laboratory would be in part returned to me. In order to have them save face, they said, 'Okay, you can have some of the ampoules.' Because I knew from my... what they didn't know, and that is that a small number of ampules would allow me to continue to supply my friends with whatever they wanted, gratis, and it would satisfy my interest in knowing that I was the only scientist in the United States who had legal possession of this number of ampoules of a continuous cell population; no one else has that legal right in the United States, even to this day.

So let me now come to closure and say why this matter will be settled in one month from this interview by the Supreme Court of the United States. I believe it was Monsanto again who discovered a weed killer. In the United States, the weed killer is called Roundup – it probably has a different name in different countries – and it's a very efficient weed killer. They also found a gene that would override the effects of this weed killer that they could insert into corn, soybeans, and other major industrial crops, so that when those plants grew, spraying the field with Roundup will kill all the weeds for the entire season and the corn and soy, etc., will grow luxuriantly and save enormous amounts of money in the job of ridding the fields of weeds.
And this was approved. Most of those products in the United States are produced in that way today. I don't think it's true in Europe because of Europe's concern about putting in novel genes into food products. But a subsequent event raised the issue to the level of legal decision-making, namely a farmer, a small farmer in Iowa a few years ago went down to his friend at a local silo where was stored a mountain of corn that contained the gene produced by Monsanto and who sold those seeds to that... those farmers. This farmer went to his friend at the silo and for a few dollars got himself a bucket of corn seeds and seeded his field, avoiding the increased payment he would have had to make to Monsanto, and, believing that he had a right to do this, planted his field. And when Monsanto learnt about this, they brought suit against this farmer and said, 'We own all of the corn produced from the original seeds that were sold to the farmer from whom you bought for $2 a bucket of seeds.' Well, that's the exact principle that I was concerned about since 1962 and for which a decision had never been made. Even my out-of-court... out-of-court agreement is not a legal decision.
So this has now gone all the way up to the Supreme Court, and in June of 2013 it will be decided. We expect that Monsanto will win this case, and that anything produced from those original corn seeds belong to Monsanto, no matter how many generations beyond that seeds can be found. I wonder what that means in respect to my ownership of WI-38. Of course, I never patented it, so that puts me at a disadvantage immediately, but had I patented it, I might own the world's supply of WI-38, which would make me sufficiently wealthy to buy London, I think.

A book appeared a couple of years ago in the US called The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks, L-A-C-K-S, a black lady, very poor, who developed a cancer of the cervix in 1950 or '51, and the... she was treated at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland, where they took pieces of the tumour out for examination, which was customary. And one of the scientists who was there took that tissue and developed a cell line from it called HeLa – capital H, small E, capital L, small A. You may have heard about it because it's very well known. It was the first immortal human cell population. And she never received compensation. It is questionable whether she should have. People don't receive compensation today for tissue that they donate or have surrendered in one way or another in operations that are then used for research. And this poor, poverty-stricken family, tobacco farmers in Virginia, I believe, felt they had been cheated, that doctors were... and those HeLa cells became very useful in research, and during the development of the polio vaccine became very, very important, not for the development of the vaccine itself, but for important tests that were done to test the safety of the vaccine.
So they felt that people and companies were making a fortune with these cells. There were some companies that actually were making a lot of money from these cells because these companies' goal was to grow cell cultures and sell the cultures to researchers and to industry, so they made not billions, maybe a few million. So they felt very, very cheated by this. Along came Rebecca Skloot, her name is, a young science writer, who decided, after hearing about HeLa cells, to write... to do a book about this family and to uncover the entirety of the story. So Rebecca began to write this book, and because I knew all of the... all of the people involved with the HeLa cell – the people who discovered it, who distributed it, they're all close friends of mine so I knew the history intimately – she got in touch with me and I spent at least 12 or 15 hours on the telephone with her over a period of several months as she was writing this book to correct some of the errors that she had already made and to provide her with additional information about which she had no information. And so she was very grateful and in fact has acknowledged my help in her book.

I believe her editors must have persuaded her to exaggerate several points and also to what we call hype some of the information. One of the things that was said in the book is absolutely wrong and that is that HeLa cells have benefitted mankind like no other cell population has ever benefitted mankind. Well, that's absolutely untrue and I told her than initially and explained to her what I just explained earlier, that is, that WI-38 has benefitted over 2 billion people, which HeLa has... cannot even come close to doing.
Secondly, an error was made in the book. There were many errors but just two come to mind. The other error was that HeLa was the first immortal cell line. That's not true. The first immortal cell line has the name L-929, and it comes from a mouse, and it was isolated almost ten years before HeLa. So that statement was untrue. Despite those two facts, the book became rather popular quickly and it was reviewed in both Science and Nature, and I wrote... and the headline in one of them said: HeLa, the first immortal cell line.
And the other article, in Nature maybe, had in the review that this was the most important cell line in the world for benefitting humans. Well, I criticised both in letters to the editor. Both letters were published. The more recent one was published in Science about six months ago, and subsequent to the printing of my letter to the editor of Science, I get an email message from a lady in Washington, D.C., who said, 'I enjoyed reading your letter' – in which I said there are four stakeholders – 'and she said, it seems to me that there's much more to your story than you have written in those 500 words.'
I almost said to her, 'You're goddamned right there is, and you know what I meant', but I didn't put it in those words. She said, 'Well, it's really fascinating.' I said, 'Well, who the hell are you?' She said, 'Well, I'm the editor for... stationed in Washington for Nature in London.' 'Oh', I said, 'that's interesting.' She said, 'Your story is fascinating. Can I come out? – she's in Washington – can I come out to talk to you further?' 'Sure, come on out.' She stayed at my home for two days, lived with me for two days. We didn't finish, of course, as you can appreciate now.
She came back a couple of weeks later, two more days at my home, and she was so fascinated with the story. Nature, the editor of Nature, wanted her to write a feature article about me – two or three pages in Nature; you know, that's unbelievable – and so of course I cooperated with her. She wanted to have, and I know she must have, documentation for every sentence I uttered. And so it took... it's taken me hours to get the documents collected to document everything I said to her, which means everything I've said to you; stacks of papers and files.
And she became so fascinated with the story that you have heard that she told me about three months ago that she's decided to take a leave of absence from Nature and, with my permission, although she really doesn't need it, technically, to do my biography, and she's in the process of doing... well, first of all, when I return home next week, she should have the feature article written for Nature. And here's the kicker: Nature wanted her to have this article finished... it was supposed to have been finished the early part of the year, but as she learnt more and more, she realised she couldn't possibly do it. Nature wants her to have the article written and published in June to meet the Supreme Court decision. So the timing's pretty good. And then of course as I said, she said, 'I want to do your biography. I'm applying now for a one-year fellowship from some organisation in the US to take leave of absence from Nature to write your biography.' End of story.
