lewis.wolpert

Lewis Wolpert (1929-2021) CBE FRS FRSL was a developmental  biologist, author, and broadcaster. He was educated at the University of Witwatersrand (BSc), Imperial College London, and at King's College London (PhD). He was Emeritus Professor of Biology as applied to medicine in the Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology at University College London. In addition to his scientific and research publications, he wrote about his own experience of clinical depression in Malignant Sadness: The Anatomy of Depression (1999).

Well, I was born in Johannesburg —  a long time ago — in South Africa in 1929, and I was born into a Jewish family and I was born into a family who wanted a nice Jewish boy. And I’m afraid they were a bit disappointed, because I didn’t turn out to be a... a nice Jew… a nice Jewish boy. And as neither of my… my father had actually been born in Belfast and he came to South Africa when he was quite young and he became an office boy at about the age of about 14, 15. So he had very little formal education and certainly my mother didn’t have any formal education, but I had quite a lot of distinguished... uncles and in fact, one of the adults I really liked when I was a child, was my Aunt Helen — Helen Suzman — who’s very famous in terms of being against apartheid in South Africa. But as a child, I became quite early on, involved… not quite so much in science, but I built aeroplanes — you know, balsa wood aeroplanes — I had a Meccano set. At the age of about 13, 14 I could build a radio. It didn’t work terribly well, but... but it wasn’t bad, and the... one of the things I was obsessed was... with was wanting to be able to fly an aeroplane, so I would read books about how aeroplanes flew and how one had to... I would sit and pretend I was flying one with a joystick and... and so forth. And at school I was moderately good at science and maths, and I finally matriculated and I got a First Class in mathematics and then I had to decide what to do. And that was quite difficult.

I went to the same school for 10 years. When I got there... my mother wouldn’t allow me to read letters with more... words with more than two letters in them. So when I was seven and went to school, when they said, ‘Can you read?’ I said ‘Yes’, but I couldn’t, so I was in the lowest class. And that slightly irritated me with my mother that I was delayed, because most... a lot of other people were able to read. And this was King Edward School but it was... I did moderately well at school. I... I wasn’t mad about the school; I liked the sports more than anything else. And then I went from the junior school to the senior school, and the senior school... they were pretty hard on us. I tell you how they taught us arithmetic. Mr Snyman would take a piece of elastic and he would hold it under my nose, ‘Wolpert, how many kilometres in five miles?’ ‘Seven, sir’. Ping!  I want to tell you when you have a piece of elastic hitting you here like that, it makes you cry. We never told our parents we were... we were hit with rulers, large pencils, elastic, in all different subjects, we were humiliated in... in all sorts of ways, but one nevertheless learnt. In Afrikaans class, the teacher once said to me, “Wolpert, what’s the Afrikaans word for abattoirs?” “Don’t know, sir”. “You were talking, and I’m going to make it so you never forget it. Stand up and say it 200 times in front of the class”. I did, and I remember it now: Slagpale. And that’s 65 years ago, since that happened to me. I didn’t like the school, I didn’t like the masters. I liked my friends, and I liked the sport. And the two subjects that I liked were science and mathematics, and I was very disappointed that I didn’t get a distinction in science in my matriculation, and that’s because I hadn’t fully understood that one question I mucked up was how... how a car battery worked, and so that thing... but I got my distinction in... in mathematics.

My mother really wanted me to be a plumber and that wasn’t quite what I had in mind for myself. And... I then decided I wanted to be... do engineering and I chose civil engineering; it seemed less greasy than mechanical engineering, and electrical engineering I wasn’t that keen on, nor was I that keen on chemical engineering. And I thought the beautiful bridges that I saw, which... I... which I’d seen illustrated, encouraged me to do civil engineering. So I went to the local university and did civil engineering. It was okay, I enjoyed the maths most, and in fact, in doing civil engineering, I really wanted to be a mathematician because it was the maths I liked most, but I really wasn’t good enough. And I... funnily enough, I... it... it was quite amusing how I finally got through my civil engineering because, first of all, I was quite good at spotting questions and in our fourth year at university — for the final exams — we had to design a water tower and a bridge and the external examiners — we took about six months designing these  — and the external examiner came and examined me, and he showed that my water tower would leak and my bridge would fall down, but he put his arm around me and said, 'But I think you’ve got the right idea, young man', and passed me on that basis. I’d made a couple... couple of arithmetical errors. And then for the final exam, we... I did the spotting for a friend and myself, but I spotted badly and I thought we’d failed, ‘cause I hadn’t done well in the exam, but…What’s spotting? Well in other words, predicting what questions would actually come up in the exam. I... I used to be quite good at it, but I did it badly for the final exam. However, I did notice they’d made two mistakes in the exam papers, they’d put a three where there should be a two and, you know, for a particular proof of something or another, and I went to the examiner and said: ‘You cannot fail us, you’ve made two mistakes’. And they passed us.

And so I was a qualified civil engineer. I wasn’t mad about the subject, I was envious of my arts friends, who could read all sorts of lovely books and didn’t have to work nearly as hard as we did and so I didn’t... know what I was going to do. But then — via a relative — I was offered a job to be the personal assistant of the Director of the Building Research Institute in Pretoria and that sounded quite nice. So I went to Pretoria and became his assistant  — Jerry Jennings  — and he was a very nice man and what... the research there was on African housing, but the real research was on unsaturated soils. It was a big problem in South Africa at... at that time with certain housing... is that you’d build something and then the soil would rise up and the whole building would crack badly and they were trying to understand what was going on in the soils, so I became a soil mechanic. And I even was the author of — or part author — of two papers on the behaviour of unsaturated soils, and that was in 1952 and I quite enjoyed soil mechanics. I can’t say I was mad about it, it’s not the most exciting thing in the world and I wasn’t mad about Pretoria, which a friend of mine called: ‘The largest cemetery he knew, with lights’.

I was also quite involved with politics in those days, and I — supporting Mandela  — and I wasn’t a member of the party, but I... every Sunday morning, we would sell... I and a friend would sell the communist newspaper in... in African townships and so forth. And I’d had enough of Pretoria and I wanted to leave South Africa, partly to get away from the politics and partly to get away from my parents who were very conservative and really didn’t approve of much of what I was doing, and certainly knew nothing about my political activities. And a friend of mine — who was also an engineer — decided that we would hitch-hike up Africa, and I persuaded my parents to let me leave South Africa ’cause I said I’d go to Israel and work as an engineer. And I even got a letter... I carried a letter from Nelson Mandela, hitch-hiking up Africa, introducing me to other African military groups and carrying certain literature with me to... to give to them. Anyhow... left South Africa, we hitch-hiked... it... it was the most wonderful adventure for four or five months... we hitch-hiked up... Southern Africa and we went to Uganda, Belgian Congo, Kenya. And in those days, it was the safest place in the world. The idea that anyone would harm you or steal from you, no... no... nobody could even vaguely think about that. Yes, there was a little bit of Mau Mau, but nothing... but... nothing serious. And we ended up... I even climbed a volcano — Nyiragongo — which actually has... which erupted recently actually, and we had a wonderful time and we ended up on the beach of Mombasa and then took an Arab dhow for two weeks, to Arabia. And then we got a boat to Italy and then I ended up in Italy and worked as an engineer, vaguely working on building a dam or making sure this dam that, north of Haifa wasn’t going to leak when they turned it into a dam. I was a soil mechanic but I couldn’t... I didn’t like it terribly much, and I kept thinking I wanted to get out of soil mechanics and to do something else, but I had no idea what I wanted to do. Should I become a doctor? Should I become a lawyer? Should I become a poet? I know that’s absurd but that’s the way I was thinking about in those days.

And then, because the man that I’d left behind — Jerry Jennings — who was so keen on me in South Africa, he had arranged that I should get a scholarship at Imperial College in London to study more soil mechanics. And I arrived in London in 1954 and went and studied soil mechanics at Imperial College and it of course was bliss coming to London because nobody knew me. In South Africa I had to behave in a reasonable way because so many people knew my family. In London nobody knew me and I could behave as I wanted to and I had quite a wild time in Soho in the '50s. I’ve even got friends still from those days, it was very exciting.

On the way to... to London from Israel, I spent a month or two... well, about six weeks in France, in Paris. I thought that would be nice and I was learning some French and I really enjoyed it. And on the 14th of July I went out — you know, that’s the great celebration day — and as I came around the corner I bumped into a lady and we embraced, and we had an affair for three weeks, which was absolutely lovely, it was magical. And also while I was in Paris, I’d sort of made friends with a... a young woman, a very attractive young woman, who told me about Soho in London. And when I came to London then... and I could behave then as I wanted to, because nobody knew me, I spent quite a lot of time in Soho and then I met a... a friend there who I... who I pursued and I’m still very friendly with, and... it was quite a complicated time, and Oliver Bernard, the older brother of Jeffrey Bernard, wrote in his autobiography: ‘I shared Rosalind with a young biologist, Lewis’. It was a good time.

The soil mechanics at Imperial was very nice, I... I enjoyed it but, I didn’t really care about soil mechanics and my friends all knew that I really wanted to change. And a friend of mine in South Africa — Wilfred Stein — was getting married, and he knew I wanted to get out of... out of soil mechanics and when he was getting married in a town that wasn’t his own — wasn’t his hometown — they said, ‘Get out of the house for the day’ and he went to the local library, and he came across a paper in which Michael Swann and Murdoch Mitchison — two distinguished biologists in Britain — were looking at how cells cleaved, how... how cells, when they divided, there was a constriction and how that constriction developed. And they were looking at the mechanical properties of cells. And he was coming to London — to King’s College — to work on cell biology. And he wrote me this letter that changed my life and said  ‘Lewis, this is what you should do’. And I went to see his professor, Professor James Danielli at King’s College while I was doing soil mechanics and said, ’Really, I’d like to change, and can I come and do a problem here?’ And he said, ‘Hold on a second, you’ve been working on soil mechanics’. And he sent me to see Bernal who was at Birkbeck – the very famous scientist Bernal – because Bernal was interested in the origin of life and it possibly being related to clays and he thought that I would know something about clays. He was very nice to me, he spoke to me for about two hours, I didn’t understand a word and it wasn’t a subject that I was interested in and I tried to persuade Danielli, with... — and I successfully persuaded — that he could take me on as a PhD student. And also very fortunately, the Nuffield Foundation in those days were offering some scholarships for people to change from the physical sciences to the biological sciences and they gave me a scholarship.
So I could then... in 1955, I started studying cell biology at King’s College and doing a PhD and looking at how cells cleaved... how they divide… the mechanics of the membrane in relation to how they divided in...  in... into two. So that... that was quite hard work because also I knew absolutely nothing about cell biology or biochemistry, but... but it went okay and there was an apparatus that I had and I would go to marines... I went to a marine station initially in Wales at Bangor and the cells that I worked on were the early cells of the sea urchin embryo, because after fertilisation of the egg, the cell divided into two and they were easy to get hold of and I could study them and were looking at their mechanical properties. And then, I didn’t want to continue to work at Bangor, I spent one summer working at a marine station in Scotland and I was a bit bored, and then I saw that many people who were studying sea urchins were working in Sweden at a marine station at Kristineberg and I decided to go to Kristineberg to pursue my studies, and I went there and Sweden was magic... was absolutely magical. The Royal Society gave me little travel grants to go there and while I was working on... or trying to work out how cells cleave, I met a Swede — Tryggve Gustafson — who was working on how sea urchin embryos actually developed. And he was taking movies of them. Well first of all... so I’d started in 1955, my first scientific progress, was... I worked with someone at the Chester Beatty, a man called Howard Mercer, who was an electron microscopist and I... I fixed some sea urchin... early cleaving sea urchin embryos and he did electron microscopy of them and we could see in the furrow where... where the cell cleaved, we could see a band and we said: ‘This is the contractile region’. So that was my first paper, my first real scientific paper. I can’t remember, in 1954 or something like that, I can’t remember. No... no, that’s not correct... that’s not right, 1956 or something, I can’t remember. No matter, I worked anyhow then on how cell... It was 1958. So my first real paper in cell biology was a short paper with Howard Mercer on... on the electron microscopy of cleaving eggs. And during this time, I worked out a model for how the cell cleaved and it’s called the Astral Relaxation Theory and it’s a little difficult to describe, but... but here’s the cell and there are two little regions in the cell at the end of the mitotic apparatus and I... from my studies and looking at the mechanical properties of the cell, the cell rounded up before cell division, due to tension in the membrane and then these asters cause the poles to relax, reduce their tension and so the middle bit constricted and that’s called the Astral Relaxation Theory, and I published this in 1960. It’s taken about 40, nearly... it’s taken nearly 50 years for this theory to be taken seriously... then it is now in the textbook. It’s not the only theory but it took a very long time for people to take it seriously. But I did apply my engineering and got my PhD in 1960, the same time as that I published... that paper.

I had already then started working with Gustafson on how sea urchins developed. And he loved working with me, not because I was applying my engineering so much, but he could run down his colleagues all the time while he was working and I would patiently listen to him. And the marine station was just... just so lovely and we published a lot of papers on how that sea urchin developed. And so, I got in... that’s how I got into developmental biology, moving slightly away from cleavage and... and cell biology. But then I got married and I couldn’t go to the marine station in Kristineberg each year and so I had to find another organism and at this… So were you in London then?  I was... yes, I was still in London all this time and... at King’s College, and I got an assistant lectureship after my PhD and so I was lecturing to students and I had to find another animal to work on because I couldn’t work on my sea urchins anymore. But we had also done some other really quite important work. I’d supervised a PhD student — Charles O’Neill — we’d looked at actually how cells moved, we were looking at amoeboid movement and I think it was a remarkable bit of work... he did. By the way, I’m never... I’m never very good in the laboratory, my skill as a scientist has been to persuade other people to do the work. I care about the experiments but I’m not good at doing them myself. But I did by chance discover a way — actually doing it myself, when doing my PhD — of isolating the cell membranes of Amoebae and so we can actually isolate these and then Charles made an antibody against them, labelled the antibody with the fluoroscine label, put the antibody — the labelled antibody — back onto the living Amoeba and showed that the membrane was fluid. It’s one of my papers that I don’t think... it was published in Nature, I don’t think it’s ever, ever been quoted, because other people in America had came up with the fluid membrane model and nobody cared about our model. We also at that time, I also... also, although I say I don’t work in the lab, but I did work a bit in the lab, I also found a way — quite by chance — of isolating and getting out contractile filaments from early Amoebae. And that... that was really quite important but I didn’t pursue it. What intrigued me was developmental... was developmental biology.

And so, thinking about what to work on, I chose to work on Hydra, ’cause this... is a little animal and it’s remarkable. You chop off its head, it regenerates it, you take a small fragment of the animal, it’ll regenerate into a hydra. And so, I decided to work on that and I had PhD students then working on how the patterning of the Hydra actually progressed. And thinking about how the Hydra actually regenerated and thinking, made me... turn to what I called pattern formation. Now, in those days, I... so I was at King’s College... until 1966, working on Amoebae and Hydra, but in 1966 I was offered the Chair at the Middlesex Hospital Medical School to be Professor of Biology as Applied to Medicine and I went there. And in those days I thought it wasn’t appropriate for me to continue to work on Hydra, although we did go on working for the Hydra thing, because Hydra wasn’t something that medical students would be interested in and I decided that we should work on the chick limb, on the development of the chick limb instead, because this seemed to me more medically relevant. But at that time, Waddington, the very famous developmental biologist, was having a series of yearly meetings in Italy at a place called Serbelloni and very fortunately, I was invited to attend these meetings and... and that was very nice. I was slightly involved in theoretical biology, a little bit, because Danielli, my professor at King’s College, had started the Journal of Theoretical Biology and that was a major step forward and I helped him a little bit with it. It’s rather remarkable, I’m still an editor of that journal. I’m one of the three main editors of that journal still, in fact I spend... even this morning, as a matter of fact, I spent a little time doing my... doing my work on the journal.
At that time I began to think, how did the Hydra know what to do, where to make its head? And I was also struck by a very old experiment, one that goes back over 100 years, by a man called Hans Driesch. He had fertilised a sea urchin egg, he had to divide into two and then separated the two cells. So what would these two smaller cells give rise to compared... Would they give rise to half-embryos? No, they gave rise to normal, but smaller embryos — so that’s pretty remarkable — so it showed that you could get a perfectly normal embryo, half the size. How was that possible? And I began to think about pattern formation and we had discussion, ’How could this ... how could we do this?’ And then I had, I think, one of the few real flashes of insight in my scientific career; I came up with the French Flag Model and what that is, the following: what strikes me about patterning and the Driesch experiment, is that you could get the same pattern with different sizes and numbers of cells and the one pattern that is invariant with size, is the flag. If you have a French Flag that’s big or if it’s small, it’s one-third blue, one-third white, one-third red. So I came up with a model or the key to thinking about pattern formation, based on the French Flag Model. And the problem is, that how do the cells know where to make blue, white and red, irrespective of how many cells there are in the line? And I came up with the idea that the cells acquire positional information, so the cells know their position in a line and therefore they know whether to be red, white or blue. And the problem was, how is that position specified? So that was really quite a major step forward in my own thinking and I was very excited about it. And I gave a lecture... I gave this... I gave a talk at the Serbelloni meeting in... at Waddington’s Meeting in 1968 and then went to a meeting in Woods Hole in America. And there I gave one of the big Friday night lectures in 1968, and it was a disaster. No one would speak to me after the lecture; they so hated my ideas about gradients that no one would speak to me after the lecture.

At Serbelloni I put forward the French Flag Model and put forward the idea that the way cells could know their position, is if there were a graded signal from one end of the flag to the other or along the line of cells and then the cells of various thresholds would know their position. And that went down rather... it went down very well at Serbelloni and in fact, Brian Goodwin — who unfortunately recently died — and Morell Cohen, actually came up with the model — which I don’t want to go into — which would work. And then later that year, I went to a meeting at Woods Hole, at the marine station — I was doing some work on sea urchins there — and I gave one of the big Friday night lectures in which I spoke about my...my model about positional information and gradients. It was a total and utter disaster. At the end of my lecture no one would speak to me. At the coffee afterwards I was just left alone and next morning I went... said to a friend of mine, ‘What is going on?’ and this friend of mine was saying, ‘They’re saying, 'Who in the hell do you think you are?' That’s what they’re saying. They hated the idea of gradients’. I was severely depressed, but miraculously, I was saved. And I was saved by the only genius I know, Sydney Brenner. Sydney is a fellow South African who I knew... he was at university at the same — I didn’t know him well — but I knew him in South Africa, and in fact... they used to have a special discussion group to discuss... things. And there were some of us who could discuss and there’re others, like me, who could listen but not discuss. And Sydney met me bathing in the water and I told him, he said — he was there — he said: 'Lewis, pay no attention whatsoever to what they’re saying. Francis Crick and I like your ideas, pay no attention whatsoever'. And Sydney Brenner saved me. It... it really was miraculous. Why were people so against it, do you think? People were very against my ideas because there had been other people, like Child, who’d put forward ideas about gradients and they simply hated it. Just why they hated it so much is really... is really not clear and it took another 20 years before — about that time — before Americans began to take my ideas seriously. Anyhow, Sydney encouraged me and I wrote a paper... I wrote it up, a paper for the Journal of Theoretical Biology and it’s my most quoted paper. And there’s no paper… It was an enormous success and then Francis Crick, on the basis of my paper, wrote a paper saying: ‘The way this gradient, or the way the cells would know their position along the line, was by diffusion’ and that was a major... step forward. And he published that paper in Nature. And so... that really made a big difference to my life, being supported by Francis and Sydney really was very, very, very important.

Thinking about the French Flag and how it could possibly work, one way would be that there would be some molecule made at one end and it would diffuse to the other end and it would set up a gradient in this... there would be a gradient, a graded set of concentrations along the flag. Gradients had been around... for quite a long time and, in fact, there’s one particular concept that goes back to Alan Turing who spoke about morphogens and that is, once again, diffusible molecules that may be involved in... in pattern formation. And the real problem was, how could this gradient be set up and what would it be a gradient in and how would the cells really interpret it? But the key point with the French Flag Model was the concept of positional information, that is, that cells would have a positional identity and that would determine how they behaved.

One way of patterning which is really quite different from positional information, is a possible way in which the digits are specified, and while the signal from the polarizing region may name the digits — this one being, you know, four, three, two, one, and so forth — the problem is how the digit... why are there these four structures. And a model that really goes back to Alan Turing, that genius who invented computers — absolute genius — and cracked the code of the enemy during the War and so forth, is based on a mechanism called reaction diffusion. And what Turing — it’s absolutely amazing — pointed out or discovered or worked out, is that if you just had two chemicals that interact with each other, one has a positive feedback, so the more you have, the more it makes of itself, but it also promotes the synthesis of an inhibitor, then blocks its synthesis. If you choose everything very nicely, then — and you start off with them all level — they form a beautiful set of peaks, and the idea is that’s how the digits may develop. And there is a little bit of evidence from that, which doesn’t come from our work but from other people’s work. If you take the early limb bud, take off the outer layer of the... the ectoderm and take the cells that give rise to the digit, disaggregate them–  separate them –  mix them all together, shove them back into the outer layer – graft them to the flank – they’ll form very nice digits. No polarizing region or anything like that there at all. And this looks very much like it’s a Turing model. Which are the actual molecules that give rise to it are still not identified. So although we have all sorts of models, the molecular basis of practically all of them have yet to be discovered.
And there’s another little problem that I’m involved in at the moment, and that’s the following: Compare your two hands. Compare your two digits. Isn’t it amazing that they’re pretty much the same length? I hope yours are. And if you stretch out your arms, most people’s arms are the same length. Now, your arms and legs are laid down when you’re in the embryo, and then they grow, and they grow for about 16, 17 years. How is it possible that your two arms, which grow independently — as far as we know — for 16, 17 years, end up the same length? I’ve just submitted a paper, pointing out this problem, to a journal. They didn’t like the first version and I’m waiting for my re... my revised version to be decided on, but I... I don’t have an answer to the problem, but it’s a lot... it... it’s a difficult problem because the way your arms grow is it’s due to growth plates in the skeletal elements that make each one elongate, and there are, oh, probably seven to 10 growth plates in your arm... 17 years and they’re the same length. Sorry, I just don’t know. But I have some suggestions. I think it will be very important for someone to try and simulate the growth of these regions, and maybe it’s because there are so many cells involved that the averaging out makes them reliable.

I was very fortunate when I came to... to the Middlesex Hospital Medical School, because there was a technician already there — Amata Hornbruch — and she became my hands for the next 20 or so years and we’re... we're still very good friends. And because I’m not good at experiments and we did, you know, we... she... she did all the... she did all the experiments and we published a lot of.... a lot of papers together. I was also blessed with a number of very good colleagues. There... one of my PhD students was Dennis Summerbell, who actually married Amata Hornbruch, and who died recent... just a few years ago. He was a very good PhD student. There was Julian Lewis who was a physicist who wanted to get into developmental biology and whom I hired over the telephone, from Moscow without even seeing... without even seeing him, and then Cheryll Tickle, you know, who came... who came... came as a post-doc and we worked extremely happily together and we put forward a series of models, which could explain patterning and positional information in the developing limb bud. Based on some experiments by a man called John Saunders, we came up with the idea that for the anterior/posterior... this is anterior, this is posterior, of... of the limb, there was a signalling region in this part of the limb and if you grafted that to the anterior part of your thing, then you’d get a mirror-image limb and, in fact, we... we analysed this in some detail. And then we came up with another model in which, how the cells knew their position... so sorry, this gave a signal — a graded signal — and that graded signal, told at a high concentration, you’d make the little...  you’d make this digit and at the low concentration, this one. So, this was gradients, it... it was a gradient model. For this axis, going along this way, we came up with the model which is a bit more complicated, in which the cells in the developing limb, measured how long they remained near the tip — it was based on time.

For this axis, we had a model in which, when the limb was growing, cells near the tip were in a special region, which we called the Progress Zone and cells were continually leaving the Progress Zone and they measured how much time they spent there. If they spent a very short time there, they would make this structure; if they spent a long time there, they’d be at the tip of the digits. And we did do various experiments that fitted with this quite... quite nicely and...  however, even today, the experiment or the... the model, is really quite controversial. A friend of mine who is a professor of genetics in Harvard — Cliff Tabin — really doesn’t accept the model at all and I don’t accept his objections to the model. And this one model here with a signal from this region here setting up a gradient as Cheryll Tickle has shown, is really much more complicated than... than we originally thought. But nevertheless, it’s... it’s not too bad and we really had a... a very enjoyable time working this out. However, I must say that when we come to positional information in general, we still really are pretty ignorant of the molecular basis and although Francis Crick had put forward the idea that the way cells would know their position, would be with making a molecule here and then diffusing, you know, diffusing along, this would tell the cells where they were... in fact, I’ve just written a paper with my friend Michel Kerszberg, saying that diffusion is just too unreliable a mechanism for giving cells their positional identity and cell... direct cell-to-cell contact in some really quite complex way, would be a much better way of doing it. But it’s an un... it’s a largely unresolved problem.

We did, of course get involved in… in other things. I was, for example, quite involved in left-right and… left-right asymmetry, and one… one of the things, you know, your body is symmetrical, but your heart is on the left and one of the problems is, how do… how do you specify left from right? And that’s really quite a funny story because I was at one stage an editor of… of a journal called Developmental Biology and they asked each editor to write a little review and I wrote a little review about left-right asymmetry. And they rejected it on the grounds… they said, ‘Why should we publish a review on a topic that no one has the slightest interest in?’ so they rejected my review. Peter Lawrence — a friend of mine then — persuaded me, looking at the review, that I really ought to come up with a model. I came up with a model with Nigel Brown as to how you could specify left-right asymmetry with an asymmetrical molecule, that if you had an asymmetrical molecule — an F-shaped molecule — and if that F-shaped molecule was oriented along the axes of the embryo, then you could see how left and right could be established and we published this as a review in Development and it’s a widely-quoted paper, I’m delight… I’m delighted to… to say. So there have been other aspects of… of development that I’ve been involved in.

The chick limb work went... went well... it’s controversial, it’s certainly even now today not solved. And, you know, I had excellent PhD students and we had a very happy... happy group at the Middlesex Hospital Medical School. And then, in 1973, Waddington put me up for the Royal Society, and that’s a great compliment to be put up as a... become a possible Fellow of the Royal Society and you’re put up in the first instance for seven years and each year some committee looks at you and decides whether to accept you. And after six years I hadn’t been accepted and Waddington had died in the meantime and other people were... were involved, and then I must say, to my enormous pleasure, I became elected a Fellow in 1980 and in fact it was Peter Medawar, who phoned my secretary — Maureen Maloney — who I work with very closely, to say that I had, in fact, been elected. I can’t tell you how important it is to be elected a Fellow of the Royal Society. And when you become elected and you sit on the committees which try and decide who will be elected, you cannot get over the idea that you have been elected, because it’s so competitive, so... there are so many candidates and there are so few who actually become elected, there’re only 40 or so P... scientists a year, that get elected, but it is an enormous honour and it makes a very, very big difference and I was very, very grateful that I did in fact, become elected and I was on various committees of the Royal Society and that... that has been really quite important to me.
And, of course, at this time, while I was doing all this science, I became involved in a different issue altogether and that is the actual relationship between science and the public, because what struck me, is how little science my non-scientific friends understood. And I gave a set of lectures — I don’t know why they invited me — in Warwick and on the base of those lectures I wrote a book called the Unnatural Nature of Science, which I’m still very fond of that book, pointing out that any common sense view, that anyone has about the nature of the world, it will be scientifically false. It... Is it not against all common sense, that when you’re going at 400 miles an hour in an aeroplane, there is no force acting on you? Force does not cause motion, it causes acceleration. That’s as Newton pointed out, but it’s so counterintuitive as to be absolutely bizarre, and when it comes to complicated things like cells or molecules or quantum mechanics, things become absolutely impossible; science really is unnatural. And I think it’s very important that people really realise that science doesn’t fit easily with common sense. I know it’s been argued, and I... argued, that science is organised common sense, but it’s very highly organised common sense. And I really... that was the second book. I’d also written a book... The Triumph of the Embryo. I was married to Jill Neville, a writer at the time, and she persuaded me to give it that title and it was for the general public that I wrote this book about how embryos develop. It was too complicated, they didn’t... the general public didn’t really... didn’t really understand it and I also, in those days, was doing interviews on the radio and I interviewed many, many major scientists... oh, Francis Crick, Sydney Brenner, all sorts of people and we published these — Oxford University Press — I’m delighted to say, published this. I did these interviews with Alison Richards, we travelled around the world and they were published in two volumes called A Passion for Science and Passionate Minds and I want to say, I think they’re a... a very nice... nice set of interviews.
And then, about 15 years ago, I got a very severe depression. I still don’t understand why I became depressed. I was happily married, I was a professor at the university, I was 65 years old, everything was fine. I was having a minor heart problem, but I went into a very severe depression and was even hospitalised at the Royal Free for three weeks, because I was suicidal. I knew nothing about depression and I eventually recovered, I was put on antidepressants and I had... I also had cognitive therapy. And I eventually got better. I was living in this very flat where we’re sit... sitting now, and when I was ill, I discovered that my wife at that time — Jill Neville — never told anyone that I was depressed, she said the stigma will be too bad. And I thought, that’s bloody ridiculous. A friend of mine has just told me about some op... operation he’s had on his testicles, why can’t I tell people about my depression? And for a reason that I don’t know, the... The Guardian asked me to write an article about it and it was widely... a quoted article, and I realised that while before I belonged to the socks school of psychiatry: you get it, oh you just pull up your socks. Depression was something different and I wanted to understand depression, so I wrote a book about it. And I came up with the idea that depression is sadness become malignant. Nobody really takes this idea seriously, but I do. And for people who are depressed, it’s a book that can be a little bit helpful because it does explain various aspects of... of depression. I mean, depression... I just have to say that my depression was worse than the death of my wife. I know that’s a terrible thing to say — but I’m terribly sorry — that’s what depression is like. It’s just worth pointing out that I challenge people when I give lectures on this topic, to tell me one good description of depression in an English novel, there are virtually none. Many novelists are severely depressed, but you can’t describe depression. In fact, my bitter joke about depression is, if you can describe your severe depression, you haven’t had one. It’s... it’s really... there’s Darkness Visible by William Styron, which about his own depression, is a masterpiece, but descriptions of depression really do nothing. So I really got quite involved in... in depression. I... well, it was a scientific way of looking at it and thinking it’s sadness become malignant, but I don’t think anyone takes that particular idea of mine seriously. And it is a quite a curious feature about being a scientist, there are quite a few of my ideas which nobody takes seriously.

I... I’m quite involved in evolution and I have a model about the evolution of multicellularity, which is published. It’s never been quoted by anyone ever. And it’s quite a nice model, which I can tell you. Do tell us. So single cells were doing very well; why did multicellularity evolve? And my model is, that what happened is that the cell divided and something went wrong and instead of the cells dividing, they stuck together, so they went around as a clump and they went on dividing and some fell off. What advantages did they have? What was the selective advantage? There was one. In hard times when there was no food for these cells to eat, the cells could eat each other. And that’s the origin of multicellularity; the egg is the cell that is fed by other cells. What women are for, are to feed the egg. I think it’s a nice model, but it’s never been quoted by anyone other than myself.

With my depression I ended up in the Royal Free because I was suicidal, and I was there for three weeks and they looked after me very well. I was given an antidepressant, I can’t remember which one it was at that particular stage, it made me feel a little bit better, and they just started me on cognitive therapy, which didn’t work. I couldn’t understand what they were talking about at that stage; I was very severely depressed. And I think the antidepressant helped me a bit, although I’ll come back to that in a moment and then cognitive therapy. And cognitive therapy is fortunately nothing like psychoanalysis. What cognitive therapy is about, is to try and help you get rid of all your negative views. One of the main features about depression is you have negative views about almost everything. And what the cognitive therapist tries to do, is to show you that many of your negative views are wrong. So, for example — a classic example — not in my case but where the...  the therapist says... where the patient says, ‘Nobody loves me’. And the therapist says, ‘What about your dog?’ and the patient says, ‘Yes, my dog does love me’. Now, you may think that’s trivial, but anything that makes you reconsider one of your negative things, is a step forward in the right direction. And I know... I know it’s very difficult but that’s the way things can... can move forward.
I did at one stage — at a much later stage — I had another depression after I’d recovered and the person I was with said that she would not help me unless I had psychoanalysis. And so I went into psychoanalysis and that didn’t help me at all. And he said, ‘You’ll never recover without my help’, at £94 a session, and fortunately he went on holiday and I did leave, I didn’t go back. But with psychoanalysis, you know, it’s really psychobabble and it doesn’t help at all. It’s not like cognitive therapy at all. Cognitive therapy, you keep a diary. Keeping a diary is very important, because, for example, the therapist can look at your diary and say, ‘You keep saying you’re never going to get better, but look, last Thursday, you did feel better’ and you say, ‘Gosh really, I... I did feel a little better’ and that does make one, you know, it... it does lead to improvement. And I began to get better with my depression, and I was very nervous about going back to work and what I did with the cognitive therapist... we had a discussion as to what would happen. We, sort of, had a almost had, like, a little play that if I went back to work and felt back... too bad at the meeting, what would happen if I walked out? And I realised it wouldn’t be that bad and I did go back and I didn’t walk out and if you make a step forward like that, then you’re really on the way to getting better. And eventually my depression got better and I’ve had minor occurrences over the years and in fact, I’ve just come off my antidepressant, I’ve been off it for two weeks. Why do I want to come off my antidepressant? I’d quite like to know who I am, because it does cut you emotionally. I’m on a... I have been on a antidepressant called Effexor – venlafaxine – and it does make one... it cuts one’s emotions quite strongly and I’ve been off it now... I came off it very slowly and I’ve been off it for two weeks. I’m not doing too badly at the moment.

There was another aspect of my life about which I wrote a book, which I really think once again, I don’t think anyone takes it very seriously, but I like the ideas. And this is really about the nature of belief. I’ve already mentioned the fact that people have very wrong... wrong ideas about science and... and science really is an unnatural mode of thought. But then I had an experience. I have four children and my youngest one went through a very bad patch, and he was then evangelised by a fundamentalist Christian organisation. And people thought I’d be very upset as a Jewish boy, that my son — my youngest son — had become a Christian. Not at all, it seemed to be helping him and I never ever tried to persuade him not to be, and in fact, there’s really... when he, it really did help him — being a Christian — and he then at one stage... he came to me at my office at work and said to me, 'Dad, you’re so lucky, I’m very envious of you'. There are not many parents to whom a child has said that the child is envious of them. I said, 'Darling, what do you mean, that you’re envious of me?' 'You’re going to die soon'. I said, 'Why does that make you envious of me?' 'I want to die, I want to go to Heaven and I can’t do anything about it and you’re lucky, you’re going to die'. And he wasn’t going to do anything about it, and we did discuss it and that sort of thing. And I told his sister... Jessica about this story and a week later, there was a note on my desk: ‘Jessica says that she thinks that you think you’re going to go to Heaven when you die; we need to talk.’ And we have talked, he’s not that religious anymore, but it made me think about the advantages of religion, and I began to think about the nature of belief and I came up with the idea that what makes humans different from all other animals, is they have a concept of cause and... and effect. And this is based, not on an idea of mine, but on the idea of someone whose name I’ve just forgotten — I can’t remember his name at the moment — who wrote a very important book called Folk Physics for Apes, in which he pointed out that apes do not have a concept of cause and effect, and... and no animal really does. And this had an enormous impact on me because I realised that you cannot make tools — well, he also realised it — you cannot make tools without a concept of physical cause and effect. And of course, tool making is what drove human evolution. I mean, we are the tool making... we are the tool making animals. And I came up with the idea that once humans evolved a concept of cause and effect with the advantages they could make tools, they wanted to understand the causes of other things that affected their lives and therefore I wrote... I argued in fact, that religion came from tool-making, because when people wanted to explain things that the causes that affected their lives, the most obvious thing was some human-like cause and they invented gods. And what religion really does, is provided causal explanations for many of the problems that hu... that humans face. And it is a human characteristic, we cannot tolerate not knowing the cause of things that affect our lives.  Now when you go to the doctor and you’re not well and the doctor says, ‘I don’t know what’s wrong with you’, you find that intolerable. And when you do get told what’s wrong with you, on the way home, I’m prepared to bet anything you will make up a story as to why you got ill. You shouldn’t have sat next to that man on the bus, you shouldn’t have had that meal with that particular salad and so... you know, we all make up things and when people... look, when there’s an air crash and someone loses a relative, they will go on for years wanting to know the cause of that crash. We want to know the cause of things and I claim that what makes us human, is having causal beliefs. No one really takes this again seriously but I think it’s really quite a plausible idea.

One of the areas that I avoided when I was thinking about belief is consciousness. I usually say that the word consciousness cannot be used in my presence unless I give you a permit. I think all the... all the statements about consciousness I... I do... do not find... very helpful. I... Of course having a concept of cause and effect does require you to be conscious. Well, yes, it does require you to be conscious, but I really don’t understand consciousness at all, it’s... it’s all too hard. Ironically — and it is a bit of irony — that although I... I started off as an engineer, my son, Daniel Wolpert, started off as a doctor, and ended up as a neuroscientist; but he is now professor of engineering in Cambridge, working on motor control. And I think that’s very... I think that’s getting the thing. How one moves and how one determines how to move, is absolutely fundamental in understanding how the human brain functions. And in fact I have argued that the only function of the brain is to control movement. I know that if you’re a poet you don’t think that, but if you can’t get the words out —that is, which you... which come from movement — then you’ll never know that anyone has actually written a poem, or... or anything else. So movement is absolutely fundamental, and that’s what he works on. But I don’t really fully understand his topic; it’s too... it’s too tech... it’s too technical for me. And that’s also a feature that affected my life. We did a lot of work on developmental biology of the limb and different thing, but, when it came to molecular biology, and identifying the genes involved, I really was not very good, or to put it mildly, I was very bad. I think molecular biology simply... and modern molecular biology and gene arrays and... really pass me by, and I have no skills in that area what... whatsoever. But one of the things that recently has struck me is that how few genes may actually be involved in development, that most of the genes that we have are really to keep ourselves functioning rather than to determine how we develop. The numbers, when... in any single case where the number of genes... where there’s been an attempt to decide how genes many are involved, it’s a... in a particular developmental process, the numbers have been remarkably small, much less than 10% of the total genome.

It’s not easy to recall in detail how I came up with the idea of positional information. I wanted to understand how the patterning of the embryo actually took place, and I certainly was very impressed with Hans Driesch’s experiment in which, when he separated the sea urchin embryo at the two-cell stage, the two cells didn’t give rise to half embryos, but to smaller, normal, whole embryos. And in fact Driesch himself had really partly predicted positional information; he also claimed that if you removed little pieces of the early embryo, the embryo still behaved normally. He was wrong, you was... there were little bits you could remove, but there were... if you removed certain bits, you couldn’t. But he claimed that you could remove any piece and it still behaved normally. And he claimed that there was a co-ordinate system whereby the cells knew their position... they knew their position. But he said — he called this entelechy — but he said this is impossible and this is some mystical thing which we’ll never understand.
I didn’t pay much attention to those ideas, and in working on Hydra, we developed a model and tried to understand why the head formed only at one end, and why it regenerated. We came up with a model in which there were graded properties along the Hydra: high at one end, and low at the other end. And also there was an inhibitor, that the head end produced an inhibitor which prevented heads forming anywhere else, and when you removed the head, of course the inhibitor went, and so you could make... you could make a new head. But that didn’t give rise directly to positional information. I really... I think the idea... I was trying to understand how cells knew what to do and... and how things were patterned, and once I came up with the idea of the French Flag, and I loved the flags, because however big or small they are they have an identical pattern, and that fitted with Driesch’s early experiment, and also the very fact that humans, from the same egg, you can get twins, and you know there’s nothing abnormal about it, that you can get the same pattern with... with half the number... with half the number of cells, that gave rise to the idea of the flag. And once you’ve got the flag, then how you would make the flag is that that you needed to think about cells having a positional identity. They knew where they... they know where they are with reference to certain boundaries. And that also enabled one to think about regeneration in a particular way. I just want to tell you there are a wide variety of amphibians which if you cut off their limbs, if you cut off the hand of a newt, it will regen... regenerate. And of course it’s now known that, or it’s now thought, we don’t fully know the molecular basis, is that there must be positional identity that determines where things are. And there are wonderful experiments now from my colleague, Jeremy Brockes, who has shown that down the newt limb, there is a graded molecule, it’s called Prod 1, it’s high here and low down here, and that possibly is giving the cells their positional identity. And you can actually change cells for positional identity with another molecule, retinoic acid. Let me tell you. Normally, if you cut at the hand end, it’ll regenerate a hand. But if while it’s regenerating, you let it sit in retinoic acid, the cells here have their concentration of Prod increased to here, so these cells now think they’re these cells, so it makes a whole new limb. It’s absolute... it’s absolutely remarkable. But of course that’s recent work and had nothing to do with the original idea of... of positional information. And of course why the Americans were so hostile to the idea in those early days, I simply don’t know. It may be related to the fact that there had been various models based on gradients — nothing to do with position — which people hadn’t liked at all.

I was at university with Sydney Brenner. He was the local genius. He… first of all, Sydney has an amazing sense of humour, there’s no one who could compete with his sense of humour, I can’t think of all his jokes. And he was very liberal. He… he could… he could talk about almost anything, he… he was so clever. And what is so amazing about Sydney, he came from — he claims, incidentally, that his father could hardly read or write — but he was just a very — Sydney himself — was a very brilliant child. And he’s a brilliant… brilliant lecturer, and his ideas, in science, have been so imaginative. I mean, he didn’t get the Nobel Prize for it, but he was one of the people who discovered messenger RNA, which is absolutely fundamental in relation to protein synthesis. He just, from… from nowhere, was looking for what animal, or what system would be the best one in order to study, in order to understand development. Now, he was a medically-trained person, and he went around looking, and he came up with the nematode worm. He chose the nematode worm because it only has something like — oh gosh, I can never remember — oh… 500 or 600 cell… 600 cells in it, and you can follow the behaviour of every one of those cells in the embryo, and he chose to work on this. And they discovered not only a great deal about its development, but they also discovered a key process in development, and that’s cell death — cell suicide — and they got the Nobel Prize for that. I mean… and Sydney, whichever area, or whichever comment Sydney made, you always had to listen very carefully, because he is so imaginative and so clever, and so bloody funny, unfortunately.

Francis was... Francis Crick, of course, shared an office with Sydney Brenner, and I remember going to visit them, and on the wall of the office was a big notice: 'Reading Rots the Mind'. And he and Sydney had a special arrangement, and that was, if any or either of them had an idea, no matter how silly it was, they would agree to discuss it in detail, to make sure that there wasn’t something in it. And Sydney pointed out that in order to make progress in a particular area, you must not know too much about the subject, because that closes your mind; you want to come to a subject where you don’t know very much and you want to bring new ideas into it. And that’s exactly what he did by bringing in the nematode worm as a model for developmental biology. So he felt... he felt very strongly that knowing too much about a subject you wouldn’t make real progress there, because you’d be trapped by the current ideas.

I was very flattered to be invited by the Royal Society... to give the Medawar Lecture, and I chose as my title Is Science Dangerous? You know, there are many people who think that science really can lead to very bad things like — oh gosh — eating all that meat, which made mad cow disease, and so forth. And I decided to... to really look at... to what the evidence is that science is really dangerous. And the line that I took first of all, is that reliable science has no ethical content in it whatsoever, it’s the way the world is. If there are genes for homosexuality, it’s neither good nor bad, that’s the way the world is. And a very important — I claim — and I don’t think many people have followed this up, to distinguish between science and technology. Technology is the application of science to certain things, and that can have ethical... have ethical implications. But scientific knowledge itself has zero ethics. And I think a great deal of the so-called ethical issues in relation to science are what... are what I think Mark Twain would have called moral masturbation. I think when one comes to biology and one looks at bioethics... bioethics, and asks what are the real ethical issues in relation to biology... and I’m really talking about the application of biology, well, there’s obviously the issue of safety. You don’t want to give drugs or try drugs out on people unless you’re going to... unless you’ve got some good evidence that they’re going to be safe for the individual. That’s hardly a big bioethical issue. There was a very nasty issue when people really were trying to show,  or to... to argue, that certain people shouldn’t... should be... not be allowed to have children if they weren’t intelligent enough. Well, I mean that’s just monstrously bad behaviour, and I’m glad that that’s all largely disappeared. But there really are very few bioethical issues. There are these things about GM crops, you know, whether putting various genes into various crops in order to help them grow will lead to people developing certain illnesses. Well, these are issues about... it’s just issues about safety. And of course the real bioethical issues, I suppose the closer ones, are... what about the nature of the human embryo? Embryonic stem cells, there’s a... in the human embryo, at an early stage, there are a group of cells which are called embryonic stem cells. If you take these and put them in culture, they will grow almost forever, and they can give rise to almost any type of cell, and they can be used... some  people have tried to use them to replace nerval... damage... nerve damage, and all sort of other… it’s the basis of regenerative medicine. But, certain religious groups said you should not be taking these cells from the early human embryo, because the early human embryo is a human being. And I think the evidence for this is zero, and this is what I would call moral masturbation. Now, it’s interesting to ask the question, when does the human embryo become a human being? If you go back to St Augustine, the ideas — oh, going back in the Church, going back, oh a very long time — it used to be thought round about 30 to 60 days, men and women were in the heart; you could tell the heart beating, that’s when the person... when the soul enters the embryo, and it became a person. And then about 50 years ago, the Catholic Church, without any evidence or reasoning whatsoever, decided that the fertilised egg is a human being. And I am totally and utterly opposed to that. And I just want to remind one that even in human development, many fertilised eggs in women don’t go on to development; something goes wrong, and they die. I don’t think anyone really believes that those are people really dying, and I am totally opposed to the idea of thinking about the early human embryo as being a human being.

So I want to argue very strongly that the human embryo is not a human being until it’s outside the woman, and can survive outside the mother with a minimum of external… a minimum of external support. And what’s nice about stem cells now, and it’s a remarkable achievement, it’s now possible to make… almost the equivalent of embryonic stem cells by taking one of your skin cells, putting in a certain number of genes, and they almost behave like embryonic stem cells. So those ethical issues thing. And then there was an enormous fuss about cloning… cloning a human being. That is, taking one of my cells, taking the nucleus with its genes, and putting it into a… an egg from which the nucleus has been removed. And of course that would be an identical twin to me when it develops, and people — there was — people have been hysterical about the ethical issues that this ranges. I have to tell you that I have offered on television, radio and the press, a bottle of champagne to anybody who can show me — or tell me — one new ethical issue that this raises. There’s a further complication. If you come and ask for your bottle of champagne and I show you that you’re wrong and it’s not new, you have to give me two. Nobody has ever come forward to ask for their bottle of champagne. In other words, it really is… bioethics is really… it really is a gross load of nonsense. Safety, of course, and if you’re doing… if you’re doing experiments on animals, you must try not to be… that they don’t suffer too much pain. If you’re doing experiments on people, you have to tell them what you’re actually doing, but I think the bioethic issues related to the… early human embryo, and to cloning, simply have no foundation whatsoever.

Cells, for their size, are the most complex object in the universe. We really need to be able to put cells onto a computer and really be able to model their behaviour. But this is a monstrous exercise. If you take one of your cells — one of your skin cells — I suppose there are probably 10,000 different proteins in it, and number of copies of these proteins can vary from just a few to a million, and they can all interact... one protein... many proteins interact with one another. Being able to simulate those interactions, and which genes they turn on and off, is really the future of cell biology, we really need to understand, we really need to properly understand cells. And when one can do that, then one can begin to be able... that given the genome there are of an organism, you’ll be able to predict how that organism will develop. I’ve got a bet with a man called Rupert Sheldrake, and Rupert Sheldrake is... doesn’t believe that molecular biology is the way that you can explain life; he believes in something like morphic resonance — I don’t want to get involved — but I’ve got a bet of a large amount of port, which has been put away somewhere, that in 20 years’ time one will be able to predict, given the genome, how that particular embryo will develop in detail. I don’t think in 20 years, but in 40 years, I certainly think one will be able to understand. And of course understanding the brain, which for its size, is the most complex object in the universe, that’s even more difficult, with all those connections, and all those different bits... those different... brain cells interacting with one another. It’s exciting and I’m afraid that in my own subject — developmental biology — there isn’t a lot of work on general principles going on, and it’s more about detail. It’s just the gene does that, this protein does that and I find that very boring. But God is in the detail, as they say, and I suppose in the long run it’ll be okay. But for the short run, I find it a little tedious.

The relationship between evolution and development is a very nice topic and it’s making really quite good progress. I mentioned earlier that I had this model about the evolution of multicellularity, but it really raises many, many issues. And I must say that I once upset Richard Dawkins — we were on a platform together, and the thing was about intelligent design, partly  — and I said I’d like to believe in intelligent design, then I wouldn’t have to struggle with these difficult evolutionary problems. For example, we do have quite good ideas about the evolution of the eye, but there are a lot of details that we don’t understand. And one of the difficulties is with evo-devo, you can see why things changed, but it’s the intermediate stages that are very hard to understand what their selective advantage was. Okay, so our jaws come from a set of arches. Okay, we know that they... that were present in our ancestors, and we can understand the transition. But what was the selective advantage before the jaws became functional? It... it really is quite tricky. And that’s why it would be a great relief for me to believe in intelligent design; I wouldn’t have to struggle with these very... with these very difficult things. If you think about, for example, the origin of wings of insects. There is evidence that the wings came from a structure which was used by the insects living in water for getting oxygen from the water. Okay, so when they came out of the water, here was this object. But what was the adaptive advantage of this object before it transformed into a wing? Very, very hard, and I don’t have answers to many of these problems. But evolution and development is... is a very nice... and it’s important to realize, that for most animal evolution, it’s changes in the way that the embryo develops that led to new structures being developed. And so the embryo is absolutely fundamental to understanding how evolution actually occurred.

One of the problems in evolution and development is the evolutionary origin of larval forms. If you take... look, a key model system for development is the fruit fly, Drosophila. So the egg of the fruit fly thing and it forms a little larva. And then the larva goes through... grows a little bit, and then suddenly it undergoes a metamorphosis, and out pops a fly. How is it possible for this larva to turn into a fly? All right, we know that hormones. Well, I must confess that I have quite a simple answer to this problem. I’ve never seen anybody quote it, once again, and the way to think about it is that really what has happened in development is that at a certain stage in normal development in the original animal, it was discovered the following. I think the best way to think about it is in relation to frogs. So think about the following: it’s about the origin of the tadpole. And the origin of the tadpole and the frog is best understood... is that in the normal development of the frog, it goes through a phase where it really is... looks like a sort of slightly elongated form of the embryo. And what happened in evolution is there were changes, it... it stopped developing at this stage and it evolved into a tadpole, which then could swim away, get food, get bigger, and then all that metamorphosis is, is going back into the normal developmental programme. So it’s just a side track from the normal developmental programme. It goes off somewhere and where metamorphosis is, it’s going back to the... it recapitulates its original programme.

Changing from soil mechanics to cell mechanics was really a very big change in my life, and I had to learn biology. I... you know, I was going back to lectures again at the age of what, something like 25 or something like that. But the trouble with soil mechanics is that it wasn’t very sexy. If you were taking out a lady, or you were pursuing a lady, and you said you were a soil mechanic, it didn’t exactly turn them on. I must say saying that you were a cell mechanic didn’t turn them on either, but the fact that you were in biology... it was a completely different group of people. And the people that I was involved with in doing my cell mechanics were really much more interesting than the people that I was involved with doing soil mechanics. When... when we did this work, we were in... when I was doing my PhD, we were in the basement of King’s College and we shared this little lab and there were four of us who’ve remained... who’ve remained  — all of us now professors  — who’ve remained very good friends over the last 55... the last 55 years. Who were they? So the four of us, there was Wilfred Stein, who was the one who got me into biology in the first place, Geoffrey Burnstock, who’s one of the most quoted authors in the... in the whole of biology and who discovered purinergic nerves, then there was Eric Barnard, who’s a distinguished... molecular biologist. He’s in neuro, isn’t he? Yes. And so... and we had... we had a very enjoyable time in those... in those early days in the basement of... in the basement of King’s College. It was just the intellectual problems. And you see it is for me... I still feel very strongly, and I try to tell people, that if we look at... that I came — and you too — came from a single cell, the fertilized egg. I still... I try to persuade people when I give lectures, that every night before you go to sleep you should say to yourself: ‘I came from a single cell, the fertilized egg’. Isn’t that absolutely amazing? And we ought to try and understand it. So when I went into developmental biology and cell biology, I really was, from the very beginning, very excited about that. And it still is to my mind, absolutely amazing that that little cell can give rise to all these human beings.

It was fortunate that I came into cell biology round about 1955-1956. That was just after or just around about the time that the double helix had been discovered. You know that... that Watson and Crick had discovered, you know, how DNA rep... replicated, and it was a time when cell biology was just taking off, and I was very fortunate to go and work in Danielli’s laboratory because that’s where cell biology was doing so well. Danielli was really promoting cell... cell biology at that time, and cell biology hadn’t done particularly well much before that. And, of course, once one began to know much more about proteins and... because what was happening... how proteins were... were coded for, it made an enormous difference, and... my colleagues like Burnstock, Wilfred Stein and Eric Barnard, have all made enormous contributions to cell biology.

Jim Danielli, who was my supervisor and who allowed me to come and do a PhD in his... in his department... Jim Danielli’s great achievement was working out the structure of the membrane that surround cell, and what... he was the one that showed very clearly that it was made of both of proteins and lipids, and it was a bi-molecular lipid layer surrounded by protein that was the basic structure of the membrane, and that was absolutely fundamental to understanding membrane structure, and membranes determine what can get into the cell and what can get out of the cell, and my friend, Wilfred Stein, the one who got me into biology, what he worked on was permeability — how molecules got in and out of cells.

There are quite a few people who think that there’s an important relationship between art and science, and even the journal Nature every now and then promotes this view, and I really think that this is very misleading. I think that there is zero relationship between art and science, and I think there’s also zero relationship between religion and science. Let me deal with art and science first. It’s very important to realise that one of the things about science is that if science... if we had to somehow go back 500 years and start again, the science we would end up with would be identical to the one we end up now. All right, DNA might be called pookie-pookie, but it... still it would be DNA. Proteins might be called something completely different, but we’d end up with exactly the same answers, there’s only one... one thing. If you compare that with the arts, it’s completely different. And one of the key things about science is that it builds one bit of... progress in science is dependent upon its relationship with other bits of science, and there must be no contradictions. In the arts, there’s nothing like that whatsoever. If we had to re-run... you see, I think it’s very important to realise that even the geniuses like Sydney Brenner, Francis Crick, or all the people who’ve made major contributions, if they hadn’t existed, we’d have still have got there. It may have taken us longer. By contrast, in the arts, no Shakespeare: no Hamlet. They are completely and utterly different. There is no relationship between them whatsoever. And just can I point out when it comes to painting, there’s no little bit of science which you can sell for large numbers... large amounts of money like a Leonardo da Vinci painting. I... I really think it is very confusing to think that there are similarities, or that the imagination in art and science is similar. I’m... It’s absolutely essential to remember that in science you have to understand what is known at a particular time, and make sure that you’re not contradicting or going too much against what is there already, and if you are going against it, you have to have very good evidence. There’s nothing like... there’s no such thing as contradiction in art, or logic in art, and so one shouldn’t confuse the two. When one comes to religion, the same once again is true. There is zero relationship between science and religion. They are based on completely... the one is based on faith, the other is based on evidence. Science is very heavily based on evidence. The evidence for God, to put it mildly, is very, very small. In fact, it’s totally non-existent.

My current book, or the book I’m working on at the moment, was... it’s for Faber — they asked me to write it — and it’s about ageing, and the working title is You’re Looking Very Well. Someone said that to me only yesterday. And it’s a book in which I try to understand the problems associated with ageing. Of course I deal with the biology, but I also deal with the social aspects: what people’s attitude towards age, what the young feel about age, how the old live, ageism, and of course, the illnesses and the difficulties that accumulate with age, like forgetting, dementia. And when I walk in the streets now, everybody passes me. I think I’m walking at a normal speed, but young children... almost old ladies pass me, not quite... I’ve no idea why I’m so slow. And of course forgetting, as everyone knows, one of the nice games old people play is called looking for one’s glasses, and hunting for words. But there really are severe problems associated with ageing, not least that we are an ageing population. There are more old people now living in the modern world than there ever have been before, and how they will be looked after is a major, major problem. And understanding ageing in biological terms really partly comes from Peter Medawar, and it’s really based on the idea that ageing is due ultimately to wear and tear, and since evolution only cares about reproduction, once you’ve reproduced, evolution doesn’t give a hoot as to what happens to your body and so the wear and tear leads to ageing. And so ageing isn’t programmed in ourselves, but there are attempts by our cells to prevent ageing until you’ve reproduced. Our only function, from an evolutionary point of view, is to reproduce. That’s not an encourageing view, but that’s the way it is. And as one gets old — and as I’m getting old — it does occur to many people — yes, some people are very happy being old, and I’m 80 now — it’s really what is the purpose of going... my children are all doing quite well, they’d do even better if I died because they’d have... they’d have the money. And so it’s not quite... it becomes quite tricky as to decide what the purpose of living is when one’s finished reproducing, it’s really quite a... a tricky area altogether. And really government attitude, to how to care for the old, needs a great deal more thought than has currently been given.

I have no real views as to the purpose of going on living now, and what I try to do is to find... to try and do something faintly useful, and it’s writing books, and I’m writing a book on aging, and what I’m worrying about is when my book on aging if finished, what will be my next book? I’d quite like to write one about sex, but my partner isn’t very keen on that. Another one is I think I might write a book on the nature of science, and try and make clear to the general public what science is really about.

I think about death quite a lot. The irony about death is that... I would like to die either on my bicycle — I love my bicycle — or playing tennis. I want a quick death; I don’t want a lingering death. I’m totally for euthanasia. I really think that we all have the absolute right to choose to die when we want to. It’s nobody else’s life and it’s my life and if I want to choose to die, I feel people should be allowed to help me die. What I don’t want is a long, lingering illness. I can’t see the point of that whatsoever.
