marek.edelman

Marek Edelman (1919-2009) was a Jewish-Polish political and social activist and a noted cardiologist. He was the last surviving leader of the 1943 uprising in the Warsaw Ghetto. Following the Second World War, he took an active part in domestic and international politics, dedicating himself to fighting for justice and peace.

[Q] Do you know anything about your father's family?
No.  What could I possibly know?
[Q] What was that you told me about Gaon? 
Well, yes, but those are family legends that my father is descended from the Willners, and the Willners are descendants of Ga'on of Vilnius - those are just stories - Gaon of Vilnius, and apparently one of the Willners lived in Warsaw and my father was his nephew or something, so I'm descended from Gaon of Vilnius which is why I'm so fantastic, OK?

[Q] Who looked after you after your mother died?
My mother's friends, Mrs Lipszyc, the wife of a famous dentist in Warsaw who was the leader of the Socialist Youth Organisation, Mrs Esther Telebinska, and the Lichtensteins who used to live with us, and that's how it went.  What does it mean, looked after me?  In those days, people matured more quickly, they made sure I went to school and passed some exams.  That was all the looking after they did.  I don't remember any more what happened.  Where did I eat?  I can't remember.  I don't know.

[Q] Majus Nowogródzki...
Yes, his father was the Bund Party secretary.  He's 84 years old, goes skiing, has had both hips replaced but he skis down the highest mountains and is a wonderful skier.  Apart from that, he made those things in the American sputniks...
[Q] In the space programme?
What?
[Q] In the space programme?
Probably.  He made radio lamps in those satellites that convey telephones and television from America to Europe, the stationary ones.  What happens is that the lamp has the greatest difficulty there... he was the head of this... this lamp has to have, it's tiny, the size of a little finger, and at its centre it has to have a small hole through which a thin wire passes.  They spent several months wondering how to do this, and with each idea the whole thing fell apart and they couldn't make a hole or do anything.  So then they decided to do a bit of brainstorming.  On his way to work, he got off the train one stop earlier and took with him everyone whom he met who he thought looked likely.  They sat down and he presented the problem to them.  They talked and talked and talked and then one of them spoke up saying, 'I'm a tailor.  I understand that it's not the needle that needs to be threaded onto the thread but the thread onto the needle.'  And that's what happened.  First, they made the wire, then they cast the lamp and everything worked.  That's Majus.  To this day, he's an advisor for this firm - I don't know if it's state-run or private - that makes these satellites.

[Q] Who taught you Polish for your graduation exams? 
I was briefly taught... I went a few times to Wiktor Erlich.  But I wasn't a good student for him.  He taught me, because I only knew about Slowacki, so he taught be a bit about Mickiewicz, a bit about Prus, what I should write.  But if you ask me what topic I was given for my graduation exam in Polish, then I don't know.

Annopol is a district in Praga populated by unemployed people who had been evicted from their homes onto the street.  There were just barracks there with no proper floors, just sand and the barracks had been put up there and that's where the children lived.  It was decided, not by me but the leadership, to set up a kind of SKIF group there, a sort of team.  I was the instructor there.  I used to go there once a week, on Sundays, I think, in the mornings, I can't remember what I talked about with them, but I told them something and for them it was a great holiday.  We didn't have any money either so I couldn't bring them any food.  There were about 40, 50 children who came to these meetings because we had a place to meet, I don't know who gave it to us, whether it was the city authorities or the authorities overseeing that community, Annopol, but it was a heated hall, a heated room so the children came there to warm up, and so we were very popular.  Then we bought them, I don't know whose money we used, uniforms - blue shirts and red scarves and they became SKIFists, then someone else came along to teach them some songs.  They didn't go to school for the most part because their time was taken up with trying to steal something and finding food.  That was dreadful poverty, it's hard to imagine.  Even in that room we had with the heating there was no floor there either, the barrack was standing on sand.  I was there in Annopol.  But what's interesting is that I didn't come across a single one of those children in the ghetto so I don't know whether any of them survived or if they were the first to be deported, I don't know what happened to them or to any of the people from Annopol, no one knows because there was no ghetto there.  Those barracks were probably burned down in the end.  I don't know what happened there.  And so I was there.

So this was SKIF.  That's where I met Stasia.  She was the most important person there, supposedly responsible for teaching and all those other things, and she told me once to do something, we were preparing some sort of exhibition, and she told me to take charge of organising this exhibition, and so that's how I made friends with her or rather she with me because I was a snotty-nosed kid compared with her, she was an important person.  She was terribly poor, too.  She'd graduated from the School of Fine Arts but there was no work, nothing to live on.  There were four children there and they had to be provided for so she painted umbrella handles.  I've already told you this before so why do you need to hear it again?  You're bored by this.  Then, when umbrellas became too expensive, her sister used to sew, she used to do alterations, a so-called 'patchworker' who used to sew patches onto garments, and so the two of them did this together.  Then I joined them and I would unpick coats.  The hardest part  was unpicking sleeves because there was always a button on the sleeve, the shoulder was there and it was all filthy, black but I couldn't cut through the fabric because we needed patches so I'd use a razor blade to unpick all of this.  I never went on to any older organisation because through the whole time, I was an instructor there so I was never in Zukunft.  Theoretically, I was old enough to join that youth organisation but because I was involved in working with the children at Annopol, that's where I stayed.  Today you'd call it a youth activist but then it was referred to as a representative, I was a representative in Annopol. That's what my activity involved.
However, there are almost no friends left from those times other than Stasia because all of my friends were also in SKIF but after the war they all went their separate ways.  Besides, the others were from wealthier families, for example, Majus had a bicycle, the only one in our class, that was something wonderful.  And he had a telephone.  We'd smoke one cigarette between four of us on his fifth floor balcony when we were in the fourth year.  His mother was a teacher and during the war, she ran a children's charity called Centos, she was very active there together with [?] who was a really decent, nice guy.  They took her from there and deported her.  By chance, I was in their house at the time and from the balcony I saw them being led away.  I don't know how it happened that I could see this.  So that's the prewar era spent in this children's organisation and really all I have left of it is Stasia because all those friends of mine escaped, they left for the east when the war started.  There's nothing more I can say.

Two great names that were in the International were Alter and Ehrlich, Ehrlich and Alter, it's all the same.  They were friends with Otto Bauer, Blum, Spak, and they were very significant individuals in the socialist movement.  From the start of the October Revolution, they were persecuted by the Soviet Union.  So when there was a socialist convention in Moscow, I don't know which one, of all the social democratic parties, although it was already after the break-up but it was still one International, the second one, Alter was arrested by Lenin.  If it hadn't been for Vandervelde, Alter would have been shot there and then, and if it hadn't been for the delegation of socialists who had come from the West protesting and threatening to go on hunger strike they would not have released him.  But Ehrlich was persecuted by the Russians because he was a member of the Bund and also because he was a delegate to the Duma in St Petersburg and had made a declaration in support of Poland's independence.  After that, I can't remember how it happened, perhaps I don't know, maybe I never knew, he had to escape from St Petersburg - it wasn't yet Leningrad at that point - and so that's how it was.
Later on, during World War II when the Bolsheviks captured them, it all backfired and they were both killed.  They say that Ehrlich committed suicide in prison while Alter was shot a few days later.  No one knows if this is true but a cousin of Ehrlich's who lives in Moscow, she had access to those documents and she says it's true because the guard who was on duty then was given 10 days detention for not watching him properly and so Ehrlich was able to commit suicide.  But this whole story about Ehrlich and Alter has been described 100 times in different places and details like that... when they were released, they talked with a judge, they'd been engaged by the Russians to set up a worker's committee that would help Russia.  Alter was supposed to go to London and Ehrlich to America, but before they could leave, they were locked up in prison and then killed a few months later.  There are all sorts of stories told that because Alter had written a letter judging the Soviet Union which he gave to the Polish embassy, I don't know.  It's true that he wrote that letter... that there was a Soviet agent there who showed this letter, that's all an invention.  Stalin's intention from the beginning was to have them killed because they were his personal enemies.  When the Soviet army invaded the eastern territories on 17 September 1939, he and Zdanowski, that is, Alter, Ehrlich and Zdanowski issued a protest to the Soviet authorities in the name of the trade unions at the occupation of Polish territory.  They were arrested straight away.  So this was the Bund party.

[Q] Do you remember your mother going to the worker's olympiad in Vienna?
Very clearly.  The main train station, a beautiful train covered in red flags, everyone wearing blue shirts and red ties.  That was the workers' olympiad.  I don't remember which year that was, it must have been before Anschluss, 1936, maybe.  Perhaps.  My mother said, 'Marek, come with me, this is the last time you'll ever see socialism'.  I was at the train station, I could have gone, I was still under-age so I didn't need a passport or perhaps I was included in my mother's passport.  So I said, 'You know what, mother?  I won't go, I'll go to summer camp with my friends'.  That was so stupid of me, I didn't go to Vienna.  Apart from everything else, that was the last expression of freedom because then came the uprising in Vienna, those battles in Karl-Marx-Stadthof.  I was looking at this now after the war and they really did build a fortress, small windows, no longer barred, arrow slits on the roof, a huge edifice, thick walls, they fought there for oh, two weeks against the Austrian government which was pro-German.  And they lost.  Their symbol was three arrows: we want... in German it goes like this: we want to make the world free.  What did these three arrows want?  The three arrows were - the first, freedom, the second, I can't remember what, the third, justice.  Everyone wore... all the progressive people in Warsaw wore in solidarity these badges, a circle and three arrows.  That meant you were with that Austrian thing.  That's when it happened, there were songs.  Friedrich, Weissel, Munichreiser - they were the leaders of that uprising.  When it collapsed, they tried to escape to the Czechs.  The Austrians killed two of them on the border and one got across.  And Otto Bauer, who was the Czech social democrat leader, was, so to speak, on the same wavelength as members of the Bund Party because I think he'd managed to leave Austria.  Or perhaps he was dead by then.
In any event, Bund had a particular liking for Austria because people there were left wing, progressive, national minorities had a place there.  Anti-Semitism wasn't, superficially it wasn't... later on, it transpired that the Austrians were the worst swine because notice that everyone, almost every commandant of the concentration camps was an Austrian, in Auschwitz, I don't want to list them because it upsets me.   Anyway, this anti-Semitic propaganda in Austria, where there had never been de-Nazification, had never uprooted this anti-Semitism even from the children.  Did I not tell you about the time that Austrian came to see me, the one who brought wine, his child and a wife, who was a school headmaster?  Why are you nodding your head?  Tell us. I haven't told you?  If you know it, then listen. You're boring.  There was no de-Nazification there.  The Austrians immediately put themselves in the same situation that Germans want to adopt today, the victims of war, that they were annexed.  But I have to say that there wasn't any other place that showed as much enthusiasm for Hitler and for the Anschluss as Austria.  I remember watching the news chronicles before the film shows in the cinema, so I saw this in the news chronicles.  In Germany there wasn't as much enthusiasm as there was there.  The Austrians are obviously weaklings and they liked grosse Deutschland very much, so that's what happened and they went for full co-operation.  Hitler killed Dollfuss as he wanted a bit of freedom for himself but didn't get it, while the whole of Austria backed Hitler.

It was like this that when the war ended, we already knew because we could hear shelling by the artillery for 2 days and so we knew that something was happening but we weren't sure what, and then suddenly the artillery stopped and for one or two days everything was quiet but we could see because we lived in a house where the German [sic] were living on the ground floor while we, this bunch of Jews were on the first floor.  This was January and those Germans had made friends with us because on New Year's Eve they'd got plastered, and there were some girls with us so the Germans charged up to us on the first floor and started chasing these girls around the table.  But nothing happened.  There was a picture of Hitler hanging in the lavatory and an ashtray in a lavvy in the courtyard, it was bitterly cold but everything was neat and orderly.  Each day a kempfer would scrub the toilet with a wire brush alongside these bandits, and everything was clean and neat.  And then they took off, they took off in the morning, they drove off, they loaded up their trucks and left in a hurry.  But around 2 or 3 o'clock, they came back.  Those trucks arrived.  But no, the previous evening they'd told us that on the road to - what's the name of the station there?  Rogowo, the Germans had parked on the road to Rogowo.  What did that mean parked?  A motorcycle brigade or division.  We went to the road but we were going through the woods and we saw that along the road, there was a bitter frost, along the road there were hundreds of motorcycles and hundreds of soldiers lying, standing by these motorcycles.  We thought the whole division or brigade was retreating, going, we couldn't tell what was happening.  But it wasn't normal for the Germans to be in such disarray, because if everything had been alright, because everything was lying around, some in the ditch by the road, some this way, some that, there were loads of them, one on top of the other.  So we went home, nothing was happening, everything was quiet, we had a look and the following day, those Germans left, but we didn't go out of the house because we weren't sure, people ready to grass on us were always around, even if there were no more Germans they still wanted money.  And then suddenly, it was 3 o'clock, still light so it must have been 2 o'clock or half past two, they came back in the same trucks and started unloading all their gear again and moving back in, so it meant if they were coming back that everything was alright.  Meanwhile, someone ran up and said, it was getting dark by then, 4 o'clock, someone ran up and said, "The Russians are in the marketplace".  We said, "That's impossible because these Germans are still here downstairs".  But the Germans weren't there any more.  They had left one by one and that was it.  So we went to the market where actually there were no Russians but a moment later a battalion of ladies arrived on horseback wearing fur hats, all very fancy, Russian Amazons but what women!  All the people were shouting: hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! while we were standing up against the wall, not knowing if we wouldn't be caught because we were Jewish.
[Q] 'We' means who? 
I was with Antek and Celina.  No one else was there.
[Q] Luba.
There, at the market?
[Q] In Grodzisk.
She was in Grodzisk but she wasn't at the market.  Was she?  No, who could she have been there?  She wasn't there.  The three of us were there, we weren't very sure of ourselves, she was in Grodzisk which has nothing to do with this.  There were lots of people there: Ala, Inka, some women communists were there, no, there was plenty of people there.  We were there and hurrah! hurrah! but we felt awful.  The Russian girls were arriving so the war was apparently won while the three of us were left in this marketplace, still a bit afraid that someone might grass on us at the last minute. But still, we went home, the Russians had arrived although we still couldn't quite believe it, perhaps this was only an advance guard.  By morning, however, we could see the Russians in that town.

Then, one day, they closed the ghetto, no - they established the boundaries of the ghetto over an area where over 200,000 people had lived previously and now 450 [thousand] or so were meant to live there since that's how many Jews there were in the whole of Warsaw, so the living conditions changed enormously.  Where there'd been one family of four, there were now eight or ten.  The area was very small.  Winter was just around the corner, it was cold, there was no coal, the conditions were dreadful, filthy, stinking and wretchedly poor.  Before they closed off the ghetto the area that was going to be turned into the ghetto was surrounded by posters proclaiming 'Seuchen schutz gebiet', which means: 'This area is contaminated'.  At that point, there was no typhoid epidemic, but these posters designed by Goebbels or by "Der Stürmer" were everywhere showing this Jew who looked like some, I don't know how to say it, like some bird of prey with an eagle's beak and a hawk's talons in which he was holding someone, and they were showing what Jews are like, how they drink blood and want to spread typhoid among the population of Warsaw.  This was before they closed off the Warsaw ghetto. Once they'd closed it off, I don't know if those posters were still there.  I later had a pass, so these posters must have been up for quite a long time, and this made the Polish population suspicious of meeting Jewish people because Goebbels was a wonderful propagandist, he knew how to arouse hatred - he was first rate at that.  And this affected people, they were afraid, they avoided contact with Jews.  When all of the Jewish shops were taken over by those treuchanders, they weren't professionals, they had only been nominated as owners but they didn't know how to conduct those businesses so they took on Poles as managers but these Poles didn't know what to do either because often they were merchants but from a different field altogether, or craftsmen or factory owners or something else, so they'd come to an arrangement with the Jewish owners, saying, 'I'll run the business and will give you half of the profits, you'll run it and I'll take this money', etc.  But this didn't last long because later most of those Poles didn't pay out any money.  There were individual cases where a Pole would pay out.  This was normal, I don't know why but people don't like to part with money if they can keep it for themselves, to give half away, because it belongs to him, and belongings are a peculiar thing.  That's how it was then.  And so the ghetto was closed off.

In the first action, we smuggled some people across out of those 44,000 we managed to smuggle some people across illegally.  But what happened?  They counted off 44,100 because that's how many bits of paper they had and that was it.  So you need to have a morally troubled conscience because you're taking your sister whereas someone else's sister has been cut off, but no one had a morally troubled conscience because those times were different.  People didn't have a morally troubled conscience.  My friend was given a number because this was the story of Mrs Hellerowa.  The Jewish community was given I don't know how many thousand numbers, and the Berson and Bauman hospitals got a certain number of them, too, but nobody wanted to distribute them because it meant distributing life or death.  And everyone... we weren't there because we were in the hospital on Umschlagplatz but those who were there and who didn't make it to the hospital on time asked the director, Mrs Hellerowa, to distribute those numbers.  Good.  Finally, she agreed to do it and she handed then out.  She handed them out and a telephone operator was given one but her mother and her sister didn't get a number.   And that's what the situation was like.  One evening, they took us out of the hospital, I'd been given a number, too, because of my mother since Mrs Hellerowa was my mother's friend, otherwise I wouldn't have got it, everything was down to protection and that's all there was to it.  She was standing, there was a small square on Zamenhoff Street surrounded by a cast iron fence, she was standing by this fence when her mother came up to her and said, 'Take me with you.'  She said, 'I have one number.'  And the line of people set off, if she didn't go this would be it and as I watched, she pushed her mother away and joined the line of people.  Well, it seemed that there wasn't much else that she could do.  I know her well, she's a decent woman but I don't feel kindly disposed towards her.  I smuggled someone out as well but I didn't push anyone away.  And that's the difference: do you push someone away or do you do things illegally? Those 4,000... the next day they rounded up 4,000 people, lined them up and chose this one, didn't choose that one.  Of those people, almost everyone survived because there was no train.  But can you imagine the situation with that mother?  That's not good.  This is war, life is in danger, this is what was there.  The torturer imposes his own behaviour on his victims.  The victim begins to act like the torturer.  These methods have to be the same to survive.  Otherwise you can't survive.  All of this is terrible.  So that's how this action ended and we stayed behind.  There weren't many of us.  For example that friend of mine who was a printer and who kept a constant guard on the equipment, he was killed on the spot.  He would definitely have come out alive if he'd left there but he told me: 'I'm not going to surrender, when they come I'm not leaving.'   I said: 'Listen, you have to leave because you know this one and that one  - you'll be able to get yourself off the hook.' But no, he wouldn't leave and when I came back after an hour, he was lying on the ground, lying on the hiding place, how do you call it, where the printing press was hidden, it was in an oven, behind the oven of a coal stove a hole had been made and when you moved it away, the machine could be taken out, it doesn't matter.  He was lying there, killed.  His name was Mr Zyferman.  He was a good guy.

We were left like that all of a sudden.  We returned to that furnace and for three days no one showed up, there was a heat wave and everything that was left had remained on the table.  Those flies, those maggots that were crawling over that food, the whole apartment was awful.  But the entire opposite landing was empty so we went looting and found some tea in a sack.  After an hour, two lads charged in saying we've survived, too, and you've stolen our tea, as one does.  Apparently, there were 100 teas along the way whereas we'd managed to steal theirs but we had to do something because people were finding out.  I'm not going to talk about this any more, it's all the same.  I can't remember how it all went.  We were constantly being moved between apartments, streets were being opened and closed.  The lice were dreadful, it was summer and they'd land on people from the ceilings, it was hell, you couldn't sleep.  People had water... there was nothing to eat throughout the entire action, tinned cucumbers, I don't know where they'd come from and people had terrible diarrhoea, so the toilets were all being used morning and evening, diarrhoea, diarrhoea, diarrhoea.  This went on for six weeks, the first action, and then as soon as it ended, everything stopped.

You know, these were all people who were group leaders in youth organisations.  They'd passed through Medem's sanatorium, the farm in Grochów, they'd brought up young people, children and look, those people they'd brought up on the farm on Grochów they all built that kibbutz from the very foundation stones.  I'm not in favour of that but the children that they brought up themselves communally didn't eat, didn't drink, lived in a field - ideals!  That's not important, but they supported one another, and when someone was sick in bed, like for example Sara Biderman who never worked but they provided for her that's not - of course, Antek was, from this class of people came people like - and Antek came from this background, too. He wasn't military, he was a youth worker.
[Q] But you said yourself that in these battles in the ghetto, military men didn't do well.
No, no.  But in the Warsaw Uprising, the military didn't do well there either.  It was the civilians who coped well.  Who did well, Rybicki.  Monter said, because Rybicki was on the staff not the general one but the Warsaw staff, he said, 'Oh, this civilian knows a thing or two', because those military men they were milk-sops.  It turned out that they couldn't even command properly during a war, didn't it?  But in Warsaw, the command was mainly in the hands of civilians who'd grown up in the guerilla army during the war.  If someone was a trainee sub-lieutenant he'd had six weeks of PO training, that's the kind of military man he was, you understand?  Even that leader on Mostowa he was a fourth year student, how could he have been a POW, he was a sub-lieutenant during martial law. They were all children who'd had an upbringing, they called it patriotic but no, it was an upbringing preparing them for collective life.  They were scouts, or from socialist organisations run by the PPS, from the Red scouts, or from that bloody Marian organisation, I don't know what it's called, that religious circle for men.  They were people who'd been brought up in a completely different... And then there was this battle, they said it was patriotism, but this battle was against violence which determined, this violence determined that it was violence against people, it was in the ghetto.  A leader who didn't have the faintest idea about the army, just like all of us, and like all those in the Warsaw Uprising, there was one captain there who'd fought in the war in Spain but did he know anything?  Did Jurek Hüber know anything?  He knew how to separate those Spaniards who were killing one another over a girlfriend.

I'm not going to talk about where the battles took place whether it was on the corner of this street or that because it's meaningless to people, even you don't really know where these streets are because they don't exist any more.  So this is a very strange thing.  Of course, there were all kinds of funny things there, too, as there are in war when someone survives that's funny because normally they die.  We had this... it's interesting, all of our boys, not one of them let us down, there was one military man who came to us in the evening after the shooting had stopped and he said, 'No, I'll go with you, I'll be with you but don't count on me doing anything, I've already served in one war, I can't serve in another.  I can die or I can survive but I can't lead in another war.'  He was an officer.  I'm just telling you this... The following morning, there was nothing going on either.  We went for a walk which was a stupid thing to do.  We could have disarmed those werkschutz but we thought - you are brazen - we didn't know, probably we would have had to kill them all because they had a lot of weapons but they weren't just people who - I didn't know them but there were people there who did know them, who worked with them, they were master craftsmen and they didn't treat these people badly.  So we didn't do that.  It would have been very easy, we could have thrown a grenade in through the window because they were on the ground floor, opened the door and they would have disappeared.  They weren't soldiers, they were 40, 50-year-old men who guarded the place to make sure that no one stole 20 brushes.  We didn't do that.  I don't know, perhaps we should have because it was all out war, so there's nothing to say, no account to give of that kind of an affair, but we didn't do it.  They were civilians.  Any soldier, to claim that kind of an arsenal when he has one gun per head and one or two grenades and two petrol bombs, but we didn't go.  Perhaps that was my fault, I don't know what to say, but that's what I thought.  I don't know them but this one knows them, that one knows them, he worked with him, he's like a friend to him, he hasn't done him any harm.

[Q] The times changed, it was a marvellous team with many different interests, a leading clinic, the best and yet times began to change. 
Yes, well, times changed, Jakubowski was Jewish, his name was Muszkaten Blic.
[Q] Tuwim writes about him.
Yes, because he used to treat all the bohemians, he treated all kinds of people.  He knew... I'm not going to say because he was friends with Picasso, they shared student digs, those were hard times, one room on top of the other.  They kept in touch for years afterwards and then later, as soon as people were able to leave Poland, Jakubowski went with Picasso to the Normandy coast.  It's interesting what they did there.  Picasso was of the opinion that sardines were at their best when they're placed in a tin, covered in oil but not yet sealed.  And each morning, they would go - I don't know, one was 89 the other 78 or 90 - and they would eat those sardines.  That's how they spent two weeks.  That was Jakubowski, those were their ideas.

Suddenly, we were notified that we are to go and view a ward somewhere.  However, the director there said there were no places.  In a word, I was summoned to the Pirogow hospital.  The director there was called Stelmach and he said: 'You know, I don't have any places for you but I'll make some, come back in two days.'  So all three of us came back in two days although he hadn't told anyone anything but just said, 'This is where you'll be working.' 'So when should we come?' 'Tomorrow.'  So we came tomorrow and started to give out orders.  Suddenly one of the nurses said, 'What are they telling me to do?  Here, the doctor, the surgeon is in charge!  There's an outbreak of flu!'  She thought the beds were being emptied to receive flu cases. 'Now they're telling me to take away the tables, to rearrange them.'  This first period wasn't very good but we were pleasant and the nurses came to like us, so that's where we started to work from the beginning.

[Q] Regarding the observation of patients, you clearly remember a patient who was brought to us from neurology suffering from an undefined condition, in effect, she was dying, her urine was being collected, there was strong sunshine and her urine turned black.  She had porphyria.
Yes.
[Q] It was only diagnosed, she'd spent years without being diagnosed, because the sunlight was very bright, it was summer, and her urine went very dark as there are compounds there that change colour.
But I was surrounded by slaves who were always observing everything and knew more than I did.  It's the same story these days, except that today they know more about equipment whereas then they knew more about patients.  When I look at all my trainees, they all developed into professors although I taught them nothing.  I told them to go to the cinema for 10 o'clock because I was bored with them.  Nevertheless, those 20 minutes they spent with me, not more because I had classes at 10, I used to turn my attention to the beautiful girls...
[Q] That's true.
You couldn't, though, because you had to be writing up a patient's history until six o'clock in the evening.  Someone had to be working.  Yes.
