michael.chapman

Michael Chapman (1935-2020), an American cinematographer, had a huge influence on contemporary film-making, working on an impressive array of classic films including 'Taxi Driver', 'Raging Bull', 'The Lost Boys' and 'The Fugitive'.

I was born in... in Wellesley, Massachusetts in 1935 – Wellesley is a suburb of Boston – and my father was a teacher in a high school in Wellesley for many years, sort of much beloved, Goodbye Mr Chips sort of teacher. And my mother was a housewife until my brother and I were... didn't have to be looked after all the time, and then she became a librarian in a town, not Wellesley, but nearby where we had moved when I was in the third grade. And I grew up in a perfectly ordinary... I can't remember quite what the word, a shabby, genteel, something, whatever, not genteel, no, but... but, I mean, on the... on the pay of a high school teacher, but perfectly nice, you know, solid family. And I was of an age where there was no television when I was young, and movies were everything as far as any sort of visual information or entertainment went, and even when I was a small child in Wellesley, the... for some reason the Wellesley school system had Wednesday afternoons off, and just little children, I am amazed that they... it was... was a more innocent age I guess, let us take the bus. We took the bus down to Wellesley Hills to the Colonial Theatre and saw movies that, for children, on... on Wednesday afternoons... and then when we moved to Sherburne I took the bus every Saturday afternoon, just about to... Sherburne was a tiny little country town without anything, but we... we took the bus to Framingham, which was the large town nearby, where there were three theatres, and where there, every Saturday afternoon there were Westerns and various things for kids, and... and I was devoted to movies as a child, as... as all the other children were, because there was no television. We could listen to serials, like Captain Midnight on the radio, but for anything really exciting we had to see movies and... and was there a whole culture of... of children going to movies, and movies aimed at children, really small children. Abbott and Costello movies and... and Westerns and things like that, almost all in black and white, and almost all what would be considered, you know, just barely B movies now, in terms of price and... and production and all that. And also, and... and I only have... only recently realized what an influence they must have been on me, also newsreels. I was reading a book by Godard, it was talking about newsreels and I realized how much newsreels probably meant to me, because in those days they were almost always shot on... there was... of course, they were all black and white, but they were almost always shot in... in 35 millimeter, you know the Imo was the... was the combat camera of the Second World War, in the United States it was a 35 millimeter camera, so they were really beautiful big negatives, and... and amazing footage, because the newsreels, when I was a child, were of the Second World War, so there would be, you know, airplanes flying and bombs exploding and... and battleships firing huge cannons and things, and they were extraordinarily powerful images of... of a world far away from Wellesley or Sherburne, Massachusetts, but... and far more engrossing and, I mean, what... what seemed like the real world, and they must have had a... a vast influence on my thought... thinking about movies I think, and I didn't realize that until many years later. But they certainly did, as did Abbott and Costello and the Westerns and all the things we saw as children. But I didn't have any idea that movies were made by ordinary mortals like myself, you know, that a little boy from... from Massachusetts could go and make movies, I... and it never even occurred to me. Nor did it occur to me, years later when I was more or less grown up.

Because we had moved from Wellesley which was rather a wealthy town to a small town nearby, a little country town, the education system was terrible, and in order to get into a decent college I had... my parents had to get me a good high school education somehow, and so they applied to Andover Prep School for a scholarship, we didn't have any money. And I got a scholarship and I went away to Andover, which turned out to be rather a... quite a thing for me actually. My oldest friends that I still have came from there, and there were other scholarship boys, I hasten to say, in a snobbish kind of way, but I got a very good education and I was able to get a... a scholarship to a... to a big Ivy League college, to Columbia, and I went away to New York in the early '50s, to go to school there at Columbia, and fell in to the sort of... what's the right word? Bohemian is too pompous, but some sort of arty-party world of New York City, and Morningside Heights, where Columbia was, of course was just alive with the mythology of the beatniks, who all came from there, Kerouac and Ginsberg and everybody had gone there, and... and met there in the late '40s and '50s, and that was sort of the dominant... if you were a member of the arty-party, that was certainly the dominant style of the time. In fact I ended up working on the railroad as a brakeman, because that was the chic think to do when you got out of college. But I again, had no idea that I would end up in the movies, nor... nor any... nor any aspiration to, frankly. I... I still loved movies, I went to them every... all the time, I went to all the classic things that one does in New York at the time. I went to all the movies on 42nd Street, where you could start in the morning and pay 50 cents and see a movie and then go have a beer and a hamburger for a dime, and then go see another movie and they were all sorts of movies, you know, usually not the big first run movies, but foreign movies and B movies and C movies and D movies and all kinds of things, you know, almost down to what would pass for porno in those days, but it wasn't really. And I, almost obsessively saw those, but I saw them because I loved movies, not because I was trying to be in the business. And then I got out of college, and as I say, worked on the railroad, and then I was drafted, in those days they drafted middle class white boys, in... in 1958.

I was... I was, in my head if not in... and... and in... the people I associated with, rather left-wing as a young man, and – I suppose I still am in a silly kind of way – but in those days, you know, I took it all terribly seriously, but I didn't really do much of anything about it, but... when I was in, drafted into the army, it was partly... well, never mind, it was partly for reasons of heterosexuality, but, when I was drafted into the army, after I got through basic, they... they realized that I could read and write and do simple sums and things, so they didn't send me to Advanced Infantry Basics, they put me in a... in a signal core unit, which was a sort of intelligence unit, and... and they began to try and get me a clearance. In those days, you know, it was not long after McCarthyism and all that and it was all taken very seriously, and I sort of said to them that I... I didn't want to... the last thing in the world I wanted to do was to be shipped off to, you know, Advanced Infantry Basic, but I said to them that I thought perhaps they shouldn't... that they should maybe put me somewhere else, and not tell me any secrets. And they said, you know, well, we... we'll... we'll decide that, you just shut up and go away. So I said fine, because they sent me to a... a very nice base in New Jersey, on the Jersey shore, it was wonderful.
And then they began to do these background checks and everything and they found out that, indeed, I had perhaps not... they shouldn't have done this stuff to me. I mean, not that I... I mean I don't mean I was a spy, I was just trying to get laid off left-wing Jewish girls, and various things like that. And also, I, you know, also I believed that I was this big, macho, Marxist, whatever, nonsense, but... they were sort of embarrassed and I was embarrassed, and... and I was in a... a secret unit of sorts, I mean, it... it wasn't a secret unit, it was a perfectly ordinary unit, but it had to do with monitoring Soviet tests, Soviet atomic tests, in some complicated way which I now cannot in the life of me remember. It had something to do with changes in atmosphere pressure, or something, and it was a big deal, a... a mildly big deal anyway, and they had units around the world, in various places, surrounding the Soviet Union. And the news of the... the... I can't remember the details, but somehow or other, some piece of information from this unit, or about this unit, came up in The New York Times, and some papers were missing from the place where we were, and I had fortunately had... they thought that somehow I had... was involved with these papers. This has nothing to do with cinematography, but it is an amusing story, so. And I hadn't, I mean I... I probably had, because every Friday I would go and burn these secret papers in a big trash can, and that was part of my job, and I... I had had a... a holster and everything, I think it was even white, but... and... and a gun in it, but the gun was not loaded, so I'd march down and I'd burn the papers, and I... we didn't care or know, and I'm sure they got burned, you know, and I... how it would get to The New York Times, I have no idea, but it wasn't for anything in our unit, we just burned the papers and then, who... who knew where the papers were?
So they went on and on and got on it and they made me take a... a lie detector test, which I, if not failed, at least it was on the point of failure, I was terrified, it was really scary, because I kept trying to say, look, I didn't do anything, and, you know, it would go up and down that, I guess. And I hadn't done anything, I mean I really hadn't! And so that I had to take another one, and that one was also inconclusive, and so, not knowing what to do – look you, you're laughing your head off – not knowing what to do, and realizing that in fact they hadn't... I hadn't done anything and there was no evidence, and so it was all nonsense, they sent me to Greenland. They sort of exiled me for the rest of my stay in the army. So I spent a year in Thule, Greenland, which was an airbase, not an army base, but there was one of these little units that went monitoring Soviet tests. Now, there were no Soviet tests in the year I was there, but every once in a while an iceberg would break off, and that would go ‘ga-boom!’ and there would be some change in the atmospheric conditions, and the needles were like, rather like the lie detector tester, I always thought that was a nice kind of metaphor, because they would go up and down, up and down, up and down, and we'd have to call Washington and say, ‘The needles are going up and down and going up and down!’ But in fact it was just an iceberg. Then they would go send somebody driving off 20 miles to where the icebergs were, and they would find out that an iceberg had broken off, and it wasn't a Soviet test.

I loved the Arctic. What was it about... the Arctic's extraordinary, oh, the light more than anything else, when... when there is light, of course, in the winter there's none. But in... in the high, high Arctic, where Thule is, I mean it's only 1000 miles or so from the North Pole, I can't remember, don't... I mustn't be held to the geographic imperative here, but it's damn high up. The sun never gets beyond about there, you know, so there's always this amazing cross-light, wherever you are, and extraordinarily dramatic and there is sometimes no fill at all, just the sidelight, and then when there's still snow, there is cross-light and fill-light at the same time. It's just inherently dramatic, the light, always, always... and you can't get over how wonderful it looks. You just walk out every day and your jaw drops it's so beautiful, plus, of course, the geology of it is, I mean it's... you know, there're icebergs and mountains and one damn thing after another, it's quite extraordinary. So, I had a wonderful time. I missed some of the creature comforts, but I had a marvelous time for a whole year, I fooled them.

I was a freight brakeman in... in various railroad yards along the Jersey shore, across from Manhattan, and it was really a marvelous job in a lot of ways for a, you know, a... a young beatnik, pompous pseudo poet, whatever... whatever in the world I was. But in... in the course of it, I looked up an old friend of a girl that I had lived with in... in college, and began dating her, and she was the daughter of a... of a cameraman, a French émigré cameraman in New York, named Joe Brun – the... the father, not the daughter – who was really a marvelous cameraman, who had just barely escaped France in 1940 with his family, and got them out of... over the Pyrenees and things and... and eventually ended up in New York. And he and another émigré, more famous Boris Kaufman, shot most of the movies that were shot in New York in those days. You know, he, Boris shot On the Waterfront and Joe shot a... another waterfront movie called Edge of the City, and Boris would shoot this one and Joe would shoot the one slightly below it. And he was a marvelous guy, not very... you've got this short little guy, but a marvelous... in spirit huge. And I married his daughter, and he felt, I think quite rightly, probably, that he didn't want his daughter to be married to freight brakeman on the Eyrie Lackawanna Railroad, and he got me into the movie business, really, essentially just because I had a wife and she was pregnant and, and then I had a child, and I needed money, you know, and... and the movie business, loading magazines and things, even then, paid more than being a freight brakeman. It wasn't as romantic, but... and then I... and... and really I just... it was simple necessity. I need... I had a family, I had a wife and I had a child and another child, and I needed to make money, and I, you know, I did a good job, and I... I went to... I was on staff at a... a production house that did mostly commercials in New York in the middle '60s, and I met Gordon Willis, who was a young cameraman there, and Owen Roysman who was a cameraman there. And slowly I began to realize that I could not just make a living, but that it was, it really was the movies, and I, and I don't know when it quite dawned on me that, my God, I was in the movie business, you know, and that I, and that I could, really could be as, I don't know what the word is, but that I could be as satisfied by it as if I had been a beatnik poet or a... or an abstract expressionist painter. I was... I was on the sort of fringes of the art world in my youth in New York, because Frank Stella and Carl Andre had gone to school with me and we were all friends in the Village, and this and that, and I knew all of those people. And that suddenly I realized that I... my God, I could be a moviemaker, just as they were painters, and that it was all going to be fine.

I operated a lot of movies for Gordie – Godfather, Klute, and all those movies, and... and I was extraordinarily lucky to be in that position, because I mean, what better training, or learning experience could there possibly be than to work for Gordon Willis? And... and not just to work for him, but to work for him when he first started, I mean, the first movie that he lit was the first movie that I operated. And we worked together and we worked a style, I don't mean... I mean that he worked out the style of lighting, I had nothing to do with that, but... but framing and thoughts about how movies should go together and how scenes should be covered and... and what the master should be and what the cover should be. We talked about... years and years together, we spent more... probably more hours together than we did with our families, for about six years or so, you know, six or seven years, something like that. I don't...don't know, I can't quite do the math, but something like that. And it was the most extraordinary learning experience that you could possibly ask for so I was very... I was very confident and content with my operating, and with that part of moviemaking, but it wasn't until, I think, my second movie, that I suddenly realized that, by God, I could be... that I probably could actually have a career as a cameraman, that I could continue working and that I could do... that I could get as much satisfaction – I really hate to use words like aesthetic, but whatever the right phrase is – emotional satisfaction. Whatever the emotional satisfaction you get from writing a poem, or painting a picture or writing a novel, or, God help us, dancing a dance, I could get from being a cameraman, and...
I remember saying to my then wife, when I was partway through White Dawn, the second movie I'd made which, with Phil Kaufman in the Arctic. She and the kids came up to visit and I said, listen, I really... this is, you know, I really am going to do this, and, and I'm going to keep on doing this. I think she, rather correctly, said, you know, you're... I'm living in West 94th Street and you're in bloody Baffin Island, and it's... this is not really how marriages go. Of course, she'd grown up with a father who did exactly that, so I don't know quite what she... why she should have been surprised. And I remember saying, yes, I understand all that, but, by God, I'm going to do this, you know, and so somewhere in there I must have realized that... that this was, I mean... you know...
I... before that I had seen movie stars and worked with Marlon Brando and done The Godfather and all that, and that part of it was all understandable and real and perfectly real and fun and all that, but there was somewhere in there that I realized that I could get whatever satisfaction I needed, other than money, out of being a cameraman. And then, and somehow it happened in the second movie, White Dawn, I don't know why it didn't happen on the first movie, it was a very good movie, Last Detail, but it... somehow it didn't. I don't know why, maybe... maybe because in Last Detail I was just so terrified all the way through it that I never could draw a full breath and think, my God, look, we've made a wonderful movie, you know. And I wasn't sure how much of it had been me, because it was... I'm sorry, the Last Detail was a...a movie directed by a man named Hal Ashby, with a script by Robert Towne and starring Jack Nicholson, and it has survived, I mean, it's now part of the cannon of movies, and it is in fact a very good movie, albeit not particularly lit one. But I felt like such a fraud while doing it, because I knew that I knew so little about lighting, or thought I knew so little, maybe I knew more than I thought I did, that I never quite could draw that breath of satisfaction that I later was able to.
Now, looking back on it, it seems, I mean I... it seems to me I did a fine job, in a... kind of minimalist way, it certainly was minimalist. But, at the time I'm not sure I... I could have fully enjoyed it, you know, and later on I could, later on after I stood in White Dawn, which is this movie about Eskimos, also recommended by... but I was extremely lucky with the things that I was... that sort of fell in my lap, you know, and... and it is a marvelous movie. And the third movie I did was Taxi Driver, so you can't... it's very hard to... to complain about... about that succession of movies. Whether I deserve them or whether they fell in just by... I mean there's... they did to a certain extent fall in my lap by a series of accidents that... that anybody who is a freelance person experiences, you know, but by then I... I was pretty happy as a cameraman, and have been, by and large, pretty happy ever since.

I was very lucky to go to... to Andover and to Columbia, because the level of... the academic level was as... as good as it gets, at least in the United States, and there were all sorts of teachers who, in one way or another, inspired me. But I don't know that it was exactly one teacher, or someone, no, there were a few, there was Pat Morgan and Diz Benzley at Andover, who were art teachers, and... and certainly made me think that possibly, they, somewhere in the arts, you could, you know, you could make a living and survive, and... and be happy. And at Columbia there was an extraordinary faculty in those days, really, Mark Van Doren, Lionel Trilling and other people at, perhaps not as heard of, but equally important, and I studied with all of them, and I... along the way I picked up a kind of, really very inefficient and... and enormously snobbish idea, but it was the idea that everyone had, although it was never, no one ever quite spoke of it, but that you were supposed to... you were supposed to know everything that you could possibly know, about everything, as long as it no monetary value. An... an utterly snobbish idea, and of course, intensely impractical, but it was...  it was certainly the kind of reigning – whatever the word is – way that you were supposed to think about your education and the way you behaved, and the way it's, as I say, both impractical and utterly snobbish.
But it did allow you to learn a lot, you know, I mean about a whole lot of things. It made you very good at Jeopardy and things like that. There wasn't any Jeopardy then, but... but what few brain cells I have left, I'm still pretty good at Jeopardy. And, I'm not so sure, but what that... that education has done more for me in the movies than, certainly than going to film school. Forgive me, Tamara, but film school teaches you exactly not those things, and that kind of learning and the army and the railroad and bumming around and hitchhiking across the country and various things, seem to me far better film school than film school, because the technology of movies is not very difficult, and if you don't know it, somebody else does and they can help you out. But the emotional content of what you're looking at and the way in which you look at it is all-important, and that's not what they can teach you in film school. And, I was extremely lucky, utterly by accident, to have had that education and that approach to the way I thought about life, you know. This sounds so pompous, Jesus. Let me think if there isn't some way to say it, other than that. But I... I guess there isn't.
Anyway, I'm very, very grateful for the... the accidental things that happened to me, I mean, imagine if I had not, if I, as a child, my family had not moved to this small town where they were able to buy a... a lovely old house, I'd have been in Wellesley, Massachusetts and gone to Wellesley High School, and not to Andover, and my life would have been very different, you know. All the way through everybody's life, and certainly in mine, odd accidents happen that have, you have no idea are going to turn out to be what they are. I looked up this girl whom I'd known in college, and... and her father put me in the movie business. I was an operator with Gordie on a not particularly good movie called The Landlord, and I met Hal Ashby and I ended up finding myself doing Last Detail, and there's no... the... I went to do the next movie, White Dawn, and this is a really sad sort of story, Phil Kaufman was going to do the movie White Dawn with Eskimos, and it was in... in... on Baffin Island in Canada, and he hired a Canadian cameraman, and the Canadian cameraman made the terrible mistake of doing some tests in the Arctic, and Phil saw the tests and he was so appalled that he fired him, and... and I'd finished Last Detail, and for whatever reason, my name was around, and I was in... in the East Coast Union, everything, so, so he called me up and said, would you like to go to the Arctic, and he didn't know that I'd, of course, spent a year in the Arctic and fallen madly in love with the Arctic, and all of these things, these are simply accidents that happen, and in my case, all happened, sort of for the good. I have no explanation for why or how, but those things happened, those things worked out.

First of all operating is... is... I don't think there's any question that operating is far and away the most wonderful job – acting aside – the most wonderful job in the movies because it's... it combines aesthetics and athletics and everything at the same time, you know. I mean you have to be very good and you have to make choices at 24 frames a second at the same time, and always put her head there, and his shoulder here, and make that, you know, make that composition work, and you have to be able to do it – like that! – at the same time, and it's... if you're good at it... it's incredibly satisfying and exciting and sexy and... and you don't have to talk to the director and everything all the time, and you can flirt with the girls, and it is just a wonderful, wonderful job. And I often... and I... and I will say, I really was very good at it. I'd always been athletic and I'd always been interested in art and... and thus composition and framing and those things, and the two just went together in... in my hands and my head, and I just, oh, I loved it.
And I... and I... I think I said earlier, I... I worked for Gordon Willis for about, I can't remember now, six or seven years, whatever it was, all of his early movies, Godfather, Klute, all the rest, and so we really... and Gordie took this stuff extremely seriously and we talked endlessly and drew diagrams and argued and drank too much and drew more diagrams and talked more, for month after month, year after year, about exactly that, about framing and... and how, how it should go and how it should look, and we worked out a system together, or worked out a kind of aesthetic of it together, that we were very happy with. And so every day I would get up and... and frame pictures, I mean, what more could anyone ask, it was heavenly. And yes, it very much influenced my work as a DP, because I, well, on the simplest level I, whenever I could, I operated my own movies. We would pay somebody and he would, you know, maybe he could do the B camera, or he would just go away and... and let me do it. And that's in... in the most satisfying and, I think, the best way to go if you possibly can. Obviously you can't sometimes, when you've got a big explosion or something where there are 17 cameras and you've got a lot of special effects and you've got to watch, but if they're... if they're just in a normal course of things, you shoot the master and the over the shoulder and the two shot, and this and that, it's wonderful to be able to do it yourself, because you can see, once you're used to it, you can see that the... the little nuances of light, how it changes when he turns his head to her, or when she, you know, looks like that at him, and you can... you can see whether it really works, and also you can, when you operate for yourself, you can take chances that you couldn't take as an operator for someone else, no matter how much you and he loved and respected each other, as Gordie and I did.
But, when I would operate for myself, I could take real chances, because who was going to yell at me, you know, if I made a mistake, if I screwed up? I... I... only I could yell at myself and so I would do really outrageous things, and get away with them. Such as? I mean I would not worry about whether the frame was on the top of her head or whether it would cut off here or there, and I would really go for what felt, just intuitively felt wonderful. Plus I got to do lots of handheld stuff, which I love. Handheld is... is one of the most... it's, you know, it's the closest sort of to acting and dancing and being with them that there is, and like, for instance, Jaws, and once they got on the ocean, almost entirely handheld, and... and wonderful, because I had... it was such fun to do, such great fun to do. And in those days they didn't have any monitors or anything, and so I... I was the only person that could tell Steven [Spielberg] what was going on, because I was the only person who could see it, so they had to do what I said, it was wonderful. I mean, they had to, you know what I mean, they didn't really do what I said, but they had to... they had to listen to me and... and be guided by what I could see, because we were out in the middle of the ocean, and bouncing up and down, and I was hammering the camera on my shoulder. That was... it... operating is a heavenly, heavenly job.

In the analogy between movies and... and... and say painting, operating is drawing, and lighting is painting, and there... there seems to me, in many ways, in vaguely representational painting that... that drawing can save painting, but painting can't save drawing, you have to be able to draw, there are very few exceptions, Cezanne couldn't draw for shit but... most of the great painters could draw, you know, and that drawing is the under, is... is what holds it up and keeps it there and makes it, holds it together and makes it work. And some of the drawings, with light, if there's a big slash of bright light across, that's a formal drawing too, but... but framing and... and arrangement is drawing and it is the basis of... of being able to use light as color and so, yes, my sense of composition and my sense of drawing, which I pompously think was really quite good, was an enormous help to me in... as I... well in... in Last Detail it was everything, since I barely lit it. And in... in other movies, as I got more confidence and lit more and it had to be lit, I... I always could count on my sense of composition or drawing that I had gotten from operating, to... to help me a lot and it always has, I think. I mean, for my satisfaction, anyway.

Last Detail was the first movie that I was the DP on, and I was asked by Hal Ashby, who... have we said all this before? I can't be... and who had been... we'd done a movie in the East and used Gordie [Gordon Willis] as the cameraman and I, as the operator and knew me from that, and for various reasons Gordie couldn't do it and there had to be an East Coast cameraman because the unions were separate in those days, so Haskell [Wexler] was going to do it but, but he couldn't because he wasn't in the East Coast Union, and he'd done a movie with... with Hal, so he... so Gordie, I think, told Hal to go ahead, use Chappie – he'll be all right – and he... and he asked me to do it, knowing in part that I... that I at least was a very good operator. And of course I said yes, you know, who... who wouldn't, and I found myself... I owe Hal a lot, I mean it really... there was no rational reason to ask me to do that in terms of experience, I'd really lit a few commercials at best. But he did and I said yes, terrified, and thinking that I was going to be found out, you know, every time that the dailies came, I.. I was like, oh my God, they're going to find out that I don't know what I'm doing and they're going to fire me. And they didn't, and I, as I think I said, or have said certainly, I sort of went around and looked at all the locations in Toronto and in... in various places before shooting.
I saw that since they were all real locations, with, I think, one exception, a hotel room that we built, the... the light in those actual locations was far more emotionally charged and evocative than anything I could much do. So I very happily left them alone because I was terrified that if I put any light I wouldn't know what the hell I was doing, and I left the light of the... the men's room in the railroad station, the bar, the whatever it was, the little lunch counter somewhere in Washington DC, be what it was. The light came through the windows, the light was there and it was evocative of a real place and... because it was a real place, and... and I did as little as I possibly could to disturb the reality of that place, and that turned out to be, I think, a good decision a) it kept me from getting fired, and b) it made the movie look, as I think I've said, like the 11 o'clock news, which is just right for the emotional content of that movie.
And again, that was, I mean I guess I was smart enough to figure it out, but it was in a large part a... a happy accident that that was the first movie I... I did. If I'd had some incredibly complicated costume drama, where everything had to be lit and beautiful movie stars had to be made to look gorgeous, then they really would have fired me, I would think. But it turned out that this movie matched what little skills I had at the time. But nonetheless, I mean, you're working with Jack Nicholson. Oh, I was working with Jack Nicholson, yes, script by Robert Towne, I was way outside of my... I mean, by the way, the fact that the movie is the success and has entered the cannon of movies is not because of my lighting, it's because of a script by Robert Towne and the acting of Jack Nicholson and Randy Quaid and various people. It's a marvel – and the direction of Hal Ashby – it's a marvelous movie, a marvelous movie, and it holds up very well and it's shown all the time. It's also one of the... it's the first dirty word movie, it's the first movie where, you know, famous lines,' I am the motherfucking shore patrol, you motherfucker', was the first time somebody could say that, and... and it's famous for those things, or it was famous at the time for those things, for breaking barriers and things like that. Oh, it was a marvelous movie, and not because of my lighting, please!

On a set the light only exists because you put it there, and so... now, you may simply try and make it look as much as possible like a garage or a dance hall or whatever, but almost always, if it's a set, you try and bring some...  some storytelling emotionality to the lighting. Probably you shouldn't, but you do... or maybe you shouldn't, I don't know about that; there is no real answer to that. As... just as there's no real answer to 'is lighting simply enhancing reality or... or making reality', it's... it's some of both, I mean, the... there are two poles in lighting – one is of theatricality and one is of documentary – and every scene in every movie is somewhere in a graph between those two, you know. I mean, in... in... well, for instance in... one of the basic images of art... of painting, of art in general, is the light coming down and striking the person, you know, the light of heaven coming down onto a martyr or... or Christ on a cross, or something like that or.. or a shower of gold coming down to Danae to seduce her, and it's Zeus. That's the basis of theatrical lighting, I think; that's the... the most basic image of theatrical lighting, which is that that light comes down and points out what you're to see and where you're to look in the frame. You know, to look at Danae, surrounded by a shower of gold, or you’re to look at a martyr on the cross with the light of heaven shining down on him, and it tells you where to look.
The other opposite of that is... is still photography – documentary still photography, still photography of the 19th century – when still photography was first invented, and they would come to you and they would... with a picture and they would say, ‘These are what dead bodies on a battlefield look like, these are what the Egyptian pyramids look like’, and they actually look like that, when no one has ever... no painting, no drawing, has ever been able to, up... up until then, tell you, this is what the goddamn pyramid looks like, and this is what a dead body on a field of Gettysburg looks like. That's one end of cinematography, and the other end is the light coming down from heaven. And every scene in every movie is... is a kind of narrative between those two poles, you know – a kind of graph I suppose would be the right word. So it's just a question of how much... how much in one direction do you go, or how much in the other direction do you go, and that's determined by the subject matter and the director and the political situation of the movie and all sorts of things.
A... a good example of... of the documentary end is... is [The] Last Detail, where there was very little light and... and indeed, what we were trying to say is, this is what... here are these sailors and they're wandering around, you know, so the East Coast in the United States in 1972, and this is what it looks like. So you don't need to... you don't want... plus they had these marvelous black suits on and white hats, so the eye... the eye knew exactly where to go. I mean, they looked like wonderful penguins wandering around and so you always knew where to see them anyway. But the other example... what's the other end of an example I can think of in something I did? Oh I don't... we don't, anyway... the... all I'm saying is that that's... there is no one answer to those things. It goes between one and the other, always in movies. And... and my own preference, probably, is for the documentary end, but I hope that I can sort of hold my end up if I have to go to the other end to the theatrical end and I... and from time to time I have.

Because it was my first movie, it... it... I can close my eyes and remember all sorts of things very, very vividly. There's a scene at the end where they... where Randy Quaid is going to run away in... in this... in the snow, and we shot that in a park in Seattle, in a kind of slum area of... not Seattle, of Toronto, in a sort of down and dirty area of Toronto that was supposed to look like Boston, and they're going to have a picnic in the snow, and they're freezing cold, and it was very, very cold and awful and we all had warm clothes on, but the poor actors who had to... you know, they had to wear pea-coats and... and sort of simple black shoes, like navy seals, they were dying of the cold, just dying, and their faces were... what was the third guy's name? I can't remember... he was a black guy... what the hell was his name? Pretty much disappeared but I... I can't think of his name. Anyway, he was so cold that his skin became kind of grey; it was... it was very strange to see. They were dying of the cold. And they had to act, you know, and I ran along with them and when... when Randy runs away I ran... hand held the camera, running through the snow with them. It was... every, almost any part of it was so exciting and so new and so charged with terror... and other emotions, but mostly terror for me that I... I'm not sure I have any one thing in [The] Last Detail. It's all a very... more vivid to me than movies I made two or three years ago, really, because it was so... such a turning point in my life, you know, and as I've said, I was so scared, oh God. And... and it's also marvel... you know, I am... there's a scene in a bar when he throws the thing down, and I... has those famous lines: 'I am the mother fucking shore patrol you mother fucker', and all that. It was wonderful, I mean, just when I just was in awe, that was really Jack Nicholson, you know, he was right there. And then I acted with him in... in a scene in Boston, I mean it was... it was marvelous. You... how could you resist that sort of thing, you know, I certainly couldn't, and that... and as I say, the next one, [The] White Dawn, I really... I thought, my God, I've found my place in life, and this is what... obviously what I was meant to do, and I had no idea I was meant to do it, but I clearly was.

I was back in the Arctic in [The] White Dawn... it was living with Eskimos. I... we were... it was... we were just trying to stay alive out on the ice flow every day, you know, it was... it was a level of adventure and things that I had never... I mean I had bummed around a lot, but this was just barely of this world, and here I was out there with all these Eskimos, speaking... I'd learnt some Inuit; I still can remember bits and pieces. I can count to five and various things like that. And I was living this life, and... and people were paying me to do it, and... and I was shooting this extraordinary landscape. If you ever... I don't know, have you ever seen White Dawn... any of you ever seen White Dawn? Oh, I recommend it highly, it's really very... it's... it's not a great movie, but it's a wonderful B movie in a way, and I mean that as... as praise, not as... not to denigrate it. It was, you know, fairly low budget and on a simple subject, where much of the excitement of the movie was 'We're going to take you to a place you've never been before', because, by God, you never had been there, and there, living in igloos and... and living with Eskimos, and... and going out on the ice every day, hauled by the... the cameras, the dogs would run away with the dog-sled and the cameras would go bouncing off down the ice. And it was incredible adventure, and I thought, this industry is going to do this kind of thing for me; I think... I think I found a home; I think this is where I belong.
I'm not sure it was ever quite as otherworldly and as exciting as White Dawn, again, but it certainly sold me. White Dawn is a marvelous movie, it's a marvelous movie... mostly marvelous because... I mean, as a story, and I did a good job and Phil [Philip Kaufman] did a good job and all that, but it's mostly marvelous because of the landscape and... and the Eskimos... oh, you can't say 'Eskimos' anymore, you have to say 'Inuit'... and the Inuit and the... and the landscape were so convincing... so totally, extraordinarily convincing... of course the landscape didn't have to... didn't have any problem; it was there. But the Inuit turned out to be like the Abbey Theatre; they were extraordinary actors. They... of course, they were speaking Inuktitut, so we... they... as in fact they often were, they were making fun of us, but we didn't know that, we thought they were saying their lines, and in the important scenes they were sort of saying their lines. Well, it's true; apparently, I heard later, that whenever it was shown in the Arctic to other Inuit, they would fall down laughing at certain passages, because what they were really saying and what they were supposed to be saying had nothing to do with each other, and like many tribal cultures, they were very randy and... and quite bawdy about things, and so they were saying all sorts of things about us. But, you know, it didn't matter, when... when they had to really act in important scenes they did, and, my God, they would bring tears to their eyes; they were extraordinary, they were like the Abbey Theatre. I told you that... oh, I don't know if I did – that we brought several actors up there, to play the main parts, and within a week the Eskimos said, 'Look, this is not going to fly, they have to... let us do it', and so we just sent them back, since they wanted to talk Eskimo, and they were going to talk Inuit... Inuktitut.
First of all that was quite a problem since these were Japanese actors who didn't speak any Inuktitut, but mostly it was that they were insulted that they felt nobody else could do this stuff, and so they made us send them back, and we did. And they did all the parts and they were extraordinary, wonderful. I mean, the end... I don't want to spoil it for you, you haven't seen it, but it has a sad, tragic ending, where... and it ends with an Eskimo girl... Inuit girl weeping over her... her fallen lover, and she's weeping, you know, and it's... we're in the middle of the Arctic, you know, and tears are pouring down; it's extraordinary. They... and they would... none of them had ever... they had not... never acted before, but they lived in a culture in which people did the equivalent of acting all the time; they... they would amuse each other with... by acting out stories and... and telling things and making fun of each other and... and doing what really is, I suppose, a form of tribal acting, and it all worked out brilliantly. The movie is a success because of them and... and the landscape, not because... again, we did a fine job, we... you know, we... we didn't get killed, and we didn't... we were not eaten by... by polar bears, and we didn't go through the ice, and we managed to get images down and... and sometimes quite striking images, because the landscape and the light are so extraordinary, but it... it's a movie that's wonderful, because of the... because of the Inuit, and because of the Arctic. And it did that primal thing that movies can do; they can say, 'We're going to take you somewhere where you've never been', you know, which photography did, and as I was saying before about 'This is what a pyramid looks like'... well, this is what the Arctic looks like and this is what Eskimos look like, and it's completely convincing, you know, and because they obviously are Eskimos and it really is the Arctic, and those are really seals they're killing, and those are really walrus we're killing and that they're eating, and all that. It just does that primal movie thing of telling you something you've never been told before, and making you believe it, which... which theatre can never... theatre can never do; it does a very different sort of thing, but it doesn't... that's not what it does. It may convince you of some emotion but it isn't going to convince you of the physical reality of a place the way a movie can.

When I finished [The]White Dawn in the fall or winter of '73, I guess, I came back and bummed around and did a commercial or two on this and that, and there wasn't a lot of work in the East at that time, and then in the spring of 1974 I heard that the Hollywood people were going to come and make this big movie, Jaws, from... from what had been a best... big bestseller which I had not read, but I knew... obviously knew what everyone knew about it, and the Director of Photography of the movie Jaws was a guy name Bill Butler, who had, years before, made a movie for Phil Kaufman, who directed White Dawn. So I called Phil and I said, 'Would you call Bill Butler and tell him that I'm a good operator', because I had operated as well as White Dawn, and he did, and Bill came to the East and we met and talked and he hired me, and I was the operator for Jaws, which I knew very little about. I mean, I knew that it was a bestseller, and I knew it was being directed by this hot young director named Steven Spielberg, whom I knew nothing about. I think maybe I'd seen [The] Sugarland Express – I can't remember whether I had or not... I guess I had – and I knew he was a sort of... vaguely I knew he was a sort of wunderkind, but I didn't know much about him. And so I... and also I had never been to the Vineyard... maybe I'd been there on a commercial... I think I perhaps had never been there, because I'd always... in the summer, since my father was a teacher and had the summers off, we'd always gone to the coast of Maine, where we had a little cabin, you know, near a little fishing village, and where... I mean, my father's family had come from Maine, and so we'd always gone there and we'd always looked down on Cape Cod and the islands as sort of effete Southerners. But when I got to Martha's Vineyard, once it warmed up... it was kind of cold in April, and... can I do this... is this... breaks continuity? It doesn't. That's alright. I realized it was really quite... quite lovely and the water was much warmer than Maine and you could actually swim in it without agonizing and it was very user friendly.
So I had a wonderful time, and I wish I could say that we knew that it was going to be this incredible blockbuster, which changed the way movies were made and the history of movies, or anything. I don't think we did – in fact, there was a sort of air of... not panic, but anxiety around because everything was taking much longer than it was supposed to take, and the shark... we didn't even get to the shark until well into July, because things took longer, and also because the shark... they could never get the shark to work and to show up. They finally did and we made... made some tests and we began to shoot with the shark and the shark would break down and... and have to fix it and it was all done by compressed air going 'psshhh' , pushing these valves and things back and forth, so you could hear the shark coming but that was the joke, you didn't have to be afraid of that shark, you could hear it coming a mile away, because you were 'pshhh, pshhh', and it was... kept breaking down, or it kept... and they would have to fix it and then when they would get another take and it would break down again, and the people back at Universal were getting more and more nervous, and we had booked rooms in hotels up to a certain time, based on an utterly unrealistic schedule, I guess, and then they had to kick us out of all the hotels, because they'd been booked for, you know, years in advance by Boston Brahmans and this and that, so they just gave us money and said, 'Go find places to live', and we found little hovels here and there, and little bungalows and things. And it went on and on and on and on, and then all sorts of people showed up and... with sailboats and things, and we'd be screaming, 'Get out of our ocean', and... but it was great fun; it was great, great fun. And once they... once they left the... the dock for the final hunt – the three of them, to hunt the shark – we were out on the ocean for... really a couple of months and everything or pretty much everything is handheld by then, so that I had a wonderful time; I had a wonderful time. I... I went back to just plain operating, you know, which was that... just is... just a joy if you do it right, and I was pretty good... as I said, really quite good.

						I was very happy for Bill do the lighting, I was so happy operating. I- I was having a wonderful time. I wasn't in any way envious or anything, I'd not- I don't think it ever crossed my mind that, gee, I would have done it different, or why did he put that light there, I'm pretty sure it never crossed my mind. I just wiped it, I was having such a wonderful time, and every day I- I mean, it was marvellous, you'd get up and I- I didn't have a car, I had a bicycle and I'd bicycle down to the dock and get in the Boston weather and the teamsters ran the whalers- they would take us out to wherever we were, you know, and then- and then we'd spend the whole day on the water and- and when the shark broke down, we'd dive for clams and dig them up and eat them, and- but they were paying us to do this, you know, and- and when the time came to actually shoot, I would handhold the camera and I had, it was just, it was like a great sports event, you know, I- I was- I felt like I was, I've said this before, and it's probably pompous and presumptuous, but I felt that I was having an MVP year, you know, that I was hitting 300 and- and I mean I was really nailing it every time.  It was wonderful, I was having a great time.  And it turned out pretty well.



That's pretty interesting, because you spent a lot of time on the water, and you get this motion sickness-



In those days, well I don't, I don't, I've never been seasick-



Okay.



For some reason I don't.  Some, a lot of people did actually, but I don't know why, I just- I've always had boats and then lived on the water and lived near the water, and- and for some reason I don't seem to ever get seasick. But, aside from that, in those days they didn't have Steadicams, and the various motion control things, you know, there would- there would be a pendulum and they were just hopeless, and so we just did a little about, just hold it, and do it that way, and actually that turned out to be far and away the best way to do it, because if you- once you get into the rhythm of what the wave is like you can make your body move with it, and keep the horizon line pretty flat, I- it's- I mean it was a bravura job of operating, I don't mean in any way to take anything away from myself, it really was a bravura job of operating, and I had a great time doing it, why- why would I not, I mean I was having MVP season, you know, you don't think somebody's hitting 350 and 50 home runs, he's not happy, he is. And I was doing well and there were, well, we won't go into that part of it but it was a nice summer, it was a very nice summer.


					
Death Be Not Proud was a... was a TV movie and I don't remember much about it, except that I remember I had to light a... I had to light a... a big church somewhere – at a prep school, or something – and I remember putting a lot of lights through those windows. Funny, you know, it's... I remember some things so strongly, and other things they... it's just pretty much a blank. I had... I remember that I had to light... I had to light a... I guess it was a church in a prep school for something like a graduation or something, and I remember putting lots of, in those days, fay lights – do you remember what fay lights are? Yes? There are lots and lots of 12 light fays coming through windows, and so that... you know, that you'd have that traditional thing in a church of shafts of light coming sideline. I remember that and I remember we ended up in San Francisco for some reason; I can't even remember what the hell the movie was about. It was a... it was a rather well-received TV movie of some sort; one of the few TV movies I ever did.

In the spring of 1975, a friend in New York mentioned me to Marty Scorsese, who was doing this low budget movie in New York in that summer, and it turned out to be Taxi Driver, and... and we met, and he saw [The] Last Detail and liked it, you know, and... and I guess he couldn't have seen [The] White Dawn, I don't think it... I don't think it was being edited then, but he saw Last Detail; I remember that we talked about it, and we talked about Godard a lot, and, as you may have noticed, I tend to talk very fast, and Marty talks very fast, and we talked very fast to each other, and we all got on very well, and we talked about Godard, and he hired me. And it turned out to be Taxi Driver. I... you know, I... again, it's one of those... just one of those things that happens, you know, I don't... I was always in the right place at the right time, and I got hired, and it turned out to be Taxi Driver. And it was Paul Schrader and Marty and Bobby De Niro at the top of their game, and what was thought of at the time as really a very low budget movie; it was going to be done on the streets of New York for no money and not much in the way of lights and everything... turned out to be Taxi Driver, and it was done on the streets of New York for not much money. It was a genuinely low budget movie – I mean, for those guys who, later on in their careers, you know, commanded millions, it was a very low budget movie. They were all young and... and passionate and excited, and Paul had written this extraordinary script, which you only realized was so extraordinary when you came to shoot it in a way. When you read it you didn't necessarily... I didn't necessarily understand how amazing it was, but it led you into... it's hard to explain how it... I mean, sometime it had actual visual descriptions which were very useful, but somehow it was so powerful a script that it led you into it; it told you where to go, emotionally. I mean, it's an extraordinary script, really is. I've got a copy of it around somewhere, I don't know where it is, but I used to have one, and I used to have one with... with all of my notes and things in it.

First we just talked, and... yes and talked about movies and talked Godard, and... because in those days Godard was everywhere, you know, and we were watching, we... and... and I... I probably was the only low-budget cameraman in New York that he talked to, who had... who had seen as much or more Godard than he had, so that's probably why I got the job – that plus that I can talk very fast. And then, you know, I read the script and... and I... I mean it's... it's a marvelous script and it's a marvelous movie; it's... it's kind of sad to say that of all the movies I've shot, it's the one... it's the one I'm proudest of and it was only the third movie I ever did – that kind of life was all downhill from there, in a weird way. But it was amazing – amazing script and... and jobs of acting and everything – oh my God, what a movie, and it really does hold up, you know.
And by then I'd begun to figure out the sort of minimal lighting that one could do in... in the right... it's a lit movie, it's not... it.. it pretends to be a... a documentary, but in fact it's quite theatrical – it's not realistic at all, you know; in... in many ways it's not... not meant to be realistic. It was just... it's emotion and there's... you know, he's walking up the street and they divide... dissolve the middle out of the shot and then he's walking this way, and then he's right up here, and there are many parts of it that are not documentary; it... it's a documentary of their emotions, not... not a documentary of their lives. A documentary of... of Travis Bickle's emotions and the other people's, and it's a documentary in that sense, but it's quite... it's quite deliberately theatrical. Marty is a theatrical director and... and, I mean that as a... a... you know, in pride, it's a wonderful theatrical director. And I... I lit it, and... and very deliberately lit it meant to be light, not meant to be documentary, although I didn't do huge amounts, and some of it is just a matter of letting you see enough to see, but sometimes that... it was meant to be dramatic lighting, you know, to... to point the eye to where to look in the frame, where to look to see what Travis is doing; I mean it, it's an outrageous movie, he burns... burning roses and things – I mean, it's preposterous... not preposterous, but it's like an opera, you know; it just woos along; it's wonderful.
And again, you know, I don't know whether we knew how wonderful it was as we were doing it – I can't remember – but I... I mean I... not that I can't remember, I think that we... we didn't know whether we knew or not, you know; we knew that some scenes, and certain moments were way, way out there and wonderful, but whether it all added up and whether it made sense and everything, I don't know that we knew it – I didn't know it, I certainly didn't know it. Maybe Marty did, you'd have to ask him, but I sure knew that some things were... you know, that famous scene in front of the mirror – you're talking to me and all that – but when you saw it, just being there you couldn't... I mean, it was... I'd never seen anything like it before, you know. I'd never seen a... I'd never seen a... a scene in a movie like that, and we knew that was pretty good and that various other things were pretty good, many things. It's... you know, there's a... he goes to buy a gun and... from... from a guy who was an old friend of Marty's actually – from a gun dealer in Brooklyn – and... and he... he holds the gun like that, and he moves the gun across there and the camera goes with him and follows, and over the gun you see people walking down and you know this is... this is theatre, this is not documentary, this is... That's a great shot. Yes. It's a great shot, it's a wonderful shot. And... and it's full of that... it's full of... it's a documentary of their emotions, you know, he... and the famous thing where he's calling her on the phone and trying to get a date and she won't talk to him, and he's going on and finally the camera's so embarrassed, the camera just dollies away from him and won't look and looks down the hall, you know, this is... this is theatre, this... well, this is movies, not theatre, this is… but this is artificially induced, you know – I mean, very consciously thought out, with a point, not just to document it, but to document the emotions. Camera... I think it was Marty who finally said, you know, 'The camera's just so embarrassed that it... it doesn't want to watch anymore'; it sort of dollied downward and then you hear him going on and on pathetically, you know: 'Well, did you get my message and did you get my...' And then he walks into the frame and walks off into the night, and it's... it's horrible; it's so ghastly and embarrassing.

I met my once and future wife on that. She was young – just graduated from college a few years before – and had won the student prize for the best student film, and Marty [Martin Scorsese] had been one of the judges, and he said... and Marty was very good about that kind of thing – he recognized people being talented and he would really help them – and he said, ‘If you ever want a job or anything, come and see me’, and she came and saw him, and he hired her as his gopher, to get him... you know, to just sort of be a gopher for him, and we met on that movie and we've been together ever since. It was ’90, so I have a lot to... Taxi Driver has a lot to answer for. It was a... it was a wonderful, wonderful summer, and I... I... as I said, well, I don't think we knew quite how wonderful the movie was going to be, or I certainly didn't, but I... you knew something was going on, you know, the night after night that we would drive, and we would get these images and... and it's something quite out of the ordinary. I was not... I hadn't made enough movies so that I... I knew. I mean, if I had now to look back on it, probably I would know more immediately how wonderful it was, but if I were doing it now, I wouldn't be as naïve and... and unencumbered with thought, so that I was able to do it... I would know and do nowhere near as good a job now, I'm sure, because, I just wasn't young and innocent and naïve and egotistical enough to do it, nor were they, nor was... nor was Marty or... or Bobby or... or Paul Schrader. I mean, everybody was simply in... in their youth, letting it all hang out on a theory that everything was going to be fine, it was going to be great, and we were great artists, and we... no, we did not think about it, I'm sorry. We probably told ourselves that we were great artists, but I, at least, never mentioned the word 'art', and I don't think they did either. But we were all naïve and egotistical and... and brave enough to just let it go, you know, and it turned out pretty well.

I loathe storyboards; I've never liked them. I think that if they are at all carefully done, they sap energy from the actual shooting, and Marty's [Martin Scorsese] storyboards are an exception. Somewhere I have the original storyboards for Taxi Driver, and if I could go through papers I could find them, but I don't know where they are. But his were very deliberately just diagrams – stick figures and arrows saying, you know, 'and the camera moves like that, and then you boom up', and it was in no way drawn or... or carefully done; they were simply diagrams of energy, and they're wonderful that way. He was the only person I ever saw whose storyboards made sense and were... were real storyboards, you know. Other storyboards are just usually bad art or comic books and they shouldn't be allowed, I don't think. I... some... I guess some guys can use them, I don't know. Goya, for instance, is storyboards; Goya's etchings are storyboards. They're very great storyboards; they're storyboards so... so amazing that you don't need to do the movie, you just got storyboards and you can just... you know, you've got the horrors of war, but they are essentially storyboards, and... and as I said, very successful. Most storyboards... if only they were as good as Goya, you wouldn't have to do any of the movies, but they are, by and large, awful, except for the... the storyboards of Taxi Driver and later Raging Bull that Marty did, and they were marvelous. So we had... we had not every shot, by the way; we improvised and we changed things and we saw stuff –  we saw opportunities that were there, like the famous shot of zooming into the... the bubbling glass of water in the restaurant. That wasn't a storyboard, but... but it was something one of us thought, and I'm sure it was Marty, yes, but we saw it and we did it and it was stolen from Godard, but, so what, great, you know? 'Minor poets are influenced by great poets’ steel,' T.S. Elliot said.

There was much more conscious lighting in that than there usually... than there had been in the only two other movies I'd done, so I was watching that a lot, and watching what I did as far as I could, so that... that was the first time I really very consciously lit in a theatrical sense, you know. I hope that the theatricality of the lighting is usually hidden, but it's... it's definitely there; I mean, there is definitely a sense of light guiding you where to look and... and what to think, you know, in most of it – in many of the shots anyway. But I certainly laid out the... the framing and stuff of the shots, and worked with Freddy [Fred Schuler] very, very carefully about what they should look like, and of course Marty [Martin Scorsese] with me before that, or Marty with... with Freddy Schuler, because Marty was... had... Marty has a genuine... visual sense is not the right word, but a sense of the emotional content of... of what you see, you know, and...  and what...  and how to get that, how... how to bring that emotional content to the frame, you know, and he is just very, very good at it. And he... he did it; it's not... I... I'm not... I can't claim that it's me. I mean, a whole bunch of stuff is me, but the basic thing, it... it's Marty's movie, you know, and Paul's [Paul Schrader], the script is in fact...
And somewhere, years later, I... I read or saw an interview with Marty in which he said that... and he's not... he doesn't usually hand out... although he's been very kind to me, I shouldn't say that – he does hand out praise – but he... he was asked about his movies, and I can't remember the circumstances exactly. And the person said, 'What's your favorite movie?' And he said... you know, I thought Raging Bull or whatever it was, and then that person said, 'What about Taxi Driver?' And Marty said, 'No, that's Paul's movie', which is very... which is a) true, and b) very kind of him for saying it is... it's that the... the passion, the insane passion is in the script, you know, and it comes from Paul's background, and nutty religious background of his... of his upbringing – Dutch Reformed, whacko Calvinist Church and everything. I... it's... it's very, very heartfelt movie from Paul; it comes right out of this guy, and we managed to pretty much get it, I think, you know, or Marty did, and Bobby [Robert De Niro] did, and I did what I could, you know. But it's... it's a great movie and... and it's the closest thing to something like art of anything I've ever done, and... and I'm very, very proud of it... very proud of it; I think it... it is... it is... if... if there are movies that can be called art – and not very many can – it seems to me Taxi Driver is one of them. Taxi Driver and Abbott and Costello meet Frankenstein, Breathless and a few things like that, are... are really art, you know, and... and Taxi Driver is. I wish I could say it that it was all my art; it isn't, but I was there, anyway, and I got my... got my two cents in, and I'm very, very, very proud of it, and remain so as the years go on, and so should Marty be, and so should Paul and so should Bobby: they were never better. And... am I in it? Oh, you can barely see me. I'm... I'm hailing a cab at one point, but the scene in which a passenger pulls Bobby over and says, 'Look up in that window – see over in that window, that's my wife up there', and it's Marty, you know. 'You know what... you know what...' Well the... there's a silhouette going back and forth – well that's my – not then, but now – wife. Oh, interesting. Yes. She was... she was Marty's decision; we needed somebody to walk back and forth and be a silhouette, so she walked back and forth and be a silhouette and smoked a cigarette. 'That's my wife up there...' And Marty's going on and on in the back seat, and that's Amy, up... up in the... against... in the silhouette against the shade.

We didn't have the money or the time, or the permits, to just shut everything down, and... as... as some occasional movies try to do in New York, usually unsuccessfully. There's another style of New York shooting that works better, which is kind of swimming like a fish in the sea of the people, and what it really takes, more than anything else, is very good ADs, and... and people who, you know, kind of control the crowds and jolly people along, and... and jazz someone here and there, and shine them off, and... and give a few bucks to this person or that – all of this, it's a very New York style of street shooting – and we had people who could do that, and... and we also tried not to have to have, you know, huge sets of lights, for instance, and things like that. And when we shot in the taxi cab, with Bobby [Robert De Niro] driving at night, we... I rigged up a few lights that we had to put a battery, a 110 battery pack in the back, in the... in the trunk of the taxi and... and the poor sound man crouched in there along with the batteries, trying... trying to... with his Nagra, with his earphones, and then we would mount the camera, or we would have the camera with somewhere operating, and we would just drive off. We had no... probably had a... I don't remember, but I assume we probably had a... a cop car somewhere around, but basically we would just drive off in the city and just go shoot all night. Go shooting along, wherever we were, and... and do the dialogue, and do the stuff, and we didn't have anything other than that, and we simply, as I say, would swim like fishes in the sea of the people. We would go through the streets of New York, and obviously that sense of New York-ness comes through in the movie, you know. And I would balance the light... the lights in the... that was lighting Bobby or the... were lighting the passengers and Bobby, to... to be more or less equal or a little less than the... than the lights that they would be going past, so that there was... so that you just felt that they were driving along in the streets. And it seemed to work out, but we didn't have... and we had none... there was no towing, there was no camera car, there was no generator – it was just a 110 battery pack in the back – and some... seven little, tiny little inkies, where inkies bounced into a card or something, you know, the most minimal lights, just to get a) an exposure, and b) a kind of an angle of light that we liked. And then we would just get in the car and off we'd go.
One time Bobby fell asleep, and we bumped into a car, because he was so exhausted, because we were going night after night; I mean, it wasn't a big accident – he just, you know, he fell asleep for the moment, hit the bumper... hit the bumper of a car ahead of him or something, but we would just drive off, and Marty would squat in the back and kind of giggle, and he had earphones, and he would say things to Bobby, and I'd... some... in those cases, I often operated or we would just have a... we would have the... the camera rigged in... on a... on a... in those days they didn't have speedrail or any of that stuff; they'd just have a piece of two by four mounted across the hood, and we'd have the camera tied to the two by four, looking through the window at Bobby, where... where it would hang on. And it was... but it was very, very simply done, and that turns out, in general, if it's at all possible, to be the best way to shoot in New York... is a... is a very simple documentary style, if you can adapt that enough to just get as much light as you need, and... and angle of light as you need, and we were able to do that, so we just drove off through the night. And we'd come back and change the battery pack after a while and get a cup of coffee, and off we'd go again. And it was... it was a wonderful summer. It was very hot and I was madly in love; it was a wonderful summer.

With Marty [Martin Scorsese], we just... we just clicked somehow; we... we were able to... we were on the same page and... and I don't know that there's any... I don't have any great secret or anything to tell, or to say about how that happened; sometimes it does and sometimes it doesn't. I've also worked with directors where we didn't... we weren't on the same page, and where we just grudgingly got through the movie, you know, but Marty and I, we... we saw it the same, and we would see the dailies and it was working, you know, and there's nothing that... there's nothing that... you know, it... like good sex makes you love the other person, well, the... the good dailies that you... you know, it works out. You... you think you... you've reinforced each other; you think you're wonderful. It... I've never worked with such a brilliant director, I've never worked with such a brilliant cameraman, because the dailies look good, you know, and it's... it... but also we had... we did have a genuine, I think, sympathy, one for the other, and so did Paul [Schrader] and so did Bobby [Robert De Niro], because we were all... I mean, Bobby and... and Marty were born in New York, and Paul had lived there, and I'd lived there since 1953, and we were all were filled with... I mean, it's an extraordinarily New York movie, you know, and we were filled with New York-ness and we all had some... some emotions and... and vision about New York that we would... were discharging, whether we knew we were or not. And it all meshed together.
And Paul, who was not a native New Yorker at all, but had lived there off and on and felt... I mean, he had the... the emotions of... of Travis Bickle – Travis Bickle was right out of his head. He... Paul is extremely intelligent – I mean, just in terms of IQ, a brilliant, brilliant man, and for a time, an extraordinary writer. He... his directing is more comp... I actually shot one of his movies and I think it was... he's... I think he's... it's best that he should... he should write, but... but no, he's directed some movies that are good too, but he was a very, very intelligent man, and it was always fascinating to talk to him, and he came from an... a kind of academic background too. He'd been to film school and he had taught film; he'd written books on film theory and articles and this and that, and he was fascinating to talk to, always. So I had a... you know, I could... what more could I ask? I was having a... it was marvelous; it was like being in film school heaven, you know – it was... it had everything.

What makes films art? I've no idea. I know some that are. I mean, you know, it's like... they... the guy, this Supreme Court justice said about pornography, 'I can't define it, but I know it when I see it'; it's... it's that simple, I think, you know. I know that Taxi Driver is something like art, I know Abbott and Costello meet Frankenstein is something like art, I know Breathless and a couple of others like Godard are like art, and they... they just... you just... I don't have any answer to that, beyond that, except... no, I don't, I don't. I mean, I'm sure if I sat down and you... and I wrote down it all, over the night I could come up with some epigrammatic answer tomorrow, but it would not be any more truthful than to say, ‘I don't know it, but when I see it I can recognize it.’ And those movies that I've mentioned are art of some sort, just as some paintings are and some aren't. You know, I mean they're all... there's... well, with painting there's good and there's bad art – in fact, if there was... wasn't bad art, there'd hardly be any – but... and that's... the same is true of movies, but every once in a while you'll see something and say, 'Oh my God, it has changed the way I see a) the world, or b) love', or whatever it is – you know, or comedy, and that's art, and those... every once in a while you stagger on a movie that is, and you shouldn't... it's death to think about it at the time – absolute death to think about it at the time – but later on you find out... every once in a while, 'My God, we really did something quite unusual and surprising and new', and whatever. And art is just a sort of simplest way of saying it. But I can't... I have no answer any better than that.

It brings in a kind of awful self-consciousness that interferes with that bravado and... and energy that is doing it... oh, you should never think about... oh my God, what a terrible idea. It really is very... it's death to... I've been on a few movies where people were very conscious they were making art, and they... but they weren't, and what you really want to do... I mean, first of all, what passes for art is usually just the intelligent solution to mechanical problems. But, aside from that, what you want to do is do the work as best you can and as passionately as you can and hope that sometime later, in post-production, or 20 years from now, when the critics write about it, they're going to find something in it, but you must... if you start thinking about that, it interferes desperately with... with the... Oh shut up, that stupid cat. It interferes terribly with the... with the mechanics of doing it, which is what you're supposed to be doing.

The closest analogy to movies is opera, I think, and that opera was the... the movies of the 19th Century, in that it used all the other arts. It used narrative and scenery and acting and music and dance and special effects, and all that, just as movies do now, now that... once they got sound. In fact, a very... it's rather interesting that the last universally acclaimed opera composer, Puccini, died in 1924, and by 1926 or [192]7 – I forget which – sound... they had worked out synchronized sound so that it... it's... I mean, it just cuts like that, and it goes from one; the mechanical necessity no longer existed for opera and opera has changed what it is utterly, since then. Now it's a sort of art form and you get all dressed up and you go to the Met, but in the 19th century it wasn't like that at all. I think I'm right about this: that Verdi's opera Rigoletto, was premiered not in La Scala in Milan, but for some reason in Naples, and I can't remember why... if I ever knew; I mean I'm not that old, I wasn't there. But supposedly the next morning, urchins in the streets of Naples were whistling La donna è mobile; it was... it was a hit, like a rock song was a hit, you know, and it was a hit for everybody, and I don't think that... and I've read Verdi's letters, and Verdi's sort of letters are not about art at all – they're about that goddamn soprano was complaining and she won't... doesn't like the thing, and the producer wants two more songs in the second act. He sounds like some poor, harried guy trying to do a... episodes of a sitcom, and he's one of the greatest geniuses of the 19th century, and... but if you read his letters, by and large, the letters that are about the business of opera, sound like some... they don't... they're not talking about art, they really aren't, you know, and that's what I mean by... that movies – the people making the movies – should concentrate on getting that... that aria right for the soprano and trying to keep the producer from yammering at you, and if you are good enough, and if your mind and your heart and everything are strong enough, something else will happen. It certainly worked for Verdi.

Scorsese has been quoted as saying that film or the movies is the church of the 20th century, and we can all understand what he meant, you know – that it's a place where everybody comes together, whether they are Catholic or Methodist or Buddhist or whatever; they're all members of the... the First Church of Cinematic Science, or whatever you want to call it, because they... they all get together in a large dark space, and they all stare at one object, and feel some communal sense. And I... and I think it's, by and large, true, in which case the advent of television is the... is the beginning of Protestantism, since it breaks up into more and more sects, and more and more channels... and oddly enough Leon Trotsky said the same thing in an essay in the early '20s, called Vodka, the Church and Cinema. He said the same thing, that... it just charms me to think of Marty and... and Trotsky on the same page, if only for a brief, brief time, but he did... he said exactly the same thing: that it was for the lower orders, or for the proletariat, or for the workers, whatever, I forget however it was translated from Russian. It was in effect the church of the present – of the then present time – and of course, the people who ran Soviet Russia took movies very, very seriously, as exactly that, as a form of... I mean, as its worst propaganda, at its best some glorification of the advance of Socialism. I don't think that's what Marty had in mind, but... but I do like the idea of Trotsky and Marty saying the same thing. And I'm almost certain that Marty had never read that essay by Trotsky; I think I could swear to that, because it was... it's a pretty obscure essay.

It wasn't so much that I was comfortable, as that I was so caught up in doing it that the... the passion and the... and the focus of doing it takes away your discomfort, you know. And it does – I mean, that happens all the time, you know, when... when... if you are with a group of people and you don't know them and you feel socially embarrassed, if... if something happens where you are doing or talking or something, so that... gets you fully occupied, you're no longer embarrassed, and the... the shooting of Taxi Driver was so engrossing and enthralling and... and all consuming that I didn't have time to be worried.

My mind was occupied by other things, and I didn't have time to be... I mean, I'm sure I was, from time to time, worried or embarrassed – 'Oh my God, I got the exposure wrong', and all that stuff that one inevitably does – but by and large, I was so busy and so caught up in doing it, and the excitement and the... and the wonderfulness, really, of... of what we were doing, that I didn't have time to be obsessively worried and nervous. I think that... I'm not sure I ever got rid of nervousness about making mistakes, or... or doing, I don't think anybody... maybe some people do, but I never did.

There is no rear projection, or anything done in a stage, or anything like that. We really were out there in the streets, you know, and that, perhaps, contributed to the idea that I would balance the interior and the exterior intelligently, you know. There was no... you were never tempted to do anything else, because there you were in a cab, and there were the lights of the... the store windows and things, and you know... and if you are... if you are driving in a cab at night and looking... of course the eye has far more... can take far more depth and everything than... than a camera can, but you... that's how you see the light – you see the light on the person sitting next to you and you see the light in the window, and they are roughly the same. If the eye accepts them, I mean, you want to make the camera do the same thing. It's not... it isn't... that's not where... it seems to me that's not where whatever passes for, you know, inspiration, whatever, is, because that seems very straightforward and simple to do, and anybody would, I think, do the same... roughly the same thing under the... under those circumstances. Circumstances dictate, far more than we want to admit, how we do things.
If you are in the middle of the Arctic, on the ice, with no generator, well, you're going to light one way; most of the time you're going to just desperately hope you don't fall through and drown and freeze to death, you know. If you're on the streets of New York and you've only got a 110 battery pack in the back, a certain kind of lighting style becomes absolutely inevitable. And circumstances dictate how things look, far more than we think they do. Going back to other things, Jaws on the ocean was handheld because that was the simplest and the only practical way to not make the audience seasick. Well, it turned out to be a kind of bravura job of handhold... handheld framing, but the reason it was done was because that was the simple, practical thing to do to not make the audience seasick, because I could control it and keep the horizon steady. The rest of the things come out of the... as I said, the intelligent solution to mechanical problems often brings on what passes for art... in fact, most of the time, you know, because it takes on some higher significance, but at the time, it's just trying to get through the day and solve the problem. And... and that's what it should be – it shouldn't be anything more than that, because it'll just screw you up, and you won't think about the right things. Because you really want to think about keeping the damn horizon straight; you don't want to think about the art of handheld and all that crap, you know. Yeah. You want to do it however you can. And that's by and large how I've tried to stagger through, you know.

I said, you know, you must never think about art and... and only try and solve mechanical problems, and... and I believe that very firmly, but I think that I didn't quite say enough why that's true, and I think why that's true is that if you block your conscious mind onto solving the problems that you... that you face – and this is the right angle we don't have... we only have ten minutes to lunch, I only have so many lights... we go to do this, you know, all of that sort of day to day ordinary problem-solving in a way allows unconscious material to come to the surface... or if not... unconscious may be too pompous a word, but at least unanalyzed material, which often is what the best stuff is, you know. You don't quite remember why or how you chose that angle of light or that angle of the camera because you were rushing and trying to solve – you did it, but as far as you were concerned for very simple mechanical reasons but often other more... I... I dread using those words so I won't, but more unexamined reasons come to the surface later that you didn't notice then, and they would only come to the surface and they would only be achieved by making your mind; it's almost a sort of Zen activity that you... you know, you chant, 'Ohm ohm ohm ohm' – in this case you're chanting, 'Oh my God, there's only ten minutes to lunch', and... and doing that for... with enough intensity, other material is allowed to come to the surface. I do truly believe that is... is a fact, and the quality of the material that comes to the surface depends on the quality of the mind that's chanting, and that's not something we can control, but what you can do is... is concentrate very hard on solving those problems and... and trust that if you're not a... not an idiot other things may emerge, and I know of specific examples in my life when they did. I don't want... I mean, those will come up as we talk.
I mean, I once directed a movie that... it was only in post production that I realized what I'd really been making a movie about – I had no idea at the time, I'd been talking to the actors, fighting with the actors, yelling and screaming, trying to get done on schedule, this and that –and only later did I realize what the movie really turned out to be about and it was the only movie I directed that was any good, because it had some actual emotional relevance to me that... that mercifully I didn't know, and... and it's obviously very good that I didn't know, or that my conscious mind didn't know until later on. It was quite an amazing revelation in... in the editing room when I go, 'Oh my God, this is what I was doing this about' – well, that sort of thing on a... on a much smaller level happens day after day after day, I'm quite sure, and you may not even... there may not be a moment when you... when you see the dailies and you say, 'Oh my God, that's what that shot was about', you know; you may not ever see it, but those shots, those angles, those bits of lighting do carry some kind of emotional message if you've done it right, and that may be emotional message of... of boredom and stupidity if you haven't done it right, but you have to sort of trust that eventually you won't get hired any more if they're really boring and stupid.
So I... I strongly advise and... and almost insist on what I was saying of the strictness of not worrying about art and all that crap, but knowing all the time that you are in a way tricking yourself into... into it, you know. I mean – I've used this example before but I will again – in... in As You Like It Touchstone the clown said... well... trying to seduce a girl... the shepherdess with a name I can't remember, says, 'The truest poetry is the most feigning', and that's really, really true. There's a marvelous poem by W.H. Auden that takes that as its title – The Truest Poetry is the Most Feigning – and it's all about tricking yourself into telling the truth, like elaborate subterfuge and the elaborate subterfuges mostly are; I mean, they may be... they may be to a certain extent the poet tricking the audience, but in fact it's mostly the poet tricking himself, and I'm not saying I'm a poet – I'm a working cameraman – but in the... the person doing the work, whatever it is – be it poetry, painting, movies, being a grip, loading magazines, whatever it is – often best succeeds by tricking him or herself into letting material come up that he didn't even know about.

Zero Mostel was one of the lead actors and he was severely blacklisted. It was a Woody Allen movie. It was about the only Woody Allen that Woody didn't direct; he acted in it and... and Marty Ritt directed it, and I think he did it... I think Woody did it because he felt quite strongly about the subject of the... of the blacklists and many of the other actors and people in it... Walter Bernstein is the writer – had been severely blacklisted – and it was, I think, the subject matter that made Woody allow... let himself be directed by somebody else, I guess. It's not a... it's seriously not a great movie, I guess, but it does at least deal with that subject, which as far as I know almost never was... never had been before and never has been since, pretty much, and I just fairly recently supervised the transfer of it to DVD for whatever... I can't remember what studio we did it for, you know, but anyway they were doing their stuff into DVD and I supervised that.
I hadn't looked at it in a long, long time and I realized that I had... and I remember doing this quite consciously – never mind any unconscious material or any nonsense like that – I... I lit it like a '50s television show deliberately, because that's what it was about – it was about '50s television and series, so I lit it with sort of hard light and... and hard shadows... I don't know if you... any of you are old enough to remember shadows across the wall at an angle with a cutter like this, and they were put there so that the people could put the microphone out when it would cross the shadow. Yeah…  [sic] in the shadow. It was entirely in order that the microphone be right the way out there and follow the people, so there was a stylistic mark of the period – of always a diagonal shadow across the wall that cut the keylight off and it was entirely so the microphone could get out there. So I lit it kind of that way and when I look at it again I realized that perhaps I shouldn't have done that, it seemed too self-conscious, but I did it anyway... what the hell, there's nothing... it's not the end of the world, and it was... it... like many movies it... it surprises you with what it is – what's good and what isn't – and what's amazing in it is not Woody Allen and not the story , which is okay but rather perfunctory in a kind of jokey way, but Zero Mostel's performance, and it was the last thing that he did and then he died, and it is absolutely extraordinary and heartbreaking, and it is entirely based on his own story. In fact, he pretty much acts out his own story: he was a big comic and then he is blacklisted and then he goes to a place in the Catskills, and they... they screw him out of his money, and it's just one thing after another, and it's very much his own story, and then he finally commits suicide by jumping out a window... he rents a room in a... in the... I forget, the Ritz or some big hotel in New York, and he orders champagne and he drinks champagne and jumps out the window.
And Marty Ritt didn't really care... or didn't seem to in this case, much care about set ups or coverage or anything, and wanted to talk to the actors. He had been an actor, and I guess that was his style as a director; I never had worked with him before, so I pretty much laid out the shots and did that stuff which is fine, I'm very happy to, and Zero and I worked out this last sequence in one shot and it really is quite wonderful – I'm very proud of it, and... and it was as much Zero Mostel as me, but we worked out the whole thing where he comes into the hotel room and he tips the man and then he puts his luggage down, or whatever he does, I forget, and then a man comes in and he's ordered a bottle of champagne and he pays the man and you... you follow him from room to room and he opens the champagne and he pours a glass, and you follow him, and you don't quite know what he's doing, but it gets more and more strange and ominous, and then I forget exactly how I did it – I have to look at it again – but at some point you pan to where he puts the champagne down and you hold on the champagne and then... you're holding on the champagne, and then there's this sort of puff of wind and a curtain blows into the frame and you pan over to the curtain, and it's an open window, and he's jumped, and it's all in one shot, and it’s marvelous kind of silent movie storytelling, and it's utterly, perfectly successful, and it's like a ballet, and it's a ballet because Zero Mostel had this marvelous physical... physicality that really great comics often have and he just did everything as if it was... as if it was a dance, you know, and it's really quite a wonderful sequence, and I'm very proud of it and... and Zero Mostel certainly was very proud of it – I don't want to speak for him, but I'm sure he was. And it's... it and the rest of his performance are what jump out of the movie out of a perfectly well-intentioned and... and good-hearted and right, politically correct movie, but Zero's performance and his whole part just jumps out of the movie into something else, and it's one of those examples of a movie tricking itself into doing something quite extraordinary that it didn't know it was going to do, and it's entirely Zero Mostel.
The other nice thing is that at the end of the movie there is list of everybody who is blacklisted – Marty Ritt blacklisted so and so, Walter Bernstein blacklisted so and so; a series of actors and other people who were involved in it, all of whom are Lloyd Goth or something whatever, 'blacklisted 1952 by...' And then they put my name, Michael Chapman, cameraman, and they said, 'Now, Michael, we don't want you to feel bad; we promise you, you would have been blacklisted too – you were just too young and you just didn't have a chance – so we put you right afterwards, so you won't feel bad, because I don't want you to feel hurt', and I wasn't. I felt justified and vindicated and I certainly would have been; I was just too young.

The Next Man, which I did, I mean, to keep working and make money and because I had... should I say? Oh well, what does it matter? I had fallen madly in love with someone on Taxi Driver and I needed... and I was running away with her, and most of this movie was going to be done in Europe and... an in Morocco, so I said I would do the movie if they would take her as the still woman, and she was a very, very good still woman, and in fact, she was so good that when we came back to New York they hired a still man... unionist still man but they kept her on and just told the still man to go and do things and let Amy take pictures because she really was... was and is talented at it... very talented at it... so we ran away and ran away to everywhere, to Ireland and England and France and Austria and Morocco. Well, anyway, other than that, the movie, other than the... my sort of insane romance, the movie is a completely forgettable movie with Sean Connery. Sean Connery is an Arab chieftain as I remember, with a heavy Scots accent and they never quite explained why he had a heavy Scots accent when he was all dressed up in burnooses and things. I think they made some mild stab at it but I can't remember what it was – that he'd been to school in Edinburgh or something; I don't know.

You know, I haven't seen it in so long I can't remember much about it except it was in... made in Georgia in the summer and it was hideously hot... hideously, hideously hot, and... and not only hot but humid, and much of it took place in... as... you know, as historically it should, in churches in the black... various black communities of, in reality, Alabama, but in this case made in Georgia, and the sort of... oh I don't want to say, but let's say... not absolutely first-class producers talked the... the black communities of these towns into being extras and coming and being in these scenes and very many scenes in churches where... where King would be talking to them, and where the civil rights movement kind of coalesced, and of course we would have to... oh, 85 the windows or black out the windows and light through the windows and it would be... you know, it would be 130 degrees in there and people would be passing out and these poor local people had to come in ties and coats and... you know, dressed up as if for their Sunday best because it was just awful, awful, and the producers tried to save money by cheesing on the air conditioning, and people were passing out, and it was just... it was the... there was this sort of dark underside of movies that comes out – fairly often, actually.

There are a couple of nice things in it; I remember doing a... again, the director whose name I can't remember had no interest in shots or angles or coverage, or he didn't know... didn't know and didn't care, so I did all that, but the only thing I remember as being quite wonderful was coverage of a riot, where freedom rioters are coming on a bus and local hoodlums begin to bang on the bus and... and punch them and hit them and I... I covered it with a little 16mm camera and I did it handheld and then I had the camera be hit and fall over on its side and lie on its side and... as if it just was rolling, so the image is on the side – you can see this chaos going on – and that was kind of fun. That was kind of fun and that, and a wonderful... by the way the food... this is apropos of nothing, but you know there's a myth about Southern cooking and how wonderful it is, and it may be but you can't prove it by restaurants; it may be in people's kitchens, but in the restaurants the food is appalling, at least in Macon, Georgia, in 1970-whatever it was – the food was unspeakable except in one little soul food restaurant called H & H Cafeteria, I think, like... F & F... no, H & H Cafeteria, and there it was kind of wonderful, but other than that, boy, Macon is.... You know, Macon... when Sherman marched through Georgia in the civil war he skipped Macon; he said, 'Oh to hell with it', and he didn't burn it because it was so appalling. I mean, that my interpretation of why he didn't burn it: he said it was so appalling, it was more pun... more punishing to leave it standing than to burn it, and he marched around it and didn't burn it; he burned everything else but he didn't burn Macon.

Marty [Martin Scorsese] had worked on Woodstock as an editor and kind of cameraman, and I think he had always wanted to do his own rock movie and he'd never gotten the chance to, and The Band got the idea of doing coverage for his last concert. And originally it was just going to be 16mm and almost like a home movie, and then it just grew and grew and grew and... until it became [The] Last Waltz. Was... I can't remember, eight or nine... no, maybe eight cameras, all 35mm, and a huge production, and... it… it was The Last Waltz. And it was... and I think still is probably the best of all the concert films by quite a bit, I think – that I know of anyway. And once in a while I see one because I get jealous; I want to make sure they haven't beaten us out, and they, so far, at least in my obviously prejudiced view, they haven't, and it's really quite wonderful.
And originally... I don't know whether I had my card on the West Coast – I must have, I guess, by then... I don't... I can't remember – but, anyway, originally he was going to use someone else and people... a couple of people kind of chickened out, and didn't want to do it for some reason, and so I said, ‘Sure’, I'd do it, and we went to San Francisco and there was... I mean, the date at which it was going to be done was set, we had to have everything ready and it was in... I remember a kind of nightmare of getting it together because under some previous administration some local crew from San Francisco had lit that hall and had just done an appalling job and got it all wrong, and so I and my crew had to start again from scratch with no time left and we worked something like two or three days straight without any sleep to try and get it ready. And we drew storyboards. I think I've talked about Marty's storyboards. He drew... Marty's storyboards, he drew 90% of them; I drew 10% because fortunately I... I knew the songs of The Band, and I really did and do think they're quite wonderful, and absolutely by accident I knew them, and Marty knew them, so we knew what the songs were going to be and we drew every... every verse for every song for every camera – what they were to do, dolly, zoom, whatever it was, for every camera – and we had pages with the notes and the drawings on and each camera had a kind of girlfriend or somebody recruited as a... as a page turner, like a page turner for a concert pianist, and they would turn the page and they would see what to do on this verse, you know – you do this and this verse you do that.
For each camera for all of the band's songs was totally worked out and light cues were worked out, every change in the lighting was done – the whole thing was really, really, really covered. The... the songs of the other people were not as... you know, there were all sorts of guests, and Bob Dylan and all other people coming in were not as well covered because we didn't know quite what they were going to sing, or we didn't have full command of what they were going to do, so it was somewhat more hit or miss. I can remember Marty and I during the concert stood at, I think, opposite sides with microphones, and talking to the people, and you could hear them saying, ‘Which one's Dylan, which one's Dylan?’ You know, ‘Which ones...’ They didn't know who they were, and I would say, ‘Zoom into so and so’, and they would say, ‘Who's he?’ But we got through it and actually some... some times... and we had... oh my, what's his name? Can't remember – great production designer who had worked with Marty, stole the sets from the from the San Francisco Opera, from the second act of... what opera is it? I can't remember. Anyway a big... oh it's the big waltz scene in... oh, it'll come to me, as the background for it and put that in, and then died right after it, actually; it was the last thing he did. Marty had a habit of somebody dying on every movie, and that was the one who died on that movie – the production designer guy who died on that one – but it was... it was wonderful and... and... a... also a sort of nightmare because we have... I have... just had not slept... I had not slept for days, and I stood there and... and originally I was going to operate a camera but then I... I had too much – I was swamped and couldn't do it – so we recruited Vilmos Zsigmond, who had come perfectly innocently to see the concert and we said, ‘Vilmos, we'll pay for your ticket if you go operate this camera from the back’, so he did. We had every... we had... oh God, we had all sorts of people doing it. And I stood on one side and Marty on the other and we sort of tried to control over it and send instructions to people. And when it was over, I hadn't slept in so long – there was a party and things afterwards and I couldn't... I couldn't go the party; I went back to the hotel and I tried to sleep and my... my legs were so cramped and... and things from... from standing for days that I ended up just lying in a hot tub for hours trying to get... oh, that part was unpleasant.
But the movie was wonderful, and when we finished the concert the footage was so good that... I think it was MGM, it must have been... yes, put much more money into it, and we did a whole series of other songs on a stage at MGM, and then we spent every weekend for God knows how long at the band's house on Zuma Beach. Every weekend night we would drive up there and get ready because they couldn't... that was true of the songs that we shot at MGM too: they couldn't face life until after... they were like vampires, they couldn't face life until after the sun had gone down, so the crew call was like six o'clock at night, and we'd work until eight or nine the next morning and under somewhat... well, I won't go into that, but under heightened conditions, let us say. We did a whole bunch of songs there at MGM – we did once The... The Staple... Staple Singers came and various other people, and those again were very, very elaborately laid out with camera moves – big cranes and dollies and all sorts of things. Because we were on a stage, you know, Marty could really let loose, so we really had... and then... and dimmers, and as the camera moved this way around them like that I would have lights on the back come up and down and up and down as I judged the cameras to be seeing them, and we had... they were very elaborate and great fun, and there we had really could really light, you know, because it wasn't a concert and we weren't restricted in any way, so some of those are really, really very jazzy. The Staple Singers singing, 'I come down to Nazareth about half past eight' [sic], whatever that's called – I can't remember. Anyway, they're very… I think very elaborately lit with all sorts of colored gels, and we had great fun; we had a wonderful time doing that... you know, as I say a heightened sort of way, or some of us a heightened sort of way.

We went there every weekend and we would... they would prepare themselves and... and we would do interviews and talks and tell stories and... and other old friends – Paul Butterfield, and all sorts of other musicians – would come and they would have jam sessions and sing, and there's wonderful, wonderful footage of... of The Band playing, and... particularly I remember Paul Butterfield, but other people too, coming and jamming and singing songs – not enough of that... you know, the movie is what it is but there is somewhere in some vault some place there's amazing footage that didn't make the final cut, you know. Van Morrison singing... oh, just singing wonderful heartbreaking stuff that didn't make the cut, and... and all sorts of other people in the real concert and then in the song... in the sessions that went on for... what seemed like a year – it can't possibly be, but it seemed to go on and weekend after weekend after weekend – and by three or four in the morning my crew would be utterly like everyone else – completely wasted. I'd be standing there, sort of the solid middle class looking around at this desolation around me. Once I had one of my sons, who was then maybe 12 or so, come and help, and I remember him with me for the night, you know – because it was rock and roll, and it was The Band and everything – and he was... he loved it, but I remember turning around and finding him sort of huddled under a furniture pad asleep with... with the gaffer next to him, passed out. Oh God, what a...
Anyway, there is somewhere, and I do wish that someone would eventually find it. Somebody should talk to Marty [Martin Scorsese] about it; there is amazing songs that didn't make the cut for whatever reason, and probably correctly – I mean, if only for length of time – that still exist of marvelous folk songs and rock 'n roll songs and things and blues played by master musicians, you know, that are sitting somewhere in a vault someplace with... with perfectly good sound and everything with them. I wish they'd appear, but who knows, and that's [The] Last Waltz. Let me think; was there anything else to say about [The] Last Waltz? No, I don't think so. It was... I'm very proud of it; I'm very proud we had a chance to do it – there's never been, I think, as I say, a concert film as good as it since, and that's in large part... I mean, we did a very good job and we really thought it out and planned it out, but it's also because the band was the intellectual elite of rock and roll and they were... those songs were wonderful songs when they were together; they really... Robbie [Robertson] could really write both words and lyrics, I mean... both words and lyrics, Jesus Christ... both words and music, and... and they were wonderful, you know they were wonderful, wonderful songs and I think we, as much as possible, did them justice.

Boris Levin: the production designer who stole the sets from [La] Traviata, which we also couldn't remember, and put them behind The Band in The Last Waltz, and then died. And, Marty [Martin Scorsese] almost... it wasn't a matter of pride, but it was certainly was a weird thing that somebody died on every movie. Boris Levin died on The Last Waltz. What's his name, who composed all the music for Hitchcock... died just as he finished; supposedly almost, like, wrote the last note of the score of Taxi Driver and keeled over and died. And I forget who died... Somebody died from... from Raging Bull, and I forget who or what, but... but there was a kind of fatality to all of them, curiously enough.

I did all... in all either four or five movies with Phil and enjoyed them very much, and... and admire him and think that he's an excellent director, and that of the '70s directors he doesn't get as much credit as he deserves, and I... for whatever reason, but I'm very proud of [The] Wanderers and Invasion of the Body Snatchers and [The] White Dawn – very, very proud of them; I think they are excellent movies and I happen to have seen them just recently, as... I may have mentioned that I supervised the transfer to DVD of [The] White Dawn, and that I... there was a kind of collection of Phil's movies shown just recently, and I saw... and they wanted me to come and be on a panel and everything, and I saw The Wanderers again. I didn't see Invasion of the Body Snatchers, but I happened to have seen that fairly recently on a DVD. They're great fun, you know, they're wonderful fun; they're deliberately, as I think I said, in a sense, B-movies in that they are... don't have enormous budgets, and they don't have enormous stars, or they had perfectly... I mean, they had Donald Sutherland and people in Invasion of the Body Snatchers and Captain... you know, with the ears – what's his name, from... Anyway, they were movies that were very specifically about a subject and... and treated that subject intelligently and in for fun, and they were, in the good sense, B-movies.
Invasion of the Body Snatchers couldn't have the kind of zeitgeist down that the original one had. I mean, I remember seeing the original one on the Nemo Theatre on 110th Street in Broadway, and it was clear right away that most people that I knew were pods and... and that this was in about the '50s, and it has McCarthyism and the… the conformity, and it has all unconscious material, talk about ‘my God’, so it was wonderful, and we couldn't... in the... in the '70s, have anything that was quite so nailed down as that, but it's a pretty good and charming and funny movie; it goes on – it has maybe one too many climaxes and things – but there's a lot of wonderful fun in it, you know... the fun of movie making and the fun of... and I'm... I'm a pod in it.
There are people... the whole San Francisco film community wanted to be in it because there was a lot of... there was a lot of straining to be a... ‘I want to be a pod, I want to be a pod’, but we were very careful who we let be pods and I got to be a pod – I was a nightwatchman in the... in the Department of Health where they sneak back, and they come round the corner and there's a night watchman mopping with his mop, and he looks like that and... and I'm a pod, and Tom Luddy from the Pacific Film Archives is a pod, and Bobby Duvall, who had worked with Phil on a movie years ago happened to be in San Francisco, so we threw him in... in as a pod; he's dressed as a priest and he's swinging on a swing – he's a pod. There was a lot of... there was a lot of competition to be pods; we all wanted to be. And it's great fun, and it has... it has the '70s kind of down, you know: sort of '70s San Francisco scene where a... it's hard to know if someone is a pod or whether they're just a sort of, you know, '70s asshole, and what's-his-name is a psychiatrist, and you can't know... you know for a long while you don't know whether he's really a pod or he's just a psychiatrist, and it turns out he's both... oh, you know, captain from space, from... help me...  Leonard Nimoy. Leonard Nimoy. Thank you. Yes, you don't know whether Leonard Nimoy is a pod or a psychiatrist and it turns out he's both, and he's wonderful, both as a pod and a psychiatrist. It was a lot of fun that movie, and Jeff Goldblum was a silly poet and things... oh, it has... it has just fun, and I did whatever occurred to me to do, you know, to hype things up.
At one point, we shot a whole scene with a 16mm lens, as though it was the pod's point of view and things, and, oh God, we just did... we did anything we could think of to be outrageous, because we knew we couldn't be as brilliantly on... on point as the first one was because the political and social situation wasn't the same, so we just said, ‘What the hell, we'll have fun’, and we... I think we did have fun, and... and it was... and it was fun to do, because of that – because we felt really quite free to enjoy ourselves and make outrageous stuff and put... and hang the camera upside down, have the camera come this way, and turn that way, and be on a bungee cord, and do anything we wanted, and have huge shadows preceding people running through the night and stuff. We did whatever we... whatever amused us and felt quite free to, and there are some sequences in it that are really quite fun; really quite, quite fun. There's a long sequence that I shot handheld that I challenge you to tell whether it was a steadicam or handheld – I mean, it's really... I'm really quite proud of that. I show that every once in a while; it goes... follows Donald and Brooke Adams down everything, and they're arguing and they talk and the camera goes here and goes there, and goes around with them for a long... a whole long sequence in one take, and it looks as if it's a steadicam, but they didn't have steadicam – I did it hand held – and it was... we had a great deal of fun doing it, and it doesn't add up to anything like the first one but it has a nice paranoid... it has moments of real wonderful paranoia to it, and it was fun to do.

I used to come back to New York to do a movie and, you know, stay in a hotel and shoot. I did a whole bunch there and one of them was The Wanderers, which either came right before or right after Raging Bull... I think it was right before Raging Bull.  And it's a story about teenage gangs in the Bronx, or teenage kids in high school, who belong to a gang called the Wanderers – it's a Dion and The Belmonts song... 'I'm a wanderer', you know? 'I'm the kind of guy that will never settle down', you know, and they have wonderful jackets that say Wanderers on the back of them, and there are Italian gangs, and there are black gangs, and there's an Irish gang, and there's a gang called the Fordam Baldies... there really was a gang in... in... who all have shaved heads and they were written by the novelist Richard Price, and they are originally a book of connected short stories that's sort of a novel, and I can't remember what the name of the book was or if the book was called The Wanderers, but they are... maybe the book was called The Wanderers, I just don't remember, but they are clearly based on his own adolescence in the Bronx where he grew up, where he was kind of the nerdy Jewish kid in the high school and he desperately wanted to be in with the hip Italian... really, you know, cool guys, and it's... it's... the stories are wonderful, by the way; the stories are really marvelous, and... and Phil [Kaufman] and his wife adapted it as a screen play and we shot it, and it's really very touching and moving.
Unlike many of the movies of the '70s that are full of irony and, you know, very hip and this and that, Phil's movies tend to be more... more sort of... not... middle class is not the right word, but more... less ironic and more overtly emotional, or dealing with people's emotions – not overtly emotional, but dealing with the emotions of the people who are in them and treating them... treating those emotions quite sincerely and straight-forwardly, unlike the irony of whoever you want to mention, and because of that I think somehow they don't quite get... they don't seem as hip as... as others, and that's... that's wrong because in fact, Wanderers particularly and [The] White Dawn, too, are packed with genuine emotions. Wanderers is really so sad and so wonderful – about these kids and what they want and the one... the hero kid is the... you know, we all know that the kid who... who peaked too early, who was the king of everything in high school and... and the hero, the lead... sort of the lead character, that is clearly that guy who was the one that everybody admired in high school, and then after high school it turned out he was just going to be a sort of goombah... local goombah who gets fat and wears Hawaiian shirts, and the other kids who... who was the nerdy kid who could draw, and somebody else, they're going to run away to San Francisco and be hippies and it... it's just full of that... those genuine teenage emotions – admittedly originally gotten from Richard Price's really wonderful stories but really well translated to the screen, and, again, we had a lot of fun doing it, a lot of fun; it was great to do . And... oh, and the Ducky boys were... were sort of like representing... they were a gang of tiny little kids that... I mean, they're teenagers but they're vicious, and they sort of come out of the dark, and they're like the unconscious, or the memory of the unconscious, and we had a great deal of fun doing it, and I think it's... an over... it was a sort of cult movie; it's not perfect by any means, but it... it has had a life and it... now it continually shows. And somewhere or other I had a couple of Wanderers jackets that I gave to my two sons. I don't know whatever happened to them, but they are priceless, they're wonderful... oh, they're orange and red – dark red – and they have 'Wanderers' in yellow letters across the back. They were nice.
The Wanderers... I really highly recommend The Wanderers as a piece of '70s-ness that when it was shown two or three weeks ago, here in LA, and I was, as I say... you know, was there, and we were supposed to talk about it afterwards, several people came up to me and said, 'You know, I grew up in the Bronx at that time and you absolutely had it right, you really had it right', and they got quite passionate about how... how much it was like their memories, and that was nice because we wanted it to be not exactly teenage life, but teenage life remembered, as... as Richard Price's stories were, because obviously he wasn't a teenager when he wrote them, and it's full of... we hoped, anyway, would be full – and apparently it worked – of the sort of memory of the intense emotions of teenage life, and I think... well, you'd have to look at it to see, but I recommend looking at it because it really is... I think we were successful and several of the performances are marvelous. There was a woman who played the daughter of a local goombah, who in the end the hero marries because he knocked her up, and she was a young comic actress named Toni Kalem, and I never knew what happened to her, and then later – many, many years later – she showed up on The Sopranos; she has a regular role as somebody's wife on The Sopranos –she's, you know, Italian, and she plays... and there she is, in middle age, and she's on The Sopranos. I'm very happy to see that she is still working. She uses glitter. I ask, 'What kind of...what's that nail buff?' She says, 'Glitter.' There's a wonderful... several wonderful scenes of dancers and a strip poker scene and things that are really... well, anyway, I don't want to go on boasting, but it's a marvelous movie, you should see it, and Phil is... was a very good director who really got to the heart of those things and was not ironic about them. You know, he resisted the temptation to be ironic, which is a hard temptation to resist, but it's well worth resisting most of the time.

We were friends and we still are... I mean, we don't see each other much – he lives in San Francisco – but we were friends; we were roughly the same age, we both had a more academic background than Marty [Martin Scorsese] or most of those other people – he'd been to the University of Chicago – and he actually... I don't want to say that... no, he... he had a more... a more traditional academic background than most of those directors, as I did, far more, and that... that was a kind of bond between us, and we... I don't know, we just... you know, I think you were saying about various other people who've been interviewed... we just got along, we were friends, we were genuinely friends and enjoyed each other's company, and had many of this... because we came from a somewhat academic – in my case, ridiculously academic – background, we shared many references to... to various figures of one kind or another, and there was a kind of shorthand that we could talk; just as Marty and I had a shorthand about Godard and about this and about that and obsession with movies, Phil and I had a kind of academic shorthand that we could talk about, we could mention. Those things, when they work like that, you don't... they're not... they're not a shorthand of specific things; you don't say, 'You remember Act II of As You Like It', or whatever – you just mentioning something creates a kind of goodwill in the other person, and mentioning Godard would create a kind of sense of bond between me and Marty, mentioning something little, or 'Do you remember that time in such and such' and... they're not... they're not site-specific in a way; they're just creating a sense of comradeship more than anything else, really, which is very useful and saves a lot of time, you know. When you trust each other, things go faster, and when they go faster you have more time to do the real work and you don't have to act things out and convince each other, you can just go, and it's a great release when it happens. It doesn't always happen, but when it does it's a great release. And it's not that you...you think, I'm doing all this and I'm covering his ass or anything like or... or on the other hand that he's doing everything and not letting me do enough – none of that occurs to either one of you; it all divides as a division of labor which is hardly even a division, you know, it's without... without any friction and it just goes, and it's wonderful when that happens. It's rather like a love affair, and it's really quite wonderful when it happens. Wonderful when it happens with certain key crew guys too when... and I've been very lucky about that, both in New York and here, when the crew guys with you know and trust you and know what you want so... so easily that they don't even have to ask and you can just almost point and say, you know, 'I just don't want the light to come this, the light comes like this', and it's... you don't have to jolly them along, and they all work at your pace; it's wonderful when that happens.
 It's... I think not perhaps enough is said about how much a movie... life on a movie set and the... the movie life is kind of like a club in a curious way, you know; it's like a men's club, but not so much a men's club, and in fact never was really a men's club, but like a club, and there is an enormous amount of social satisfaction when it runs well – when you have the same guys movie after movie and the same director movie after movie, and you're all doing it as a... as a troupe, a theatre troupe; you're itinerant players like people in Pagliacci or something – Cavalleria Rusticana – you're just travelling through the world, doing this stuff... it's enormously satisfying, and it makes up for the hideous hours and the rest of the sort of awfulness of it; it... it's very seductive... very, very seductive. Ruinous to... to marriage and children and all sorts of things, but in itself enormously seductive. It's like a sort of endless summer camp with sex, you know; it's just... it's really, really seductive, and as you get older, it's not as seductive as you don't have as much energy and you can't... you can't do that, you know... you can't do that and then drink all night and do all that stuff and... and go out and party – you can't, and God knows I can't anymore – and, often, what passes for wisdom is really just exhaustion – but in its day and when you're doing it, and when you're young or younger and the movies are coming and the movies turn out well and... and the guys you're doing it with are friends and everything, it's a very, very seductive life. God knows it seduced the hell out of me; and not just me, but many people I know too. There's... there's nothing I know... it's a world that's unlike any other – rather like the army except you don't shoot each other so much and... and the food's better – but more people die in the movies in the end because they just keep going until they die, but it... it has that quality, you know. I forget who said that it's a good thing war is so terrible or we'd never be able to stop it because it's so fascinating; well, movies are sort of like that.

He had this script about the porn industry, and I remember having read it without any thought that I was going to do it or even that he was going to do it; it was just a script, you know. I read it and liked it, and I had always thought that the way to do it was to do it like a documentary – like anthropological documentary, you know; I'm going to New Guinea and I'm going to study this tribe and this tribe has the goddamndest habits you ever saw, and it would all be done in 16mm handheld like... like a anthropological documentary, because, believe me, the world of porn is as weird as anything you ever could imagine, and it does have rituals and... and social structures and things that are like some very primitive tribe, and that it would be done that way. And then... and I... and I kind of... I can't remember the details of how it came about but I remember that I said, 'Yes', still halfway thinking that's how it was going to be done, or at least thinking maybe I could convince Paul [Shrader] that was how it was going to be done. And then in pre-production, when it was in the process of happening, George C Scott was signed on as a star, and suddenly it wasn't going to be that way... no, because you're not going to shoot George C Scott 16mm handheld grainy deliberately screwed up faux anthropological documentary.
So it became a traditional movie; it became... it became kind of The Searchers, you know – I'm looking for Natalie Wood – and... and I still regret that... I wish that it had... I wish we had done in that way... it would have been a very different movie, and I think a far more interesting one, because the world of porno is a... absolutely appalling – the most antisexual thing you ever saw in your life – but fascinating to have shot that way, the smells and the... oh my God. And we shot a lot of it in San Diego because there's a huge porn section in San Diego, because there's a big marine base and a big navy base, and therefore clients for a big porn section, and we shot a whole lot of it there because... because that's where the action was, and we built our own porn sites and everything, you know, and several times women would come to us and say, 'Listen, can we... can we... are you hiring, because your place is much cleaner than ours', you know, and they didn't know that it was movie set.
It was awful... real world of porn... it's just... I mean, it would turn you off sex for life just to be there and look at it, and it did, in fact, because we were... when we went back to LA and we were on the stages, word got around – I forget where it was...Warner Brothers maybe... I think it was Warner Brothers – that they were doing this dirty movie and there was a lot of naked women and everything, you know, and so guys were always coming around saying, 'I got to inspect the... I got to inspect the electrical outlets and everything', and trying to get on the stages but my crew guys – all they wanted to do was get off, get out of there; they just didn't want to see anymore naked women and think about it. It was very hard to find them but other guys were always trying to sneak in. You could always tell the real crew guys from the guys sneaking in because the real crew guys were always trying to just leave; they were so depressed and never was... and these were all old friends and people had known. I had never worked on a crew where there was so much grumbling and everybody was so unhappy. It was profoundly depressing to be in that world, but had we done it like an anthropological documentary I think it would have been kind of wonderful. We didn't. It was whatever it was; some people like it. I'm... you know, I'm sure it's a fine movie, I don't...  I just was so... I had that image in my head of how I thought it was going to be done, and it wasn't, and whatever... whatever, but Paul's an old friend and was a great, great writer, and I'm happy to have been around him and worked with him – he was always fun to talk to. Odd guy but... but marvelous to talk to. And some people actually like it very much – think it's a fine movie – and I guess it is. I don't know, I just... I can't really look at it objectively because of... I had... because I had this idea so strongly in my head... whatever. It was freezing cold, and we went to Grand Rapids where he came from and shot there, because that's where George C Scott was supposed to come from. Bitter, bitter cold... wow, made you understand Paul, because that's where he came from – Dutch Calvinist Reform Church, you know; he'd never seen a movie until he was 20 or something like that, and just... wow – in its own way as weird a world as the world of porn: very different but not so completely dissimilar, I guess.

Once George C Scott was the lead, none of the rest of that was ever going to happen; it was going to shot like a traditional movie and it was... shot like a... and I do remember a couple of things that I did that I enjoyed. At one point Scott is looking at a porn film that may have his daughter in it, as I remember, and what I did was take a camera and project it on to a shiny board, and let the shiny board light come back onto to his face, and I threw it out of focus so that it was a series of images but you couldn't see what it was, but you could see that it was flickering on his face, and then I turned my camera and looked at Scott and filmed him. And that was great fun, and I'm not sure that someone had done... if anyone... I... I had never done it before; it just occurred to me because I wanted to have some image cheating in a way because in fact light from a screen doesn't really come back that much at you, but it does in a small room where you're close to it; it does more. And then when I had him watch... then he watches an actual snuff film where someone is killed, and he then... there's some question that that might be his daughter. I mean... I can't remember the details of the plot, but I know that he did that, so then I did the same thing, but, instead of doing it on a shiny board, I did it onto a big old-fashioned mirror – mirrors they used to use to take the... on Westerns if the sun was coming this way, and they wanted it to come that way; they hit the mirror and they'd bring the mirror and use it to reflect, and the... there's a technical word for it, but I can't remember what they are, and they found one somewhere in the... back at the studio somewhere. It hadn't been used in years, and we cleaned it up, and I projected it onto a mirror so that it came back, and I made it be in focus so that it was in focus on his face, and you could see the images, and that's really a cheat because that would never happen, but that was... we got away with it because it was fun; we did it so you could see the images of what was happening reflected onto his face, and you could see... actually see a person pretend to stab and everything, and that was, as I say, completely a cheat because that would never, never happen, but we thought, what the hell, and we did it, and it worked out fine.
Other than that, I don't remember much about it being, you know, one way or another. It was a movie that we shot: we went to Grand Rapids; it was freezing cold and made you understand Paul [Shrader]. And I remember that somewhere in the course of it we were shooting in Los Angeles, and an old friend of George C Scott's – another actor who's also dead – who played... his name... anyway came to him, took him away and they disappeared for three days, drunk as skunks, and we had to shut down. They're both dead so I can say that without any fear of libel since it's certainly true. We missed... we only missed one day because I think it was the weekend and they disappeared. God knows where they went, but they came back by the next Monday, but it just... it was nice, actually; we shut down and went home – it was nice, we got paid, it was lovely. Other than that, I don't remember that much about it except those little bits and pieces and that I was disappointed in the way we got to do it but it was inevitable; it became a movie, you know. I mean, you can't.... you can't... what's the word? You can't dismiss the... the amount to which the movies are... all these other things we've been talking about... it's also a job, you know: you show up and you... and you work so many hours, whatever it is, and you go home, and you... and you want to do a job as... as best you can, and... and a lot of it is not art or aesthetics or whatever, but really a lot of it is just plain a job, you know, when you've got to get so many scenes done in a day, and that's a good thing too.

I had never shot black and white... or maybe I had – maybe I'd shot one commercial in black and white, I can't... I don't think so; I don't think so. I think by the time I was shooting anything all the major networks had changed all their commercials to color in the '60s, so there was almost no chance to shoot black and white, and I had no background really in photography at all; I had... never was a still man as a kid or anything, and still am not – in fact I can't take stills. I mean, I can't take stills that are any good; my wife is a brilliant stills photographer but I'm not. They're not the same, you know; stills and movies are just philosophically completely different. One is about stopping time, and the other is about going through time and I... because of that or for whatever reason, I am not very good at stills; I'm only occasionally good. The only kind of stills I'm good at... while we're getting off Raging Bull – I guess I'm hesitating to talk about Raging Bull... the only kind of still I'm good at, and I am very good at that, is taking stills with Polaroids.
Polaroids are used on a movie set: the script girl uses Polaroids; the set people use Polaroids to see whether, you know, he put... he put the glass down there, she put the thing down there; and there are always Polaroids floating round the set. And for years I have taken them and shot with them, but I shoot with them blind, as it were. I don't aim like this, I go like that, or I shoot behind the back, or I go... and that's almost like shooting movies, so I can... I can get emotionally involved in that, and 99% of them are no good, but every once in a while there's one that's amazing – that just... by those wonderful accidents that Polaroid is, and I have a few that I've saved over the years that are just extraordinary, and... for instance, on... I can't remember what movie it is, I happened to take a shot of my operator, whom I will not name, hitting on a woman – she was a wardrobe woman or something on the set – and  they’re... they are standing behind a wall about that high, and they're both leaning their elbows on the wall and they're talking, and I was down below, and I went like that and took the picture, and, you know, you wait for... and you peel it off and the old Polaroid, and you look, and I had managed to cut their heads off by accident, so that all you see is their bodies and their arms and everything like that, and you know exactly what's going on; you know that he's hitting on her, and you know that he's going to succeed, and it just... just by their... you know, I don't want to sound like the Bush Administration, but their body language, all of it, it just works, and there is this extraordinary photograph that I took utterly by accident; it's wonderful.
And every once in a while, a movie... a movie still thing like that would happen and that's the only kind of still photography I can take, and those by the way are all color, because they're color Polaroids, so I knew nothing about black and white, except what, you know, you'd heard that you know you can't separate by color – you have to separate by back light because they are so close that you can't count on the green separating from the yellow from the blue from the red. But I was curiously not terrified by it; I don't know why I wasn't terrified, but I... and I really don't know why I wasn't, but I wasn't, particularly because it didn't seem to me that it was going to be that big a problem, and also the movies that were lodged in my head, and, as I think I've talked about, the... the newsreels and the things that are from my childhood were all black and white.

Boxing was a black and white sport because, you know, in our youth and childhood, the Friday night fights on television... there were boxing every Friday night, and it was a big thing to watch, and that of course was black and white, and the photography of the fights – famous photographs in Life Magazine and other things – were all in black and white, so that... so that boxing was definitely thought of in our memories and in our... not just in our childhood but in our association... totally in our association, boxing was a black and white sport. So it seemed perfectly reasonable to shoot it in black and white, and we looked at a lot of old boxing movies – you know, City for Conquest and a lot of black... simply black and white... famous black and white movies of one kind or another – and thought about them and talked and... I... I don't know why I wasn't as frightened as... by then I sort of hoped that I knew what I was doing, and I don't know why I wasn't as frightened by the black and whiteness as I perhaps should have been. Gordy [Gordon Willis] had done a movie in black and white – he'd done Manhattan – and he had had trouble with the lab, and so I... and I knew about that.  Black and white stock is much more brittle and harder than color stock, and thus as it comes... as it unwinds, much more likely to cause static and when they were sent to the labs, unless you put guns to their head and told them to unwind it very, very slowly onto the cores...
Gordy had a lot of trouble with static, so I... I was aware of that and knew what to do, and I don't know why I wasn't... I wasn't so terrified by the black and white, but it seemed... I can't even remember whether I did tests and things but... I'm sure I did some tests for the lab, but I can't remember whether I did extensive tests to see if I knew what I was doing... I don't think I did, and we just did it, and it turned out okay. I remember agonizing sort of whether I would use Double X or Plus X and it seems to me that I used Double X on Raging Bull and Plus X on Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid, which seems perverse but I did. I would have thought I'd go the other way but I must have had some... at least some half-assed reason for doing it, but I remember very specifically deciding to do Double X not Plus X, and I was very lucky in that I had my old friend Dicky Quinlan as the gaffer, even though that most of the movie was ended up being done out here, and Eddie Quin the grip, and they were able to... mostly through Marty's [Martin Scorsese] raising one thing or another, we got them to be able to work out here although they weren't in the unions here; they got... and we got them in the unions here, actually, and that was a great blessing because they were old friends and we had done the New York part together and we just set out and did it, you know. We were guided by old... one of the nice things about black and white is that... after all, black and white goes all the way back to... to Méliès and the very beginning of... of movies and the great backlog of movies is black and white, and you think that you are in touch with... you know, that you're going all the way back to the soul of movies when you do black and white, and so in a way it's... it's very encouraging. And it's also liberating to do black and white because black and white is inherently more abstract than color, because, unless you are color-blind, you see the world in color – you don't see it in black and white – and so therefore black and white is one step removed from reality anyway, and that's a relief in a curious way. You can do more... more what you want and you are not... you are not at all hampered by... by reality, you know. The light can come from where it wants for your purposes since it's inherently abstract and unreal, and I found that very comforting.

It's not at all a realistic movie and the fights particularly are not... are very deliberately not realistic and are more like... and this is all from Marty [Martin Scorsese] not from me, by the way; I'm not trying to take credit for it. It... they were like dances; they were very deliberately done like... like various kinds of dances, and they were in fact choreographed... very, very elaborately choreographed with camera moves and... and steps for the actors all worked out, and we'd get... each fight was done in a different style – one was done all with long lenses, one was done... tried to make long... long takes as long as we could.

We were pretty precise about what we wanted and we had all sorts of rules, you know, the... the actual boxing would all be at 24 frames, but other times it could be other... when it wasn't just the boxing, or there's some famous shots where it's in 24 frames, and then you go to 48 frames while Jake walks away in the neutral corner and he's breathing, and he comes back to 24 frames when he's going to fight again, but it's all in one shot, and we did... that was okay, because he wasn't actually boxing when he went to 48 frames, and we did it with a... we did it with a... really just by hand, and now you can coordinate that and punch it in, but in those days you did it by listening to the sound of the camera changes – speed changing and then opening and closing the diaphragm in... in relation to the change of the speed. But guys just did it by hand; we did it two or three times and it worked out. If you don't do it right, of course, it... you know, it gets all buggered up. We did it I think every time and it worked out all right, and then occasionally when he's in the corner, and they're pouring water over him, we would go to a really 96 or 120 frames and... and really be outrageous, but when they were boxing we made sure they were always 24, except I think like all rules we broke them a little bit in the end, but, anyway, we had very elaborate rules and very elaborate methodology that we... we worked on all the way through the movie.

What is obviously the case is that Jake was in charge of the world and very... and everything was wonderful and elaborate and he was the king when he was in the ring, and when he was outside the ring he was hopeless, a mess as a person, so we shot it that way. In the ring it's extremely elaborate and full of all sorts of camera tricks and moves and everything that we could think of, and then outside the ring much of time it's very, very simple, you know – the camera just sits there and watches two guys... two goombahs in the Bronx arguing in a room and... and the camera doesn't do much; it just sort of sits and watches. And that again was very deliberately done because it was to reflect the different realities of his life – how good he was in the ring and how awful he was out of it. And he was, by the way... he was a oaf as a person... oh God, he was around a lot just sitting around, and he'd get up and say, 'It wasn't like... no, no', and he'd walk to the set and poor Marty [Martin Scorsese] would have to try and get him out, and once we were sitting outside a stage in... in Culver City and he was sitting outside and some teamsters were playing catch with a football, and they're throwing, and Jake was sitting there taking the sun like that, and one of the teamsters threw and it was an errant pass and it hit Jake in the head, you know, and he went... and then he went right back to sleep, because it was nothing to Jake. The poor embarrassed teamster picked the ball up and sort of slunk off, but it was nothing to Jake which... Oh God. And we... you know, I mean all the things that are sort of, I guess, famous for Raging Bull, we did very consciously and with... with forethought and for... to a purpose.
For instance, there's a wonderful scene when he sees Vicky at the... at a dance, and when he looks at her, it's in slow motion, and then when everything... whenever it's not his point of view, it's in... in regular motion, and it's really... it seems to me it works perfectly, it's absolutely heartbreaking – he sees her and he's madly in love and she's just this floating beautiful object, and when you cut around, it's all this sort of chaos of this Italian village dancing: everybody's having fights and yelling and screaming; and... and then she just... and she sails away with the goombahs and walks down... down the stairs in slow motion, and he runs after her, and then again she drives away... this unobtainable princess drives away in the... in the car. Oh, it's... and then all the fights and everything explode around him and he's back to 24 frames and it's terribly sad. And we stole from movies: the first... when he first talks to her, he... she's on one side of a fence and he comes up with Joey from the other side of the fence and he talks to her, and Joey comes up and talks to her, and then the camera pans back and sees him, and he comes forward.
And it's all done in one shot, and we stole it from a shot in [The] Rules Of The Game, where they first come to... to the country house, and it's raining and the camera starts... I can't remember whether it starts on the door... no, I guess it starts on the car driving up, and then it pans to the door, and the butler and another servant talk, and then they come out with a... with an umbrella and they bring a person in, and the... the camera just watches and just shows these things happening, and in the course of that, in... in Rules Of The Game, you understand... it tells you volumes about the class distinction between the servants and the masters and which servant is the highest servant, because finally in the end the higher servant carries the umbrella for himself and lets the other servant walk in the rain, and it's all done in just one very simple shot, that just tells you everything you needed to know and is filled with information and... and, you know, minor poetry, but that's why great poets steal; we just stole from that and did exactly the same thing. So the car drives up and you see the car, and it's really a kind of elegant roadster as I remember, and Joey gets out and he walks up and he talks to... to... through the fence, and they talk, and she says, 'Is that your brother?' 'Yeah, you want to meet him?' And then the camera pans back, and Jake gets out of the car and he sort of hitches up his pants and it tells you everything about them, because it's all in one shot, very consciously taken from Rules Of The Game, and who better to steal from, absolutely. And it's... and... we were really... we were not so innocent as we were perhaps on Taxi Driver but we were... we knew what we were doing, you know; we were working at a fairly high level of thought, I think. I say 'we'; I really should be... Marty was, and I was there doing what I could do and helping out, and I think doing a good job. It was... it was a far more examined life than Taxi Driver was.

Raging Bull is a... is a... a sort of Italian Verismo opera really. It's very much like Cavalleria Rusticana or Pagliacci; I mean, there are these unfortunate South Italian peasants who are in the Bronx, and... but otherwise they behave exactly the same, you know – they had insane jealousies about women and this and that – and it's all done in a tiny little enclave of people. It's a Verismo opera, but we... we let the camera do the singing rather than they – but other than that it might have just have well been Cavalleria Rusticana. And, I mean, I know that sounds campy and everything, but it's really quite true. I mean, they are exactly the same people; they just happen to have ended up in the Bronx rather than in Sicily or South... somewhere in Southern Italy, but they're exactly the same people and have no more clue of what they're doing.
The other thing that's probably interesting to mention in... about Raging Bull is the color footage of the home movies. Now, I never talked to Marty [Martin Scorsese] about this in many years, but my memory is... well, first of all we saw them; they were... Jake had actual color home movies, and we saw them; they were of himself and... and various other members of the family and absolute goombah Mafiosi guys jitterbugging on the sand at Miami Beach, and of christenings and weddings and all of that stuff.

They are based on the real Jake's real home movies, which are the way home movies and albums of still photographs of families are: absolutely heartbreaking, just almost... you begin to weep watching them because of the... because there they are, and you know that most of these people are dead and you know what happened to them, and... you know, and history is just closed down around you as you watch them, and they're almost too painful to watch. And so we thought we would try and do something... we knew we could never do anything as... because they weren't the real people; we knew we could never do anything as heartbreaking as... as Jake's actual movies, but we thought we would do them, and I... I haven't talked to Marty [Martin Scorsese] in many years and my memory may be faulty, but I think it was I who suggested we should do those in color. I can't... I don't want to, you know, take credit... well, obviously I do want to take credit or else I wouldn't say it, but I... I don't want to absolutely say it because it may not be true, and it may be my self-serving memory urging me on, but I think it may have been my idea, you know... even if it was my idea it was Marty who said, 'Yes', so we shot them in 16mm color hand held with just a cheesy little camera, and when we... and I've told this story before, but I'll tell it again: when we went to shoot them, I started shooting them, and I couldn't make them... I couldn't frame them right, it didn't feel right, so I said, 'Marty, I think I'm being too arty here; I can't... I can't make myself frame them badly enough, so you do it.' So Marty started shooting... I think the first one we did they're there by a pool and, you know, he throws her in the water and things like that, and then after a while Marty realized he couldn't do it right because he kept framing them artistically and correctly and stuff, and finally we got the teamsters to come, and we'd say, 'Here, you... you shoot them', and they came up right and from then on, whenever we did it we just got any... practically stop people on the street and have... and say, 'You shoot it', to get them to be... to feel... to have that strangely amateur feel which I couldn't do, and even Marty, who was not a cameraman, couldn't do. And so we would have mostly... I remember the teamsters would do it, whenever we were... we'd say, 'Come on over here, we [sic] need shooting', and they turned out to be pretty good but they were done by teamsters.

The first time that Jake sees her, she's associated, in a way, with water, and later on there's a wonderful scene where it's raining and he says, 'I saw her there first', and he finds out he's going to have throw a fight, and it's horribly sad, but he's standing in the... in the changing room that looks out onto that same... that same swimming pool – the neighborhood swimming pool. But the first time he sees her it begins with a shot of kids diving off the side of the building and down into the pool, and I kept thinking, this is like the Max Beerbohm novel Zuleika Dobson, where... I don't know if this makes any sense to anybody or not... where these students at Oxford keep committing suicide for... because they're so madly in love with Zuleika Dobson, and it is like that; it's like they're throwing themselves into the pool, and as a kind of way of opening up and showing this women who is... you know, who is the whatever – the Medusa or whatever you want to say – of his life, and that is... now, I don't know whether that is just self-consciously literary on my part or whether... it certainly at least is that... whether I was the only one who made that association, I don't know, but to me it is... it was always there: that they are... the students of Oxford committing suicide for Zuleika Dobson as they throw themselves down to the pool; and in some curious way she's associated with water all the way through, you know – there's the scenes of her kicking her legs like that in slow motion and the water's dripping off them, and then later on he's having terrible trouble and fights with her and he's standing in the rain, and Joey comes and says... tells him he's got to throw the fight and everything, and all the way through, in some curious way, she's associated with water. It is... it's hardly an innocent movie – it's full of all sorts of references to other movies, to literature, to... to God knows what, to... to Jake's home movies. It's... it's a very self-conscious movie, but I forgive it that... that self-conscious... it seems to me it sort of works in that case.

We sort of knew... I don't know if we knew it was going to be a great movie or something, or if we knew... but we knew we were doing, we knew the self-consciousness was sort of paying off you know, and I guess it did, I guess it did. I don't know. And then I didn't win the Oscar, but in a curious way I sort of... in the... in the court of public opinion I did, because everybody assumes I won the Oscar – years later, they all... so there's some way in which I did, but in fact I didn't, and Marty [Martin Scorsese] didn't, which is really much sadder. I forget who won.
[Q] But Robert [De Niro] won the Oscar for best actor, didn't he? 
Bobby won for best actor and Thelma won for best editor, but Marty didn't win, which is really ridiculous; I can't remember what... what was the movie? Oh, the movie that was best director was... Robert Redford won for Ordinary People and Marty didn't win. I mean, that's... that’s pathetic.

We did use the mechanics of movie-making with... shamelessly; I mean, we just... if there was something we could do, we did it, you know. That famous steadicam shot that goes up and then... goes up and up, on a crane and rises up... we did everything we could think of; everything that seemed appropriate to do; and we did... yes, we did everything we could think of doing, and we had... by that time in our careers, we had a command of a lot of the mechanics of movie-making at our fingers – we knew what to do and how to do it; there was no question. I don't mean to denigrate that at all; I think in this case the mechanics of movie-making were in the service of... of a really sophisticated idea and therefore not... though they were self-conscious perhaps they were not self-conscious in a bad way. It was... it was perhaps mannerism rather than renaissance, but there's nothing wrong with mannerism; it's just that you have to understand it's a mannerism. And so we did it, you know, and it was... I must say for myself, of the two of them I prefer Taxi Driver. Taxi Driver seems more immediate and more disturbing and... and closer to the bone somehow, but as a great piece of mannerist film making, it's hard to do better, and I am delighted that I got a chance to do it. I'm delighted I got a chance to do the black and white, and everything about it was fun.

I knew it was an opera, but then I happened to know about opera. And, of course, by the way, the... much of the music... some of the music in it is from... is the entr'acte from the first and second act or first and second scenes of Cavalleria Rusticana. I mean, we gave the show away; that... that music is played all the way through, you know. Taxi Driver is not an opera; Raging Bull is an opera. I don't think Taxi Driver is; Taxi Driver... I don't know what Taxi Driver is – it's not a classic tragic opera the way... the way Raging Bull is. Raging Bull is, I think, almost consciously an opera. Marty [Martin Scorsese] is very, very knowledgeable about music and very interested in music, and used to say that he had musical themes in his head before he started the movie – knew what... knew what the music... I don't think he meant that absolutely specifically but he... he very definitely had a musical idea in his head before he started the movie, and I'm not sure if he already had the... the Cavalleria Rusticana music in his head before the movie started, but it goes several times through it. It's always over the... the home movies in black and white, and, of course, it’s just perfect for it, and it sort of gives the show away that it's an opera.
Taxi Driver... yes, it's tragic... I'm not sure tragic is the right word, I mean, in the sense that tragic implies a kind of heroic figure and I'm not sure what... that Travis is particularly heroic exactly. It seems to me that Taxi Driver is about the death of organized religion in a curious way, because somebody said that the trouble with the world after the death of organized religion was not that people would believe nothing, but they would believe anything, and that's certainly what Travis Bickle does. In... if there were some organized religion that had something to do with running a state he would have been some kind of monk or, you know, he would have been safely away in a... in a priory somewhere or a monastery and... and would have been very happy – or, if not happy, at least would have been under control. It's just that he's in the world where nobody believes anything and where he believes... well, what, you know, the insane stuff that he believes, and there is no way of organizing that belief. I think that's what Taxi Driver is about... in a curious way about the post... about the world after... all belief taken out, and I don't think that it's a tragedy in the kind of classic Greek sense, but it's certainly a very disturbing movie.
But, yes, they both are... no, they both are about... yes, about manhood all screwed up and that sort of thing. Now, again, I was just a worker there, guys; I mean, I’m not... I don’t know about my manhood, but I don't think it's that... I mean, in other words, the people who were the most... the people emotionally involved were not Michael Chapman, so perhaps you should ask them about their... they've both all been married several times, have lots of children, and... but it may have... it may have been on their minds; it certainly was on their minds. It was on the minds of Jake La Motta... I don't know. Yes, Raging Bull is an opera; Taxi Driver is not an opera. I don't know what Taxi Driver is; it's not a classic tragedy. I don't know quite what category it fits in; it's a report from some very peculiar world, and I don't know quite what the right word is. Yes, there is... there is a link between them of disturbed maleness, but, I don't know, that seems too... that seems in a way too limiting. Certainly with Taxi Driver it's not just about that... the maleness of it; I mean, he can't... obviously he can't get laid, he can't even talk to women, but he can't talk to men either, you know – he's way beyond just that. Jake... and Jake is a character out of Cavalleria Rusticana where they... where they everything is... all the relations between the sexes are completely screwed up. But I don't know what the answer is about what... what kind of... how you categorize Taxi Driver; I really genuinely don't know. I think it's a unique thing, you know, that you can't put your finger on.

It was... Robert Towne, a writer whom I knew, because I'd done [The] Last Detail, and he wrote a... a script which he wanted to direct, and... I think it's fair to say that Robert was, perhaps, more of a writer than a director, and he hired some – I didn't have anything to do with it – and he hired some guy, and they shot for a little while, and then there was a writer's strike, and they had to shut down, and I think it was felt that, perhaps, they needed a guiding hand. I'm trying to say this... And so they let the other guy go, and I came and I shot the rest of the movie. It was fun, you know. It was... Has anyone... have you seen it? It's about women athletes. And what was interesting about it was being around these women athletes who were the first generation of... kind of... professional... just about first generation of really professional athletes who are women, you know, but who are athletes more importantly than being women, and who counted up their... the number of semesters of eligibility they had at this college, and then they would transfer to another college, and they were... they were jocks. They were... they happened to be women, and I don't mean that they were all lesbians or anything like that. I mean, they were women, perfectly ordinary women. A certain number were whatever... but they were... their real defining principle was that they were jocks. And that was fascinating. And, I think Robert got some of that... that sort of jock society into the movie. Maybe not as much as... no, he did get some of it. But the interesting thing to me was being around them and seeing them, and seeing that they were... that they were so unusual as women because they certainly were women, but that they were jocks, you know. That was the thing about them. And one of... it's an example, really, of one of the very nice things the movies do is that they take you to places and introduce you to situations that you wouldn't otherwise be in. And they not only do that, but that they don't do that for you as a tourist, but as a participant, in that you go to some foreign country, or you go to some subculture of some kind, like porno or women jocks, or whatever.

One of the nice things about movies is that they do take you to a) geographical or b) sociological situations that you wouldn't otherwise be in, and that they immerse you in that situation, be it a foreign country or some sort of very specific culture that the movie is dealing with. It's one of the great things of B movies – that they tend to be about that. You know, that we're going to make a movie about sponge divers, we're going to make a movie about Eskimos, and... and they take you to that place wherever it is. In this case it's the world of women athletes who were just discovering what it was to be a jock and a woman at the same time. And they were fascinating, and I hope that some of that came in the movie. I haven't seen it in a long time, and I don't really remember. And I don't know if there is anything particularly to talk about technically, or anything, in the movie, that we did anything out of the ordinary. There was very nice... very nice dolly shots we made with people running really very fast. We were on a track at the University of Oregon which... but an outdoor track, which became very famous – not because of our movie, but because it was some sort of new composition that I can't remember the name of, but that it really enhanced the speed, and all sorts of records were set there over the years, because Oregon was a big centre of track and field, and several record holders of various kinds lived there. That's probably... and they ran on that track and that track was incredibly smooth. And we... I can't remember what sort of dolly... you know – some sort of battery-powered golf cart rig we used. I wish I could be more specific, but it's so long ago I don't really remember. But I remember that we made wonderful shots with... going at the same speed that the runners were going for, say, 400m, you know. So really bullying along. Quite dangerous, and I'm amazed that we got away with it, because if somebody had stumbled or we'd swerved, somebody could've got hurt. But it didn't happen and we made marvelous shots and we were going full speed, going with them, on the track. Because the track was so smooth we were able to do it.

That was my other black and white movie that I, obviously, got asked to do because of Raging Bull. They thought I knew how to do black and white. And it was... for anyone who hasn't seen it, it was made of matching shots that we made, matching the over-shoulders of old black and white movies, so that Steve Martin... it was a comedy, and Steve Martin would be... you'd see Steve Martin looking down with something on his face, and it would cut around and it would be Lana Turner, from some old ‘40s movie, or any number of people. And that was the joke of the movie. And it was wonderful fun to do, because it was a kind of archaeology. At the time I had... I had a head electrician and gaffer named Don Stott, he was an old, old man – and I think retired almost right after, or very soon after anyway – who had been in the... the movie business for 40 or 50 years, and had worked in the old studio days as an electrician. And, in fact, had worked on a couple of the movies that we used clips from. He'd actually worked on those movies. Happened by accident to have worked on those movies.
So we decided to, or I decided to, as much as possible, only use the old lights, so we dug around in the basements and storage rooms and things of various studios, and found old this and old that, and lights that I've never even seen, and that Don knew. And then we cleaned them all up and used them, and we used arc lights all the way through, which nobody does anymore. And we lit it as much as possible in the way that was absolutely accurate to the movie we did. And that was great fun. Don, and several other old-timers who we used, knew all sorts of tricks that... that nobody knows anymore. That I don't, and certainly didn't, know, and I don't think anyone does, that there were... that were used in those days. And they're quite wonderful. For instance, if you're going to do a shot in which you want to have ripple effects on the wall –  you know, as if water was rippling – you would take a light and shine it down into a pan, a thin pan of water, broad like that, and there would be all bits of broken mirror in the... on the bottom of the pan, and the light would go down in there and break up that all these mirrors and bounce up. But to make it ripple, you would agitate the water so that it... sort of... like that. You know, you'd do it like... you're in a cave, or something like that. I can't remember where in... oh, I think at the end we're in a cave somewhere in... yes? Anyway, we did that and we did it but we did it... in modern day you would do it with a light and you'd have a grip who would stand there and sort of agitate the water, but in those... we had arcs, and arcs, if you know, have a rotating mechanism that feeds the carbon to where it burns. And that rotating mechanism has a handle on it, which turns. So all you do is you tie a string to the handle and put a piece of wood in the water, and it agitates itself, because it goes around and around like that, and the string lifts the piece of wood and it goes, flap, flap, flap.
And it was just this wonderful little bit of knowledge from the past that I had never seen, and none of the younger guys had ever seen. I mean, he said, ‘No, you don't have to do that. Get the grip whip and, you watch, I'll show you.’ And he tied the string around the thing, and it would go round and round and round, and it would agitate the little piece of wood like that, and agitate the water. It was wonderful! You know, it was a perfectly logical, simple solution to a problem, but none of us had ever had it occur to us how to do it. It was full of that kind of thing. You know, how they used to put scrims in front of the light and then they'd pick oil... they would take oil and dot the area where the light was coming right into the face. It would be soft around it, but it would be a little hotter in the eyes, and things. All kinds of old-time things that I knew nothing about. And it was wonderful to see and to do, and it was... it felt like archaeology. But archaeology to the past of one's own craft, you know, and it was fascinating. And great fun to do.
We had a... we had a wonderful time with Steve Martin and Carl Reiner; everybody had... we all had a great, great time. And... it... in a way, I did too good a job because younger people didn't get the jokes. They didn't know who the hell this woman with blonde hair was, you know. They just thought it was a woman talking to Steve Martin, and so... older people fell down laughing. My parents, and people like that, just loved the movie and thought it was wonderful because... because they got the joke. But a lot of younger kids didn't. It was a mild hit, but only mild. And much of that was because if you didn't get it that he was talking to Lana Turner, it was nowhere near as funny, you know. So anyway... but it was great fun to do, and I'm very, very happy to have done it. And I had a very good time with Steve Martin and Carl Reiner. I did another movie with them too... what was it called? [The] Man with Two Brains, which was just a... you know, a regular comedy and a lot of fun, and very funny, I think. And Steve and Carl were very nice guys and a lot of fun to work with, and very smart. Steve had a great art collection and knew a lot about art.

Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid, which was originally going to be called Suck the Bullet, because there is a refer... recurring thing where... what's her name? She's an English actress, and I can't remember her name. Very beautiful. What was her name? It doesn't matter. She sucks a bullet out of his... out of his shoulder, and Steve says, 'Where did you learn that?' She says, 'Oh, at summer camp.' And it was going to be called Suck the Bullet, and someone convinced them – I think stupidly – not to call it Suck the Bullet. It would have made much more money if it had been called Suck the Bullet. But anyway it was great fun to do, and, well, hardly, you know, the second coming of cinema or anything. Marvelous sort of, as I say, archaeology of one's own past. It was very nice.

As I was saying, I had to match old footage from old movies with the footage that we were shooting, over Steve Martin's shoulder to Lana Turner and then over a stand-in for Lana Turner with blonde hair, to Steve Martin. So... it was before the days of anything seriously digitalizing, or where... where the technology of it was, a) primitive, and b) incredibly expensive, and we didn't know anything about it anyway. So I did it in the most simplest ways. I mean, I just looked and tried to figure out what to do and shot film. And what I had them do was to build a... a dark room on the stage. You know, half the size of this room, or a quarter the size of this room. And I had a slide projector and I measured the light and it was... so that it was very precise – it was 16 foot-lamberts and everything – and then I had slides taken from the old footage and I would stick the slide in and project it and I would study it, and I would say... I mean, this was so primitive, but it was the only way we could think of to do, you know. And I'd say, 'Well, let's see, the light is coming onto her face from here, so that means it must be coming onto his face from there.' And I would sort of figure it out, and kind of paint by numbers. And then I'd go out and figure out... and I would tell the crew what to do and where to put the light and everything. And I'd go back in and study again, and go back and forth and back and forth. That was how we did it. Totally primitive by the numbers, paint by numbers, way. Although the darkroom, which you could lock from the inside, became used on lunch hours and things for all sorts of things. I went in there a couple of times and found... I was kind of amazed at what's going on, because I had... I liked to... and even in those days when I was a good deal younger, I liked to sleep at lunch. And it's almost a most important thing in movies, really. And so I had them bring a mattress and put it on the floor in the darkroom. Well, you can imagine what went on. It was quite extraordinary really, because you could line up... pounding on the... 'I want to go to sleep!' Anyway. But it was very useful extracurricularly, but also very useful and that was how we did it. And that was how we matched the footage – really by very... very primitive, just studying and figuring it out, and trying to match it by eye, and we had no more technology than that.

Everybody should direct at least once, if only to get it out of their system, if they possibly can. Because most particularly cameramen go round for years saying, 'My God, I could have done better than that. Look at that idiot. What a... what a...' You know, and then most of the time we are dreadfully wrong, and we couldn't have done better. I've proved that. And... and we're much better just staying cameramen, but inevitably, you know, you grumble and groan and you think, I could've done better. You're almost always wrong. But I did get to direct one movie: All the Right Moves. A movie about high school football, and it's really quite a good... hardly Shakespeare, but it's not a bad movie. And one of the odd things about it was that I didn't realize what I... I mean, I thought it was fun, you know – it was going to be fun, and I was going to treat in this nice way; it was going to be shot in a... funny, cameraman that I am, I kept thinking about how it would be shot... shot in this real location in this decayed steel town in... in Pennsylvania, and it had a secret kind of left wing message and all that nonsense. And I firmly believed it, and perhaps it did.

We were going to do it Johnstown, Pennsylvania, where the Johnstown flood had been, which was very much a decayed steel town where the mills had all closed and everybody was on relief. The buildings were marked where the heights of the... there had been several floods, actually. And there was paint... and there were painted marks, like high tide marks, that how high up this building the flood had gone. It was wonderful. And we... and we... we shot it, and I thought that I was making a film about high school football, which I vaguely remembered and everything, and... and we did, and that it was expressing sympathy for these downtrodden steel towns and things, and it did do that, I hope. But, it was not until post-production that I realized what I had really... what had really attracted me and what I really, passionately, seemed to feel. And this was a very... this is a paramount example of what I was talking about, of concentrating on trying to get it done, and do it right, and the get the actors to do it right, and letting whatever unconscious material there is come up on its own. Because what I really was making was a kind of valentine to my two older sons. Because I had been divorced when they were young and had started a new life here with Amy, and the people you met, and had kept, you know... in their college years and high school years I had not been around, and this was very much... it turned out, and I swear to God I didn't realize it until well into editing... it was a kind of valentine to them saying that I still loved them, and that I, as their father, you know, supported them and would help them and do anything for them because, in fact, the father in the movie does, and it's very much about a father and two sons. One of them happens to be Tom Cruise, but that feeling is all through the movie. And I had no idea that that's what I was really saying, you know, until... I just... I can't remember when it came on me – I slowly began to realize it, and then it was a perfect example of concentrating on one thing and letting the other stuff come out on its own. And it... it's not a bad movie, and it... and it is full of that feeling, you know. I am far more proud of it than I would be if it didn't have that. Directing was, in that case, you know, hectic and frightening and full of all sorts of things, and nowhere near as straightforward and simple as when you're a cameraman. But I got through it and I liked it, sort of. First couple of weeks I must have been a... in fact, Jan de Bont told me I was a dreadful pain in the ass, because I kept saying, 'Don't you want to just move it, get light a little that way', you know, and that, but after a little while I was so swamped with work and with other things that... and, besides, I could see he was doing a very good job, that I shut up, and made... his life was easier. But the first week or so, I must have been really dreadful. He forgave me, I guess.

The only casting choice that really mattered was casting Tom Cruise. And Tom Cruise was a young actor, and it was before we cast him, and were shooting, I think, before Risky Business came out and made him a big star. And he was just represented by the... I forget who the woman was who was the casting director, but he was represented as a very good young actor. And, by the way, he was. I think he did a wonderful job in All the Right Moves. Quite convincing and not overplayed, and not like a star, and he was just this young kid playing football, you know. He did a hell of a good job. And I can't pretend that I, you know, was a great director of actors and everything, but I knew about football and I remembered being a teenager, and... The other people, I just had casting calls and cast them by instinct. But partly it had to be... they had to be able to play football, most of the kids. So there was a lot of... you know, 'Can you throw, can you catch, can you run', and so I had that... that sort of parameter guiding what I did.
I can't remember how I cast Lea Thompson. I remember that I had to ask... I mean, they wanted a certain amount of nudity and I had to ask a series of actresses to take their shirts off, which is so humiliating. It is just... I can't tell you how humiliating it is, and they didn't seem to mind, but I minded terribly. And the producer was there with me. And he had to, sort of, okay the breasts. I can't... it's of a level of humiliation you can't even begin to imagine. So finally, after a while, when I was fairly sure that I wanted Lea Thompson, because she could act... I mean, apparently her breasts passed the producer's test. I finally said, 'Look, you just look at them, I can't', and I left the room. I couldn't do it, was all. I mean, as a cameraman you don't have to do that sort of stuff. There's whole levels of humiliation you don't have to go through. It's a much better job. I mean, unless you are, you know, a big star as a director, and have authority, it's... it's really a hectic and in many ways, humiliating job. You have to deal with... in my case I was fairly lucky, but you all know of horror stories of having to deal with actors and actresses, and just... I, unfortunately, did it, in some ways, the wrong way. There... the one actor's agent called up and with all other things, she says that I picked up a... the agent complained that I picked up a two by four and threatened to hit the actor. This was on All the Right Moves, and I probably did, actually. And I'm... but it worked. He pulled himself together and did a very good job. I won't go into who it was. It wasn't Tom Cruise. But, on [The] Clan of the Cave Bear, too, I supposedly threatened a guy with a piece of pipe. I can't believe I did, but maybe I did, I don't know.

Originally it was called... it's a story about an FBI agent. Sidney Poitier is an FBI agent and he has to go way up into the mountains of the Cascades or the Rockies, or somewhere, in pursuit of some horrible killer, and he goes over the border to Canada. You know, it's just a sort of fish-out-of-water. This very urban FBI agent with his nice suits and everything, has to go way into the mountains with a mountain-man whose name I can't... don't remember the actor. And they... you know, they become buddies. It's a standard fish-out-of-water. I'm a very, very sophisticated urban man and I have to eat rats, you know, and grab fish out of the... you know, I have to become a mountain-man in order to catch this thing, and he does. And then they finally catch the killer and whatever. And it was originally called something like Mountain High or Way Up High in the Mountains, or something, and when we got up to the mountains – and there were whole sorts of scenes where they have to climb up the sides of this, or repel down this or that – Sidney said, 'You know, I have a terrible fear of heights.' And somebody said, 'Well, Sidney, didn't you see the name of the movie – it was called...' Whatever it was called originally. But he couldn't do it. We went up on a... I remember we were up on a glacier in Whistler in British Columbia, and he was... he just... he couldn't act. He really was freaked out by the heights. So we ended up having to build sides of mountains in the studio in Culver City somewhere and light them as if they... it was a pain in the ass, we had to light them as if they were a mountain. And he was sitting... and he was okay then, or, in fact, he was in far more danger of 150ft up on a set here, on this rickety silly set on the stage in Culver City than he ever was in the mountains, but he seemed fine. And he was a very nice man.
And we went... in the end, for some reason we had to go and do an underwater sequence. What was that about? Oh, we went to the Bahamas to do it, but why, I don't remember. Oh, I guess at the end, they plunge into the water in Puget Sound somewhere – they were pursuing the guy, that's right. So we went off to the Bahamas and spent a week in the Bahamas where Sidney had a very nice house on a golf course. That was very pleasant. Again, it was hardly the second coming of cinema, and I don't remember anything staggeringly innovative or noteworthy in what I did. I hope I lit it well and framed it well and did it well. I remember when we did the underwater sequences in the Bahamas, I needed... there was a sort of second unit and there were just a few of us, and I needed a light and I didn't have any, so I took some trays that they had on the lunch wagon, and I wrapped aluminum foil around them, and we had... I went underwater and I held them as fill light on Sidney's face, and he liked that. And it was fun.

Most of the movies that you do... regardless of who you are – even if you're Michaelangelo – a lot of the stuff is... you'd work it for money, and you're making... you're working on a studio movie, and you're doing as a good a job as you can in... and whatever is appropriate to the movie, but the movie is not Shakespeare, and it's not Raging Bull, and it's not Taxi Driver, you know. It's a... it's a job. And I don't think there's anything wrong with that. In fact, quite the contrary. I think, often, some of the most memorable shots, or some of the shots in which you trick your unconscious, as I was talking earlier, into doing something nice; it can be perfectly ordinary. You know, dumbbell old movies. There are sequences in all sorts of really quite silly movies that I remember with real fondness. For instance, I think we skipped over a movie called The Next Man, with Sean Connery, where he plays an Arab... yes, right, he plays an Arab ambassador or something with a heavy Scots accent, and it's an unbelievably forgettable movie, except for one sequence which is shot... which was shot in a helicopter, and why were we in a helicopter? Don't ask me, but we were and for reasons of plot. Sean Connery and some other people were in a helicopter flying over Manhattan at sunset, and I was in the helicopter... in the helicopter with them with a handheld camera, and they're... they’re saying lines and he's looking down and saying, 'It's a magic city', and various things like that. And out the window you can see Manhattan and the helicopter keeps banking here and banking there. You know, don't ask me what the scene was about or why we were in a helicopter over New York at sunset, but we were. And it suddenly shows you Manhattan... that when you saw it... you realized that Manhattan was clearly designed to be seen from the air, exactly like that. And it was... it was a magic city. I can't do his Scots accent, but it was a magic city. And... we could look over their shoulders and there was plenty of light, and I stopped way down so that everything was sharp, and, by God, it's a beautiful sequence. It really is gorgeous. Utterly forgettable movie other than that. But that one sequence has a... has magic to it.
I mean, it really is wonderful. It's what movie... suddenly it shows you what a movie can do, you know. It puts these people in this perfect position, in a helicopter flying over Manhattan... for whatever silly reason, they were flying over Manhattan in a helicopter. But there they are, and there's Manhattan and it suddenly works. And it's suddenly... wow, that's what a movie is. And that was nice, and it happens all the time, and that happens in the most pedestrian movies. Every once in a while something just comes together and makes it all worthwhile in... other than paying off your mortgage, and all the rest of it, and making money and this and that. But that happens and it happens... you never know when it's going to happen or in what circumstances, or why, and that's one of the reasons why no movie should be sneered at and you should take... you know, you should take whatever the best is that comes along when you need the money, because every once in a while something's going to happen in any movie, and you never know when that will be. And when it does, it's wonderful. And was there something in... Yes, there was, yes. In... in Shoot to Kill there was a moment of filming Sidney Poitier with a... with aluminum foil wrapped around it, a lunch tray in the water in the Bahamas. And I thought, here I am and look at that. Isn't this fun, you know. And that happens all the time, and it makes up for the hours and the whatever, and the drive home – all the rest of it.

The Lost Boys is a vampire movie, with Keifer Sutherland and various other people as these vampires metaphorical... whatever they are. But I've always liked horror movies. I love vampire movies and, particularly, I love werewolf movies. I've never gotten to do a werewolf movie, except maybe Taxi Driver, but... I've always wanted to do it. If anybody wants me to a werewolf movie, I'll really do it very cheaply. I love werewolf movies. But I quite like vampire movies too. I like horror movies of all kinds. They seem wonderfully metaphorical, you know. Vampire movies are obviously about the sort of oral stage of sexuality and I think that werewolf movies are about the anal stage, you know, it's sort of there behind and you don't know what it is... is it going to erupt? No, I think that's true, really. I know it sounds silly, but I... so I got to do a vampire movie and I've always wanted to do every kind. You know, in a way, [The] White Dawn was my western. Although I did do a western which we skipped over, and just this last... under an assumed name, because I... well, that's a long story.
Oh my God. I'd fled New York with the woman who is in the other room and I had no money, and I was out here. But I was a reasonably well-known cameraman. How did we get into this? Oh, I know. So I couldn't just do movies under my own name, you know. And I didn't have a card in the Union here. At that time there were separate Unions and I was really broke. I had left with, like, 35 cents. And so I got a job doing a pathetic non-union western in New Mexico and Arizona with various actors and things who were on their uppers, for one reason or another, or in low points in their career. And I couldn't do it under my own name, and so I did it under the name of... I can't think. What's the name of... of the hero of the Henry James novel, The Ambassadors? Oh, Jesus. Sort of naive middle-aged New England man, off in the great world of Paris, in this case. I thought it was just right so I took his name and did the movie under that name. Now, isn't that terrible, it's a good... and I can't remember the man's name. Bloody hell! Anyway, I don't know how I got off on that, but... what was I talking about? Oh, vampire movies, yes! [The] Lost Boys. The Lost Boys, mmmm. I think maybe I... Well, Lost Boys is worth seeing. Lost Boys is worth seeing because it is really quite a stylish, slightly comedic, vampire movie and it's, I think, Joel Schumacher's most heartfelt film, really.

Scrooged was one of these examples where I took over a movie, where the director was having trouble with the cameraman, and he had... now what's his bloody name? Does it say who the director is? Oh, it should.  [Q] Unfortunately, it doesn't.  Of Scrooged?  [Q] No.  Okay. All right, it doesn't matter. Anyway, he been... it was a big guy connected with Warner Bros. and he'd been the producer of [The] Lost Boys and had been very good to me and very helpful, and he was having trouble with the cameraman, and I took it over. You know, for a very nice pay cheque. But what was interesting about it was... other than the movie which was a perfectly okay movie, was that I met Bill Murray, who was the star, and... and really connected with Billy, and did, altogether – I can't remember – three, four, or five movies, with Billy in one connection or another. Ghostbusters 2 and Quick Change, and some others; they'll come to me. But it's one of those examples of just accidentally meeting somebody and having it work out. And Billy and I really hit it off well. Billy is an extraordinary... a) extraordinary character, and b) a great, great talent. Not just as a comedian, but as an actor, you know. Well, you've seen that Japanese movie, and, before that... Lost in Translation, and before that there was a movie... there was a modern-dress version of Hamlet that was made three or four years ago... four or five years ago, in which he plays Polonius, and he is the best Polonius you ever saw.

I met Billy and we hit it off and then he recommended me to Ivan, and I did Ghostbusters 2, and then Billy and a writer did a New York caper movie called Quick Change, and they were the kind of co-directors but... whatever. I had a certain amount to do with it, you know. But, again, I really like and respect and get along with Billy a lot. I know he has a reputation for being difficult, I mean; but, by God, he was never anything but an absolute gentleman and really nice guy. I mean, he's a complicated man, but a great, great talent, and always extremely kind and... and good to me, and we had a wonderful time working together. And Quick Change is again a movie that's a lot of fun, and... and it sort of slipped through the cracks. But, in fact, it's very funny. Really, really funny, and well worth seeing.
It's... it’s a New York caper movie taken from a book, not by Elmore Leonard but some New York equivalent of Elmore Leonard whose name I can't... Donald Westlake, one of those guys who writes slightly comic caper movies based in New York, rather than based in Miami and Detroit, like Elmore Leonard. And it's a very funny movie. It's about how it's easy to rob a bank, but it's impossible to get out of town, you know. They robbed the bank wonderfully and then the rest of the movie is desperately trying to get to the airport, and it's a howlingly New York movie. It's... it’s got wonderful, wonderful things in it. I mean, the cab driver doesn't speak any English, and the cab driver is Tony Shaloub. And he speaks a wonderful made up... kind of Arabic that he remembers vaguely from his childhood, and it makes no sense. And he is hilariously funny. And all sorts of people landed up funny. And they just get further and further into the morass of New York at night and they can't get to the airport. And they have a million dollars that they've stolen, wonderfully and brilliantly, you know. And it's a really very funny movie... very funny movie. That show was... there was a show done... I saw it on TV a while ago and I was howling at it, it was so funny. And then I did a bunch of other stuff with Billy. There for a while I was a sort of wholly owned subsidiary of Bill Murray. And it was... I remember it very fondly at that time because I had such fun with Billy and he, by and large, I mean... he's so bright, and so off the wall, and so unpredictable that, you know, every day is like this great comic invention when you're around Billy. It was great fun. Again, they were not artistically... or not necessarily Shakespeare, but... although Quick Change is damn good, I think, and really funny and well worth getting a DVD and watching.

I was doing... for many years in the '80s, I was doing big studio movies – you know, Ghostbusters 2, and Scrooged, and this and that, and working. I mean, my car could find its way to Warner Bros. I didn't even have to be awake. It could drive me back and forth by itself. And I was doing large studio movies which, by and large, entail a certain... certain parameters of the lighting anyway. You're not going to do... you know, you're not going to do wild abstraction, or something. And coverage and... I mean, with all that a big studio movie implies. I did them for 10 years or so, one after another, one kind or another. And did very well doing them and was quite happy doing them. And, you know, raised a family and had two children and settled down to life in LA in a... in a very ordinary, middle class way, you know. And I'm quite happy to have done it. Had I... I mean, I suppose I could have done, or gone, a different route in my career, but I'm not sure that in the '80s there... that route was very interesting.

Those were the movies I chose to do, or that I was offered. I don't remember whether I was, you know, turning down some wonderful avant-garde piece of Shakespeare in order to do Kindergarten Cop; I don't remember. I just remember I did Kindergarten Cop. And they were, by and large, large studio movies with big studio directors, you know. And so that... that implies a certain kind of... of coverage and lighting, and camera package and all the rest. And I unashamedly did them, and... and perfectly happy to have done them. I don't know that there were, in those years, as interesting alternatives to that as there were in the '70s, and that's why the '70s is remembered as the last great... whatever it was, that went up everybody's nose, and the '80s wasn't. And I did what I did, you know. I sound as if I was defending myself. Well, I suppose I am. But, no, I'm not. I mean, what the hell else was I going to do, and I did what came... No... And I'm just... You can't dance unless you're asked to, you know.

The Ghostbusters movies were big hits, and with all of us... and they're actually very funny. I didn't do Ghostbusters 1 [sic]; I did Ghostbusters 2, and, again, I supervised that recently into DVD. And it's... you know, it's whatever it is, but it's enormously good-hearted. You can see that... that the ghostbusters and all of... they're all having a wonderful time with each other. They're very happy to... to be there, and they were, in fact; they were all friends in those days. They're not so much friends now, but in those days they were. They had a great deal of fun playing with each other and joking off each other, and you can see that, and the movie reflects that. And there is a good-humouredness to it that is unmistakable, and I don't think can be faked. It really is a group of people who are at ease with each other, and having a hell of a time. And in that case, what the cameraman should do is step back and give them space to do it in. And, you know, light it intelligently and block it intelligently. But we're not talking about Caravaggio here. We're talking about, you know, giving the comic actors – in the case of Billy [Bill Murray], comic genius – space to do what they do, and do it and not be hampered by they have to hit a mark here, or they have to have a light that comes into their eye there, or something like that. You know, that's not what those comedies are about, and nor should they be about.
And I don't suppose Ghostbusters 2 was as... can't be as original as Ghostbusters 1 [sic], but it's a funny movie and it's full of good-heartedness between and among the actors, which is very nice to see, and... and very warming to see when you watch the movie. I had... I had a very good time with Ivan [Reitman] in general. We did a whole bunch of movies together. Ghostbusters 2, and... and Kindergarten Cop, and, God, I can't even remember – a whole bunch of them. And Ivan always treated me very well. I wouldn't... I mean, this is hardly what the world needs to know, but Ivan was always a good guy to me. To a certain extent, people think of him.... that he was difficult, but he was never difficult to me, and he always told me the truth, which is very rare. And I rather... in fact, more than rather, I quite honor and respect him. He was a good guy. He is a good guy.

That turned out to be a perfectly nice movie, but it was a... it was a movie about an utterly false issue, how the American economy was going to be taken over by this new giant from the Orient, Japan, which, of course, turned out to be... within three or four years Japan... the Japanese economy was in utter collapse and the banking system was bankrupt, so the fear that Japan was taking over the world turned out to be not really one of the great fears of our time. So the movie had a certain redundancy, I think. But... but it was fun to do and I... I always enjoyed working with Phil [Philip Kaufman], and not so much with Sean [Connery], but I had a good time with Phil, and you know. Who else... who else was in it? Oh yes, Wesley Snipes. Wesley Snipes, yes. Wesley Snipes, yes. He'd come a long way from being this kid in Bad; now he was a big star, but he did a good job. Very straightforward guy. The only amusing thing that I can think of in that was that we had a long... several long sequences where Sean and Wesley Snipes are driving at night, and Sean... and because we had to accommodate Sean Connery we couldn't do what I would have done under the circumstances – we just put them in a car and go off driving at night and film them. We had to do it in a studio with rear projection and all that. So we would go off and shoot rear projection of where we were going to do it. It was fun to do. That was fun to do – sort of old-time stuff that I very seldom got a chance to do, so I enjoyed that. We filmed what they would see out the back, and we filmed what they would see out the front. We filmed what they would see out one side, and the other side. And then, when we turned around and looked at them, I projected, I synched up... I took projectors instead of lights, and I projected the light that they saw that way, back onto their faces, as if... of course, as, in fact, it would show on their faces. And it worked wonderfully. Once you synched up the shutter so that they... you know, they were always open at the same time, it turned out to be a marvelous way to light them, and totally effective and convincing of driving by at night, you know, because there would be a flash of this and a flash of that, and there would be patterns on their faces. It was wonderful.
But it... it began to evoke some sort of response in Sean Connery. It was making him sick to his stomach and he couldn't... it was as if... what is it? As if he was being attacked by some sort of disease, and he kept saying he couldn't do it. He couldn't have this happening because he was... And I said, ‘This is ridiculous; look... here's... here's Wesley Snipes sitting next to you.’ I said, ‘Wesley, is it alright for you?’ He said, ‘No, it's just like the IRT. It was just like travelling the subway in New York, seems alright to me.’ And Sean couldn't do it, and couldn't... kept on and then finally it got to be a huge brouhaha and they brought in the agents and huge people and started... you know. I say, ‘Come on, I just made it; it works great, come on.’ And then they... they brought in a doctor. And he said that Sean was suffering from something called photophobia, which I took to mean fear of cinematographers. And... and finally we had to stop and they wouldn't... fortunately, we got... by sort of shooting while arguing, we got... gotten into most of it. But then finally I couldn't do it anymore.
It turns out a wonderful way to do that part of rear projection. I mean, you know, we're looking back out the window, we have regular rear projection, but on their faces, instead of lighting them solidly with some sort of silly light, we just lit them with... in fact, what the light was coming, and we did it with projectors rather than... and I would change the lenses on the projectors. Most projectors have a kind of zoom lens sort of thing, and I would change what the size of... of the lens was, depending on how I wanted to shoot them. And it works out wonderfully. If you have the time and the money to go and make those shots the night before and have them processed, and you can set up projectors on either side of the cab, or the police car in this case, which is what they were doing. But, anyway, it brought on something called photophobia. And never do it again. You know, I don't mean to denigrate these movies, these studio movies I did, but they're not necessarily filled with wonderful, innovative inventions of cinematography. They weren't meant to be. They were meant to be big and satisfying studio movies. Although I'm very fond of that and I have a couple of times done it since then – projected, lit... lit people with projections. We had to be very careful about sinking up the projectors with the... with the shutter of your camera or you'll get, obviously, just blankness. Because your shot will be open and theirs is closed. But if you synch it all up, it works wonderfully.

I had done another movie with Harrison before. I'd done... The Fugitive. Fugitive, yes. So I knew him and we were, kind of buddies, and got along. He's a very good guy, very good guy. And of that class of person, you know – that sort of huge movie star – he's far and away the class of the outfit, far and away. A really okay guy. Yeah, I'd done The Fugitive with him. Another example of a big studio movie and all, but one where I had been called in. They'd been shooting for a week – maybe two weeks – and they fired the cameraman and called me up and said, didn't I want to go to Chicago in the middle of the winter and freeze my ass off? And I didn't want to insult Warner Brothers because I'd been... they were, kind of, my meal ticket. So I couldn't say no. So I quoted a figure that I would do it for, which I knew they wouldn't accept, and, of course, they accepted, and sent me off to... God, to Chicago and the mountains of North Carolina and things, to do the movie. But it turned out... you know, it's one of those things you never know.
I was very unhappy all the way through it. I didn't get along with the director. I don't want to... you know, I don't want to go into the details of why, but it just was a very bad mix. It just didn't work. And I used to say to them, 'Look I haven't cashed the cheques yet. I'll give you the money back; just let me out of here, please. I'm begging you. Just let me... I'll give you the money back.' They wouldn't, and they made me do it. And, you know, when it came out it was a big, huge hit. Who knew? Yes, it was a massive hit. Oh, yes, and you can't figure that stuff out. You can't figure it out. Some of it, you know, as I... as it recedes into the past and I'm not as angry, I've got to give him some credit. There's a Chicago-ness to it that Andy Davis, who was the director whom I didn't get along with, did bring. I mean, he was a native of Chicago, and there really is a feeling of Chicago in it that; I mean, I hope I captured, but it was his, you know – he knew where to look. And there's some scenes in it that I'm really quite proud of. There... there's one where they break into a house in a slum area of Chicago on a cold winter's day with snow on the ground, and they... you know, they think that Harrison's there but he isn't – it's the other guy – and it's sort of... and it's very nicely done and it really feels like that part of Chicago. A lot of it really feels like Chicago, because it is and it just has that... has a native's eye to it; and that's Andy's, not mine. And it's... you know, it was a big hit and everything. I guess it's a good movie; I don't know. I... yeah, it is, you know, for what it is. And Harrison does a good job. Boy, not much fun to do, though. Wow, it was cold!

It has a big train crash, and that was achieved by actually crashing a train. And that turned out to be the best way to do it. We were in the... in the mountains in North Carolina, in the winter – awfully cold – and there was a railroad which ran in the summer there as a sort of tourist railroad. It must once have had some industrial function, but now and for many years it had been simply a tourist railroad to take people through the Smokey Mountains, or whatever the hell they are, and in the winter it wasn't used. And so, we rented... rented an engine and some cars and a section of track, and crashed the train. And I... presumably they built a new engine, or whatever they did. I don't know. We'd left and gone back to Chicago by then, so I don't know. But... well, the big secret of how we did it was – we just crashed a train and filmed it with a lot of cameras. That was an amazing sequence. Yeah, it is. And... and... but it turned out that the best thing to do was not to do a digital anything, it was just to crash a train, and we crashed a train. We had a lot cameras and turned them all on and lit it well, and crashed the train. And... then there was some other... some stuff, actually, that... that we matted in with Harrison [Ford] running and things, but a lot of that, even, is... well, we shot Harrison and we shot where he's running and the train is going behind him and everything. We didn't... obviously you can't threaten a big movie star with that, so that was composited later, but most of it we just plain crashed the train and shot it.
There's some... there's some nice stuff in it. There's nice... nice examples of... I did that once where... where I was talking at some God-knows-what. After you get to a certain age, you spend most of your time talking instead of doing, but I was trying to give examples of the two poles that I was talking about earlier of a documentary and theatrical lighting, and I used that movie because there are... there's that sequence where they... where they sneak up on a house in the slums of Chicago, which is done without any lights, without anything, and mostly hand-held, and he just sees them coming in and going into the house. And it's done utterly documentary and it looks... I think it works very successfully as these agents sneaking up on a beat-up house in the bad section of Chicago, and it's quite thoroughly documentary, without any embellishment of any kind. And in the same movie there is the opposite end. There is a sequence where they... where they... Tommy Lee Jones and the other guys hunt Harrison through a series of sewers underneath a... underneath a tunnel that leads to a bridge, and it was all made up; it's all nonsense. But... I don't know if you remember, but there's a... you know, they go through a whole series of tunnels and there's water pouring down, and they slide down this and that. And, in fact, there is... if it were a real place there would be no light at all. Because it's underneath a road which is in a tunnel. So it’s... so there's no light, you know. But, of course, you can't have a movie if there's no light. So I took big lights and I would shine them straight down through various holes as if, for some reason, instead of being underneath a road in a tunnel, they were outside. And so there'd be a shaft of light here that would miraculously happen to aim just where you needed it to aim, and that was the... and there'd be no other light – maybe a tiny bit of fill light but probably not. And that was all built... that set of tunnels was all built on a stage in some big warehouse in Chicago. And we built sort of tracks underneath the water so we could dolly along here and there. And I had a small amount of fill light on the front of the dolly, maybe. But basically it would be just dark and then there'd be these big shafts of light, and those shafts of light are the opposite of documentary. They are that basic theatricality of telling you where to look, like, you know... and where to look happened to be where Tommy Lee Jones or Harrison Ford was. But it works. And then he jumps off the... jumps off a fake dam, top of a dam, and we dropped a dummy in front of a huge real dam in North Carolina, and there you are; it all works.
Anyway, there are... those... the two poles of cinematography and both happened to be in that one... in that one movie, and I was using it in some film festival or something I was talking about; I don't know. But it's an amusing movie. It's fun, I thought, The Fugitive. Sort of silly, but nice. And it works, I guess. Seemed to... made a lot of money anyway. And got me an Academy Award nomination again. So who am I to know? And all the time I bitched and complained, and said I hated being there, and this was... I was the wrong guy and then cursed and this and that, and it all worked out. So, you know, you never know. You really do never know. Never, never know. Never have any idea. Even back... way back to [The] Godfather, we had no idea. No idea in the world. Francis almost got fired, and when we were over budget there were all conspiracies and this and that going on, and look at what happened, you know. So nobody... all that old cliché – nobody knows anything – is entirely true. Nobody knows anything, just about.

Primal Fear was again in Chicago. That was... it was supposed to be Chicago and... I mean, we did all the studio stuff here, but we did go back to Chicago. And, you know, we shot in some of the same places, and I found take marks on the ground where I'd had... I swear to God. There's a sequence in both movies and there's a kind of underground underpass in the middle of downtown Chicago, underneath some big buildings. I'm not native Chicago – I can't remember what it's called... what the name of the place is, but it's a very well known place. And in both movies, we shot a sequence where there's some sort of meeting there, and so I was putting lights on, and I looked and there's some old dirty tape, because I put a ten K there, from the movie before, you know, which was five or six years before and it was still there. Other than that... Primal Fear with Richard Gere. Primal Fear with Richard Gere. Oh, it had a... it had Laura Linney in it – a very good actress that I met there and... and grew to like and admire very much. There's some nice lighting that I remember: bits and pieces here and there; lighting her face and his face. But, you know, I think it was very well done and it made money, and it was a good... again, a good straightforward, you know, crime movie. And not anything that is earth-shattering or new that I can think of.

Six Days Seven Nights, we did, for instance, which is... which, again, I quite like. I mean, it wasn't... it was never meant to be anything more than the movie equivalent of a romance you take to the beach in the summer and read, you know. But, given that, I think we did a wonderful job, and Harrison [Ford] and Annie [Anne Heche] were really good together, and they gave each other... like Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire, they say, you know, she gave him sex and he gave her class. Well, something like that with Harrison and Anne Heche. Annie gave him, sort of, sex appeal, and he gave her a kind of dignity, and they... and they were a wonderful couple together; they really were a wonderful comic couple. You could've wished that they'd done a whole series of movies together. They just fed off each other and they made each other really work well.
And we had a great time, you know. As I say, it's not anything other than a summer romance comedy, but as that it's... it was fine, and we had a great time lighting it, and we sort of did it in an old-fashioned style. Again, we brought arcs and things to... to Hawaii, partly for... well, just for the fun of it, really, because we thought we could... it was going to look like an old-time... not look like, but it was going to be an homage to an old Doris Day/Rock Hudson... that kind of romance movie, so we thought we'd be a little bit homage with the equipment too, and we brought arcs and did stuff and we had a good time, and, I think, made a really charming movie, mostly because Harrison and Annie were charming together, and here comes Harrison flying over now! He lives right up the street; he may be, for all I know. And he has a helicopter. It was... it was the only time I ever worked in Hawaii, and, I must say: frankly, if I never work there again, I'm perfectly happy. It is the most... boy, there's no 'there' there. It's absolutely... there's nothing to do. After about three weeks the crew would have killed to get off the island. It's just... there's nothing there. There is no 'there' there at all. But the movie itself was great fun and... you know, and then on your day off you go play golf, and then you go work, and then you go play golf again, and there's one restaurant. This is in Kauai anyway. The rest of it I don't know. But it was fun. It was great fun to do, and I think it was a good movie, and I think Harrison and Annie were a marvelous couple together.

Slowly, I think, as those years went on, and as I got older – and this will happen to you too – I couldn't do the hours one after another anymore. I can't now. Now I don't even pretend I can. And, I keep... I mean, at my age, it's just... you know, the hours have gotten... I don't suppose the hours have really gotten worse. Supposedly in the old studio days, people used to sleep up in the permanents, because... and then just get the next morning and go to work because the hours were so long. But they... because I'm getting older, they seem longer and longer and longer to me; 14, 16 hours a day is... and it's... it's... I... I think it's because it's labor intensive in the sense that the money that you... the interest on the money borrowed to pay for the film is so much, that what you have to pay in overtime and everything to crew and people is nothing. So they simply try and get as... every day there must be hundreds of thousands of dollars interest on the money borrowed to make the movie, so they... it's just... and it's not a really good way to live, you know. And I find now that I can't... I can't do it as... as long or as many weeks per year as I once could.
But, fortunately, it's worked out, sort of, that I don't necessarily have to, and that I've done... over the last few years, I've tended to do shorter movies with first-time directors, or directors that were doing an American movie or a studio movie for the first time, and they would, sort of, give me... like Doc Hollywood. Michael Caton-Jones: that was his first American movie, and his first movie with a big studio and everything. And that... that was some years ago now, and I was younger then. But that sort of situation. In the last few years I've done two different movies. I did a movie with a writer who... you know, if they want a writer to do things, they'll say, ‘If you'll do this, I’ll... we'll get you a job to direct’, and every once in a while the writer will call them on it. And a New York comedy writer named Michael Clancy called them on it, and they... they got him to... they allowed him to direct a movie called Eulogy – a comedy that I shot. And... you know, I'd help to organize and things because... I... I don't mean that it's my movie – I don't mean that for a second – but that's a niche that I can full... fulfill quite well with younger directors, or... I just recently finished a movie written and directed [sic] by the actor David Duchovny, who turns out to be a very good writer... remarkable writer. And who would've known? But he really was quite remarkable. And, again, they had no pretence to know the mechanics of directing, although he directed a couple of episodes of his TV show, [The] X-Files. But I was able to help him out on that, and that's a very good niche for someone of my age. I'm very... quite happy doing that.

Most of them are not, you know, 26 weeks; they're only six or seven weeks. And I can do anything for six or seven weeks. And I get to think an awful lot. I have to do a lot of stuff and that keeps me going in a way. I find it very satisfying. And I've... actually, I've just been lucky and I've got along with Mike Clancy and with David [Duchovny] very well. I've known David – he'd been in movies and things that I'd done. But we were sort of buddies, and... no, I find it a very... I find it very satisfying. I can't... I made... the movie before that is a movie called Suspect Zero, which was also a low-budget movie, with a guy who had never made a big studio movie before. And for reasons of... that somewhat escape me, but I think partly vanity and partly just I thought it would be fun, I said I would operate it too, and we would just pay a guy to... but I'd be actually operating, and that was probably a mistake; I shouldn't have. I... that is too much to do at my age, but it was good... it was great fun. I so love operating that I did do it. I didn't operate the Eulogy or House of D, but I did operate Suspect Zero. And it was... it is heavenly to do; it really is. God, I love it. I wish I weren't old and sort of lost my reflexes, but, you know, I stagger along as best I can, and happily so.

It is not after all making movies under the Nazi occupation of France, or anything. Or making movies under the most severe Stalinist situations where, if you make a mistake, they'll send you to the Gulag. It isn't... it isn't... that way. It is to a certain extent, yes, in that for instance when Gordy [Gordon Willis] did [The] Godfather it was a big studio movie and they couldn't... they just were going to shoot him. If they could've gotten across the continent and shot him they would've, because it was too dark and you couldn't see their eyes, and this and that, and yes, he was a... but, you know, Gordy was a great artist. And he fought, and... and now, of course, everybody considers that... that's how lighting should be. I don't remember... those are situations that don't come up very often. And not every movie needs or deserves that, you know. Many movies are... for instance, musicals. I mean, Gordy in a musical, they did an American version of that... you know, the guy who wrote The Singing Detective? What's the one before that? Pennies from Heaven. What? Pennies from Heaven. Pennies from Heaven. You know. Yes, well... now the original British television version of Pennies of Heaven is... it's just breathtaking; it's so wonderful! And Bob Hoskins is just... and, unfortunately, the one that Gordy did with Steve Martin is, sort of, overblown and sits there, and it just doesn't work. The difference between water colors and oils, or something. The original British one is just... you just gasp, it's so wonderful, because it flows and it's simple and it's light, and the big studio system and the lighting and everything kind of overpowered that, that's true.
And there comes times when the studio application is not right for even a musical. It'd be nice to do a kind of... it would be nice to do an almost documentary musical. I always wanted to shoot... I always tried to convince Marty [Martin Scorsese] to do Mahogany. God, I would love to do Mahogany. And do it in a... oh, in some just sort of sleazy wonderful waterfront area somewhere. And I can't get anybody to; I don't know why. I do know why really, but I can never get anybody to do it. I think it would be wonderful. And there's a pretty good... there's... I think there's even a pretty decent translation of Mahogany into English, so that it could be done in English, but I never have been able to get anybody to do it. I'd love to do that and I certainly wouldn't do it as a big studio musical. I'd do it as a... almost a documentary, you know, and it would be... God it would be wonderful! And shoot it somewhere in... I don't quite know where, but, I mean, a place with dumps and, you know, sleazy bars and, oh God, it would be heavenly! So if you know anybody who wants to do Mahogany, again, I'm available. I'll do it cheap. I won't... I promise I won't sing.
But, no, I don't have... doing studio movies is a perfect example of that... of what I was talking about before: of doing your... doing your work and concentrating on your work and concentrating on whatever the limitations are and letting the surprises happen, and letting the bits of unconscious magic come out when they come out, and where they come out. And if I were to sit down and go through my... sort of, whatever you want to call it... studio movies, I could point out to you various places where that happened. And not just me, but all sorts of people, and sometimes just plain studio movies, and the most obvious example is... is musicals... turn out to be wonderful, within... utterly within the confines of the studio system; after all those were the great days of movies... was the studio system. That's when movies were the great art form of the 20th Century. That's when they were the church of the 20th Century, before television and before the rise of Protestantism. When it was just one big church, and they were... you know, they were wonderful then, and they made no pretence of being anything but... but that... that studio system. And it was... it was an art form. It was... it was also, by the way, an industrial procedure. An extraordinary industrial procedure. It was much more rational than it is now. They shot everything looking this way one day, and... everything. And then they... and then the night crew would come around and lift walls up there, and you'd put the cameras and turn around, and then they'd shoot everything this way. And it was all done like a factory. It was done incredibly rationally, and that's how they ground out all those movies, you know, per week. Because, theatres all over America and all over the world, in those... when I was a kid, it was all double bills. I mean, there were two movies every... every time you went you saw two movies.

When I was a child I and the other kids learned whatever... I mean, I once was forced to go to Sunday School for about six months, and then didn't anymore, but whatever I learned of what bravery was, what manliness was, what sexiness was, God knows, was taught to me by the movies. And not just me, but millions of other children and, I suspect, adults. There was a kind of consensus of what men were and women were and sexiness was, and bravery was, very much, you know. And... and what you could do and should do. A sort of moral code – unconscious and not spelled out in any rational way. And I'm not talking about the Hayes office or any kind of enforced patriotism, or anything like that, but simply a kind of collective unconscious morality was given to the world. And the world absorbed it. I certainly did and... and the other kids that I know did. And I'm sure adults did. And... because there was only one... essentially one place that this vision could come from, which was the studio system of Hollywood, it tended to be a unified vision. I mean, one studio did one kind of thing and another studio did another thing. But there was an overall unconscious familiarity and... and unity of vision. Now that doesn't exist anymore. Because now there are... is no one... there is no one source. There is no one church. Everybody is his own church now. I mean, as I say... if television is the rise of Protestantism, we are now way past, you know, anything. We're all just our own terrorists now, and there is no longer a unified voice or a unified morality.

What I think about the studio system then and the major movies that are made now is that then they were the only game in town. There was this... in the great days of the studios and the great days of studio movies, there was no television – at least, you know, towards the end of the studio days there was television – but... and they jumped in on television, but in the great days of... there was no television. There was no anything, but those movies. So that, while some studio may have had one policy and another studio another, and one director had one vision and another director another, there was a basic consistency – an almost unconscious consistency – in what they were saying, or what they were implying, about life, about sexuality, about heroism, about how to behave, how to dress, how to do that. That no longer applies. Now there's... how many channels of television, plus DVDs, plus the Internet, plus everything. There is no... there is an utter fragmentation of point of view, so that, while studio... big studio movies may think they have some sort of point of view, or something to say, that doesn't have the overpowering cohesion that the studio system once had.
And now it's a movie that just says, you know... makes a movie about the Vietnamese war, or makes a movie... it's a western or something, but it doesn't have the mythic quality that westerns once had about... it is not as convincingly mythic, anyway, no how much desperately they try to make it so. And because there are simply so many points of view and so many outlets, actually, more than anything else. The outlets promote their points of view. There are so many ways that you can get an image seen, or that images are seen... that after all, movies or studio movies are out-grossed by porno, and out-grossed by video games make more money per year, apparently, than... than studio movies, or at least in their first release. And supposedly the porno industry makes more money per year than studio movies do. So they... they simply... they don't have the same power. They may have... one individual movie may sweep the world away, but it doesn't have the cumulative power that it once had. It doesn't mean that they're any more or less... either good or bad or sincere or insincere. Insincere I would think, but they don't... they simply don't have the same kind of power. And I think that's generally true of the movie industry altogether – the American or the large-scale American and Western European movie industry.

It's not... it's not fun. A lot of directing is not fun, a lot of it. Oh God! But, fortunately, I did a very bad job on Clan of the Cave Bear, so I was spared having to do it much anymore. I did... I directed a TV pilot and I directed... sometime later I directed a Viking movie in Iceland, which was also a fiasco, but not entirely my fault that time. That was partly a matter of casting and things. But it was fun to go to Iceland, and I don't... and I don't regret that at all. It was great fun to go to Iceland, and it was also a low budget, you know... off the book sort of movie anyway. So it was never... my failure was never even seen. And Iceland was fascinating.  [Q] Is this something that you wanted to pursue as a... as a career?  No, no.  [Q] Because there's a ten year gap between one job and another job.  I didn't... I realized how... how sticky a sort of job it was and how much I didn't need that part of it in my life, and I felt... after I realized what I had really been meaning to say in All the Right Moves I felt, and still do feel, that... although, please God, may it pass me by if I ever again... never again, at my age, but I felt that if you had some subject matter which you really deeply wanted to talk about and get out before the public – whatever it is, you know, be it a political or a social or a sexual... whatever personal... whatever it was that you wanted deeply to say that you cared about – then I would go through it again. But short of that, just as a job... whew, God, I really... I mean, I think as I said earlier, I had found many years ago that whatever my needs were to express myself... oh God, help me, whatever those things are, I did it plenty good enough as a cameraman and I didn't need that. And so, yes, until... I mean, until I got too old, yes, I would've done something else, had I really felt strongly about it. And I did feel strongly about the Iceland movie because I felt, and do feel still, very strongly about the original source material, the Iceland Sagas. The Iceland Sagas are extraordinary.

Everybody should go out and read them. They are to the novel what The Iliad is to poetry, and... and just as poetry has not gotten any better since The Iliad, the novel has not gotten any better since The Iceland Sagas [sic]. They're extraordinary... absolutely extraordinary prose. And I became obsessed with them. I had known them as a young man, but the various new translations of them came out in the '80s and I began reading them again, and read them over and over and over, and read all of them and studied them, and read old translations. I became quite obsessed with them. And they seemed to be screaming out to be made into a movie. And I later found out that they have been, in fact... that many European directors... mostly European directors have tried for years to make movies out of them, and never quite solved them, which, God knows, I didn't... solve how to make them. And they never have quite done it. Bergman, I think, wanted to and various other people wanted to, because they... they are so extraordinarily cinematic.
I didn't succeed in solving the problems, but it was... in this case, it was not entirely my fault. It was also some casting and things that were forced on me by the studio that was backing it up... backing the movie. And there was very little chance it was going to work. It has some nice things in it and has some really... it's kind of like Peter Brook's [The] Mahabharata; it's not at all... That's something to speak about, by the way. Does anybody... That you should get. You should go... you should interview him and talk about The Mahabharata. It's one of the great pieces of cinema of all time, and it was hardly an influence on the Sagas, but the kind of pageantry in it impressed me very much. Because at the same time I was reading the Sagas, I was watching The Mahabharata over and over again. Although I think Peter Brook could have done a better job with The Icelandic Sagas than I did, I think. Anyway, that's really all there is for me to say about directing. I was not meant to be a great director, and I proved it. But I do like All the Right Moves and am rather proud of it. And some of the Icelandic stuff is kind of nice. But, fortunately, you'll never get a chance to see it.

I was very fortunate to be an operator on some marvelous movies, like Jaws and [The] Godfather. And that... all the stuff I did with Gordy [Gordon Willis] I did because Gordy chose me, and his career just exploded into all those movies, and he just took me along in his wake, you know. And I got to operate in Klute, in The Godfather, and all those things. It was wonderful. It was heavenly. And, as I think I said before, Gordy and I worked out a whole... won't give it too pompous a name, but... not an aesthetic, but a way of looking and a way of framing that we both were totally happy with and agreed on entirely. And so I... he trusted me and we did it, and we had a wonderful time, and... I know I've said all this before – that operating is far and away the most wonderful and sexiest job in the... in the movie industry, as far as I'm concerned. It's just marvelous and I had a wonderful time doing it. As to how much it affected my later career, or certainly as a director, or something, I don't know. I'm not so sure that I could make that connection in any conscious way. I mean, it is... it is a form of storytelling, certainly.

My take on operating and Gordy's [Gordon Willis] over the years certainly diverged. Because Gordy was a real classicist and tended to be totally still... a lot of operating was just trying to stay awake and not... you know, you didn't have to pan much. And... and operating was... was framing for Gordy. Very, very elaborately thought-out frames, like... like painting, like drawing, you know. I mean, the... the head would be here and the lines would come this way, and it would make you look there, and it's very beautiful and very classically done. And I agreed with him entirely and thought it was wonderful. I... my own... my own preference is for more nervousness and movement in the frame. And when I operated for myself, and when I operated and also do other things, I tended to bring more nervousness and more movement and more... more speed into the frame. But that's... you know, I was operating for Gordy and I was operating what he wanted, and I totally agreed with... under his regime, which was a regime I was enormously admiring of. I wanted to do what he did. My own taste, later on, is for more movement and for more nervousness and more agitation. And I think I did that. But that's just, you know, personal taste, really, and it doesn't have anything to do with... I'd not dignify it with the word aesthetics or anything; it's just... it is, well, whatever it is. Who knows? Those words make me very nervous. But... just personal taste. Personal preference, you know. And one is not necessarily more... more real or more beautiful or more whatever than the other, you know. I think I said that the two poles are Raoul Coutard and Gordy, and Gordy is still and Raoul Coutard is full of movement, and I sort of drifted to the Coutard end, you know. But that's the... he came... Gordy came along before Jean Godard in the '60s and the Nouvelle Vague you know. I don't think it ever even touched him. He was Gordy.

I did a very show-offy good job, you know. I mean, you go out and stand in a rocking boat with a hand...held pan... you know, anamorphic camera, and see how you like it, you know. I was real good at it and, as I think I probably said, they didn't have... there was no video playback or anything, and they... they pretty much had to... not do what I said, but they had to listen to me because I was the only person seeing it, and it was all full of, you know, did the shark come up here, did the thing go there, did the... it was... it was a really bravura show-off job, and I... and it was great fun to do.

The confusions and breakdowns and this and that were practically nothing to do with me, I was happy as a clam, you know. The boat sank one day. All sorts of things happened. The orca... I was standing there with the boat sinking down there, holding the camera saying, 'Well, please somebody take this damn camera before it gets...' You know. All sorts of things happened, but it didn't... it was fun for me. I had a marvelous time. Marvelous time. And, it was just really... just fun the way sports is fun, in a curious way. It really was like a... like a sport – like a long, long game of some kind, you know. Football game or baseball game, whatever, that went on week after week after week. It was wonderful! And... and I was winning, and I won, you know. It's that simple, really. I wish I could... I wish it were more profound than that, but it was really almost boyish in the... in the sort of sportif... you know, sports and aesthetics all together. It was wonderful. Who could resist? And I think, you know, saying... there's almost nothing more that can be said about operating than what I've said because it is... operating is utterly unverbal. It's as... it's as close to... to action painting art as anything can be, you know. You can't talk it. You can only do it, you know. And so there's really... there's almost nothing to be said about it. You can sit down with people and say, ‘Look, you should've let the head be here and you should crop it, and you should put the...’  You know. But basically you're just out there doing it, and you can do it or not, and you have a... a vision of how the frame should be or you don't. And if you do, it's heaven.

Most important certainly [Jean-Luc] Godard and Raoul Coutard and everything with Gordy [Gordon Willis], and, that's an interesting question. I can't... and, sort of primordially, as I... as I said, the newsreels that I remember as a child. Because they were the first images that totally convinced me of the power of movies to show. And, of course, they had the great advantage of being movies... newsreels... Second World War, you know. Battleships and guns and tanks and airplanes and everything, but they just brought to this small boy in Wellesley or Framingham, Massachusetts, the images of the power of visual art, you know. There it came... my God, a huge battleship coming, or whatever it was. Or the tragedy of dead bodies and... and people shot in the war. I mean, it was overpowering, and I know that they have stayed in my mind far more than I thought they had. Stayed in a sort of preconscious part of my mind as... as part of the power of... that movies could attain, that... that imagery, visual imagery could attain. It's also part of why I have always been so fascinated by home movies and... and snap shots and family albums and things. They seem almost always more powerful than... than fictionalized movies, you know. I mean, anybody's home movies are... they're almost like an indictment of some kind. There's always a hint of tragedy or... or strangeness or story that you're never going to figure out. If you look... if you go to anybody's house and begin looking at their family snapshot albums going back over generations, and you begin to feel a sense of... of the strangeness of life, you know. They're fascinating. Or go into second-hand stores and buy old... like old postcards do some of the same thing. Postcards from tiny villages, and postcards that show this and that. They begin to tell elaborate stories that you can only barely grasp. And all of that kind of imagery has, I think, clearly... I certainly talked of... I mean, if you read what Godard has had to say over the years, he says very much the same sort of thing. In fact, he did one time an experiment of taking a whole set of newsreels from the Second World War of the same events, but from the Allied side and the German side, and things like that, and he edited them together or separately, side by side. And, it must have been fascinating to see.
That kind of... of imagery – be they stills or... or movies – have always fascinated me and have been, I think, much more of a suggestive element in my work than I probably consciously know – or most of the time know, anyway. I certainly don't think of when I'm doing it. But it's always the... the... the basic... whatever the word is... demi-urge, or something, way down in my mind that helps me. I think quite strongly that... so that as far as the influence of specific directors and cameramen... I mean, certainly Gordy... certainly Gordy... certainly Raoul Coutard, certainly various classic Hollywood movies that I saw as a child and as a young man influenced me. But more than anything, I think, is home movies and postcards and snap shots in family albums. Those really influenced me a lot, without my knowing it. As any family album is... is an indictment, practically, of some kind. Even the happiest family. 

I think we all agree that movies was the great art form of the 20th Century. But the 20th Century is over. And movies as such, and we've been talking about that, are... don't have the same position of power they once had. Movies made as big studio movies that go out to theatres where everybody comes and worships the church of the 20th Century. That doesn't exist anymore. And with it, film as such is, I think, fading away. The still is used in most movies, but increasingly it's digital, and in 20 years or so – who knows how long – I suspect it'll all be... if not digital, it'll be laser or something; who knows? In large part because the... the antiquated system of taking large rolls of 35mm film and shipping them in trucks to theatres in... in Jumpoff, Georgia, and, who knows where, Maine, is... is utterly obsolete. It's going... it's increasingly obsolete, and putting and running them through the gates of projectors again, in theatres, is increasingly obsolete technologically. And you can fight anything but can't fight technology. And, sooner or later, that technology is going to be out the window. And as soon as that's out the window, the whole idea of shooting on film is going to become increasingly... I mean, film is a 19thcentury technology. Little claws pulling things down and holding it like that, you know, 24 frames a second. That's... that was invented in the 19th Century, and this is the 21st Century. And, it's like old clockwork... Nobody has... almost nobody has clocks that go tick-tock, tick-tock anymore, and that's... movie cameras are the equivalent of that. And it's going to... it's going to change. The example that I've used before and will use again is, before the process of transferring photographs to newspapers was developed in the 19th Century, images in newspapers were done by people called wood engravers.

You can fight anything but you can't fight technology because it's going to change, and when it changes it's going to change the form in which... I hate to use the word art again, but art – what the art is... is done. A very good example is what happened to newspapers in the middle of the 19th Century. Before the technology existed to reproduce photographs on newspapers, on newsprint, images in newspapers were done by people called wood engravers. Artists, or whatever you want to call them, would go off to an event, like the American Civil War, and make drawings of things happening – of people surrendering, of people shooting people... whatever, of battles. And they would be sent... Winslow Homer did a lot of it. And they would be sent back to the newspapers in Boston or New York, or wherever, and they would be given to wood engravers who would, quite literally, engrave on blocks of wood... not copies so much as more or less copy what they had seen. And those blocks of wood would be printed on each sheet of newspaper. And in the world of wood engravers there must have been good and bad wood engravers, and probably even star wood engravers who made the most money and worked for the biggest and best newspaper. And this was, if not an art form, at least a craft which was going fine until the invention of... I forget what it's called... photo offset printing, or whatever it is that allows photographs to be printed. And then they were gone. Whether they were good or bad, whether they had years of experience and they were creative artists, they were gone.
And I suggest that my generation of cinematographers are, in a way, the last generation of wood engravers. And that the technology of imagery... of visual imagery and storytelling is already in the process of changing so rapidly. Partly because of the technology of cameras and... and imaging, and partly because of the technology of distribution. That, within another 20 years, it's going to be radically, radically different. And that is not necessarily good or bad; it's just a fact of life. And I think that what is useful or important is to seize on it and make it good, and make video cameras, or whatever kind of camera is going to come in the future, assume its own properties. They always talk now in... in... in shooting a video, it doesn't look enough like film, we can make it look like film. Well, it's nonsense. It shouldn't look like a film. It should look like a video. But, you have to find out what the really basic properties of video are. And... I'll admit it that the video keeps changing as the technology goes rapidly more and more and more and more... whatever. So who can keep up with it? I don't know anything about it. I've never shot anything... I mean, I've shot, you know, home videos, but I've never shot a feature or anything else on video, and only because no one has asked me. I'd love to do it, because I'd love to try and find out what it's really like. And some guys that I know have, and what they say is very... is fascinating when you hear them talk about it. And I've been on the set... an old guy who used to be my operator now shoots a TV series... several TV series that he shot on video. And he became a kind of... the big guru of it, and I used to visit his set and it was fascinating to see. And it’s... it is not the same as film, and it shouldn't be thought of as the same as film. It has different properties. Just as, you know, impressionism is different from the Italian renaissance – not better or worse, but simply different and having its own properties. And those things are the things that people should be trying to figure out.

I think that the way that... If I were young and trying to start again, or start out to do it, what I would be interested in is in a kind of less realistic format, by which I mean... I'm going to go back to a kind of idiot's history of art for a second. Just to explain what I mean. In the Italian renaissance the laws of perspective were worked out so that art could... the art of painting could accurately represent what the eye saw. You know: I'm closer to you I'm larger; as things go away... there were vanishing points; and all that stuff which had not been used before. And because that had been worked out, there became, over the years, a kind of representational imperative in painting that you had, once you could do that, you had to do it, in Western art. And that was in many ways a wonderful thing. And it allowed enormous advances in... in telling people what the world looked like, and showing what it looked like. Not only just repertorily, but emotionally too. But it wasn't the only way. And because of this representational imperative, it seemed to me that, in a curious way, art began to bog down in the 19th Century, as witnessed, for instance... the French Academy and Bouguereau and people like that, they didn't... they were very slick and very beautiful and they showed life, but they... things began to... it began to be kind of a dead end.
But fortunately... and this is how... an example of how technology changes art: fortunately the invention of photography came along and took over this representational imperative, and it was a job that you could do much better than painting could, because there was no intervening human hand. It was just light, lens, and the object. And there was no way that the painter could intervene. He was unnecessary. He was gone, like a... like a wood engraver. And that freed art to go whooshing down the Impressionists, Fauvists, abstract... whatever road it wanted to. It does not mean that painting, that, you know, representational imagery could not be in painting. It still can and still is, and will always be. It just didn't have to be. It gave painting more freedom.
Well, I suggest that, because we are so surrounded by imagery of all sorts, with, you know, 500 channels on television and advertising, and everything all around us, that we are so saturated with representational imagery that we can now... the mass mind of the... at least the Western world, will begin to accept less rigidly representational imagery in visual storytelling. And that you can... now you can... you should be able to begin with... and certainly with video you can, to make the visual imagery that we use in storytelling more... freer, more... more able to represent overt emotions in... because of the colors, the framing, the how the image breaks up. You should... we should have far more freedom. Or we can begin to explore freedom in visual storytelling. And if I were young, and starting out, I would very much try to do that. I would... that's what I would passionately try to do. And, by God, I think that the... the human mind, in the sort of... the abstract of the, you know, middle class Western world – be it in America or Europe or whatever – would be begin to accept it. Because they're so saturated in imagery that they don't need this... this hammering of... of perspective and clarity. They don't anymore. And then I think they would begin to... and sometimes there is the beginnings of it; you see it every once in a while.
There's a curious movie called, I think, Greenvale [sic] or something, by a rock and roller, or an aging rock and roller... now my mind's just gone; wait a minute. Neil Young. Neil Young. Did you see it? It's called Greenwood. Greenwood. Greenvale. Greenwood. I thought it was Greenvale. Well he shot it on Super 8 handheld camera, and it looks like... it's kind of wonderful. And it doesn't, it's not, it's barely realistic. It's all Super 8 so when it's blown up it looks like Seurat. It looks like Pointillism, but it's moving Pointillism. And it's utterly convincing. Curious... I mean, I went to see it only because I wanted to see what Super 8 looked like. I didn't think I would last 10 minutes through it and, by God, I sat through it. And I was kind of fascinated. And it's all... what it really is... is an album of songs and the people in the movie lip-sync the songs. And it's quite curious, but it works. And it doesn't pretend to be realistic, at all. And it was a sort of step by this sort of goofy guy that I remember from The Last Waltz, with the big... Well, never mind. And, you know, it works. He... this guy did something that was really... really new and really exiting and not realistic. And that's where... that's one of the directions that lie in the future. You know that, I'm sure – that all sorts of things... I don't begin to think that I know the answer to any of this stuff, but I think there are many more, especially so because there are so many outlets and the Internet and all that stuff, that we can begin to really just let loose, and don't be held back by... by this representational imperative that has hung over us for so long. Especially in things like the Internet where everything you look at is no more than, what is it, 5 x 6, or something in size. You can do anything you want, you know.
 First of all you're not going to have... I mean, it's going to dictate that you don't want to have big wide shots. A big wide shot on a... a... your computer, you know – it's the Himalayas, you don't know what it is; it's just sort of there. Most of it's going to be tighter stuff. Those are dictated... those choices of imagery are dictated by technology, if you're going to the Internet. But let it... this is a sort of plea to people. Let loose! Just do it! My God! You know, think of... think of Impressionism, think... think of Picasso, think of anything. Think of, you know, I don't know what, but think of the most abstract stuff you can possibly get away with, and try it and see what happens. Because I think, also, that with the Internet and stuff as a... as a form of distribution, I don't think you need millions of dollars anymore, or billions of dollars; you really don't. I think there's all sorts of things that can be done that... home movies... the equivalent of home movies can be put out there for the world to see. And I would very much try that, if I were... if I were not an old fart, I would.

I am very fond of Haskell and admire him and I feel that he has put his money where his mouth is. He really has. It's also true to a certain extent that only the very rich can behave as though the revolution had already taken place. And, unfortunately, that doesn't apply to me. Haskell has... has really, genuinely, worked for years and years. He's also done, you know, all sorts of regular... regular studio movies, just as I have. We've all done... In fact, he directed... he shot a movie that my wife directed. And has done any number of... did a wonderful... what was that wonderful movie about Woody Guthrie... what is it... Bound for Glory. That's... that’s quite... he did a marvelous job on that, and that has a wonderful kind of political agenda and everything. But it was mostly just beautifully shot. The railroad stuff in it is gorgeously shot. I always meant to talk to him about that, because it's... they really let David Carradine jump off freight cars and walk on the top of freight cars. I don't know how they got... how they got insurance for it, or maybe they just did it. Maybe they didn't really understand how dangerous it was, but the... the railroad footage of just bumming around the country is extraordinary. And Haskell is very much to be praised for it. It's gorgeous at... at sunset with the light shining through the open doors of the cars as they go through so that it'll be light, dark, light, dark, light, dark, as the freight cars go past. It's beautiful, beautiful stuff. And, as I say, very dangerous. And they... they let David Carradine just climb up and down the sides of the cars. I don't know how they did it, but it's wonderful. And it has a genuine political content. I... as a cameraman, it's just... I mean, you can choose what you... what projects you take on, but beyond that there's not really a lot of... there's not really a lot... you know, you can't do left-wing photography, as far as I know. Maybe you can; I don't know. If it is, I don't know what it is. There's only subject matter that you're allowed to look at and you can look at it that way.
I'm very proud to say that... when in... in All the Right Moves, after it came out, the producer... no, a producer of another movie who was a friend of mine, told... how do I tell this? Well, I don't want to mention the names, so I won't mention any. But told a very big time actor, who was a friend of his and was looking for a director for a movie, that he should look at All the Right Moves, and the actor, who was quite a sophisticated guy, did. And, after he looked at it he said to the producer, who was a friend of mine... he said, ‘What are Chapman's politics?’ So something... and this producer told him what my politics were. So something of that came through in All the Right Moves. I'm very proud to say that. Happy of it. Beyond that, the politics of the world dictate what movies are going to be like and in what country, surely. I mean, very brutally they do. And I don't know that... I mean, underground filmmakers and filmmakers, in opposition to whatever the leadership of that country may be, manage to do things. And certainly in things like occupied France or Russia, filmmakers – not necessarily cameramen, but filmmakers in general – managed... I think sometimes brilliantly, and exactly because of the restraints of censorship and the regime looking down over their shoulders, managed to do some of their very best and most subversive work, because they have to... are forced to think so hard about how to get around the censorship and around the overt holding in of what they want to say, that they often... they offer a great example of the truest poetry is the most feigning. And we never had that opportunity.
An old friend of mine... long dead now but a guy I worked with when I was an assistant cameraman, was a French cameraman named Jean Bourgoin. He had an Academy Award for, I think, The Longest Day... Academy Award nomination really for The Longest Day. And he shot Orfeo Negre, the great movie in Brazil. I once travelled around South America with him doing a whole series of commercials for an American company, because I could speak French and so they had me. And he was a marvelous guy. And he told me that the most exciting time in his life, in terms of work, was during the German occupation of France because they had to think so hard of how to get around the censor that they did their very best work, you know. But we never had that kind of... I mean, alas, we never had that kind of overt thing hanging over us here, and so we never got to do that. You know, Western artists and things often feel a kind of secret envy for their... for their equivalents in Russia under... in the days of Stalin, because at least they were taken very seriously. They were taken so seriously they would be shot, you know. Nobody ever shot us.

We can afford to be sentimental about how wonderful it would have been to be a painter or a poet in Russia, but they killed them; they actually killed them. There's nothing sentimental about that. You know, they took all those people off and sent them to the Gulag and killed them. So I think in the end it's probably better to be unrecognized and treated as a trashy old cameraman here than to be a... you know, Osip Mandelstam. Osip Mandelstam did not come to a good end. However brave and wonderful he may have been, I don't think I would've liked to die in the Gulag, you know. So yes... in one way, yes, how wonderful it is to have your art be so meaningful that repressive regimes want to send you to the Gulag. On the other hand, how unpleasant to be sent to the Gulag. And so it balances out either way. But as far as Haskell goes, Haskell put his money where his mouth is, and he's always done these things on the side. Like the long thing that's still going on about the bus strike and stuff like that, which is wonderful stuff, and good for... good for Haskell. Good for Haskell, indeed. But, as I say, it is true also that only the very rich can afford to behave as though the revolution had already taken place.

I would like to be a really good cook. I don't know that I'd do in terms of movies much so much anymore. I want very... I'm very interested in cooking. I would really like to... I'd begun to be pretty good at cert... at a few things. Also, I'd like to have... I know this sounds silly but, in fact, I feel just as strongly as I did about movies: I would... want to get to our place on the Vineyard so I can get my vegetable garden started. I very much want to have a really good vegetable garden. And one of the nicest things about the place we have on the island of Martha's Vineyard is the food. Especially the seafood. I mean, you can go out... you can just get up in the morning and go down at low tide and dig the clams you want yourself, and come home and steam them and make clam spaghetti, with your own tomatoes and your own garlic, and... it's not your own olive oil, but everything else is your own stuff, right there, and it's... let me tell you: it's nice. It’s... that's art, you know. It's just... it's very much art. It's just art that unfortunately is... is perishable because you eat it, so you don't... it doesn't stay around, but, I mean, it's the real thing. It’s... and I'm very interested in that.  [Q] How did you, like, get into the culinary...  I would like... what?  [Q] How did you get into... just like... Yeah.  Oh, just by living and eating, you know. And slowly... for instance, when we were here earlier, instead of having my wife make tea for us all, we all went out and made our own tea. And we made... you put in as much honey as you wanted, and I put in rather more honey than you did, I suspect. I put in milk; you didn't put in milk. And everyone begins, as they go through life, to have their own very particular needs and... and things that please them. And I... my wife's an excellent cook, and all sorts of people have been good cooks in my life, but I began, as time went on, to have very particular tastes of my own that only I could satisfy. So now I make, for instance, curried turnips with... with some tomatoes and raisins and, oh, a lot of curry, and you mix it with rice, and it's just right for me, you know. And I have a specific way of making rice. I don't use water; I use vegetable broth to... to cook it in. Even though I'm a vegetarian, I cheat and I put in a little chicken broth, but I don't tell. I'm only... I'm only revealing that to the world now. But, it's 80 or 90... 75 or 80% vegetable broth, but a little chicken broth does make some difference, and some... well, never mind, I'm not going to go into it... but you know, I have very particular tastes, and I love to... I mean it's totally selfish, but I love to gratify them.
And on the Vineyard, we can... we live in terms of food, I mean, it's ridiculous. You can't... you can’t... in no restaurant in the world can you get the kind of food that we can just go out and harvest. I mean, I can go out and catch some blue fish, or a striper, or whatever, and can bring them home and cook them, right then, you know. And with... once I can get there and get it going, with the stuff from our own garden. As far as culinary life, it's ridiculous that it's so nice. And pick wild blueberries and... wild blueberries, by the way, are one of the great things of the world and they're disappearing like wild trout and that stuff. This is nothing to do with cinematography, but it's important. It's art. It's really art. Wild blueberries, which are a native American crop, have slowly been subverted by high-bush blueberries and commercially grown blueberries, which don't taste at all like the real ones. You have to go to Maine, where... particularly the part of Maine where my ancient mother lives, where the wild blueberries... wild low-bush blueberries are still grown and harvested. They're a completely different fruit. They don't taste the same at all. Just like wild trout in streams don't taste like hatchery trout. And very soon the world is not going to know what wild eastern brook trout taste like, because they'll have disappeared. Partly from the blueberry barons because they use now... now they use all kinds of chemicals to keep the herbicides and things... to keep the other stuff down, and it goes into the streams and kills the trout, and you can't catch the wild trout anymore, so there are only going to be hatchery-raised trout. Just as there will increasingly be only hatchery-raised salmon, and hatchery-raised salmon doesn't taste the same at all as wild Atlantic salmon. And pretty soon the world is not going to know what wild trout, or wild blueberries, or wild salmon, actually taste like. And that is a great loss, let me tell you!
When I was a kid, my father and I used to walk down to a stream in Chamberlain, Maine, and catch 8, 10 inch trout for breakfast, you know... 6, 8, 10. Just come back and then clean them and eat them. And it's one of the great culinary delights of the world... of the world! And you can't do that anymore, just about. A few places you can. There's one place on the Vineyard that still has some wild trout that are not... that have always been there. And I and a few other people know where to go, and so I occasionally go get... just... you know. But, just about, you can't do it. It's very sad that that's disappearing from the world. Very, very sad, I think. And that my children's children will never know what those things tasted like. And that has nothing to do with cinematography. No, but we were just finding out what your passions were, and that's interesting. But if you were asking what passion absolutely inspires me now, yes.
And I'd like to go back to painting and drawing too, and try. I'm never going to be that good at it, but I'd like to try, really, again without... with just being there by myself. I can't seem to paint in California much; I don't know why. The light's different, or something. But I can paint back there, partly because that's where I grew up, in New England, and it reminds me of my childhood. I would like to go back to really working reasonably diligently at painting and drawing. I still draw a lot but I don't... I don't paint much anymore. And I would like to try that. That stuff very much interests me, makes... I want to do as much... more, I think, than I want to do cinematography anymore. I've pretty much done what I can do, you know. Unless I could get into a whole new world of what you were talking about... pixel camera? Pixel. And that sort of stuff. That would interest me enormously. But nobody's going to hire me to do that, you know. And I'm not going to... And I don't know how to do it myself enough. I mean, I know how to do it myself, but I don't know how to do it in any way that was distributable.

I'd love to do a werewolf movie... very much like to. I have... I have a sort of a bad script but a good idea for a werewolf movie that takes place in the Caribbean. I'd like to do that. One from the... done from the werewolf's point of view... the werewolves are the good guys. I want very much to do... oh, this is a kind of plea, I guess. I very much want to do a women-in-prison movie. I want to do a women-in-prison movie that is shot... probably on video, cheesy, 60mm black and white, or video, and that has... that is like an exploitation movie, with naked shower scenes, and... and women with sweaty clothes bending over and having their clothes cling to them, and really just as cheesy as that can be. And yet, every once in a while, when the proper time comes, it would turn to glorious beautiful Technicolor and they would lip-sync great girl-group songs from the '50s and '60s, you know – ‘Mr. Postman, look and see, is there a letter, a letter for me’, and thinking of all of those songs... songs of the Shirelles and people like that. And then it would go back to being a cheesy, women-in-prison movie. I want very much to do that. If somebody would give me some money to do that, I would do that in a second. And... because this is... girl groups are... girl group songs from the late '50s and '60s are extraordinarily powerful and have not been studied or given their due. And what they are is a form of religious allegory in everyday life, in a curious way. Not, I think, Christian religion, but the last movie I did, we worked for a week at the end in Paris.
I had one day off and I was wondering through the Louvre and I came upon a section of Greek and Roman sculpture. And I saw a life-size sculpture of the three Graces, who were beautiful, lovely, staggeringly beautiful nude women, and I realized they were a girl group. And, in fact, girl groups are pre-Christian religious allegory in everyday life. They really are. They're... they're songs sung to whatever deity it is that they are trying to evoke at the time. And this is a perfect example of the truest poetry is the most feigning. If I could do that as a... as a cheesy, exploitation, women in prison movie. So if anybody wants to do that, please, I'm your man. Other than that, I want to do... I would like to go back to painting and I very much want to grow vegetables and catch fish and cook them and eat them. And I will be doing that in a few weeks, I hope. I can't tell you how good clam spaghetti is when you've dug your own clams and chopped up your own garlic and some onions, a little... a little olive oil, and, oh God, it's really nice.
