murray.gell-mann

New York-born physicist Murray Gell-Mann (1929-2019) was known for his creation of the eightfold way, an ordering system for subatomic particles, comparable to the periodic table.  His discovery of the omega-minus particle filled a gap in the system, brought the theory wide acceptance and led to Gell-Mann's winning the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1969.

My father, who was an immigrant from what was then Austria – the Austrian half of Austria-Hungary, grew up...
[Q] Where was that actually?
He grew up in the extreme east, right near the Russian border, very close to the Russian border. And then he went to high school, to the gymnasium in the city then called Czernowitz – later called Cernăuți under the Romanians. Then it was incorporated into the Ukrainian part of the Soviet Union and it’s now part of Ukraina, Ukraine... and there it’s… nowadays I think it's called something like Chernivsti.
He then went to the University of Vienna, in the very early years of this century. He went there for a year – the course was three years; second year he spent in Germany, I think in Heidelberg, because at that time you could interchange attendance at an Austrian or German university very easily. And then  the third year he was to have come back and finished his studies at the University of Vienna, and then he wanted to be a gymnasium teacher, perhaps a teacher of philosophy or something of that kind. He didn't do that though because his parents, having suffered financial reverses, saw no alternative but to go to the United States where you could get an ordinary job... and so his parents had left and were living in New York, and they were still in trouble. I think his father was ill and they didn't have much money and they needed help from him, and so they asked him to come to the United States, which he did after two years of the three-year course at the university.
He arrived in Philadelphia where he worked in an orphan asylum, what would now be called an orphanage, I guess, and he learned English and baseball from the… from the orphans. And he learned English perfectly even though he was an adult; he never made any mistakes, he didn't have a foreign accent...but as I wrote in my book, you could tell that he was a foreigner because he never made mistakes. He spoke very pedantic English and he gave... later on, of course, he made a career giving lessons in English to immigrants and lessons in German to Americans – but that was much later. He... I don't know when he arrived in Philadelphia... 1908 maybe, something like that, and then he went to New York to join his parents, a few years later, a couple of years later.

My mother… thought that she was born in New York of immigrant parents but, it turned out…when she was over 40, in 1940, just before the United States got into the Second World War, she discovered that she was actually born in Austria… part of Austria-Hungary, and she had to be quickly naturalized. Of course she'd voted in several elections and so on. The thing was taken care of very easily and she became a citizen without any problems, which is a good thing because the war was just ahead.

My father was very interested in intellectual things in certain domains, certain carefully restricted domains, but he loved mathematics, physics, astronomy and related subjects. He was very impressed with the work of Einstein on special and general relativity and kept trying to understand it, and...
[Q] So was that talked about in the house? I mean was that the atmosphere of, of sort of dinner time conversations, or...? 
Yes, we discussed… we discussed the stars, we discussed the planets, we discussed things of that kind. My older brother, though, was the one with whom I interacted the most. He was nine years older. His name is Benedict, now called Ben, and… I learned almost everything I learned, when I was a child, from him. And he had an additional set of interests in nature, and in art and in history and in literature and so on and so on. It went beyond what I think we would have discussed otherwise just with my father.

Very early on, when I was only five or so, I started to go out birdwatching with him. We… I grew up in Manhattan mostly, on Manhattan Island in New York where I was born, but for a while during the Depression we lived in the Bronx where the rents were lower, right near the Bronx Zoo. And just north of the Bronx Zoo is the tiny remaining area of Hemlock Forest, the original Hemlock Forest that covered the whole area before the Europeans arrived. And… my brother and I regarded New York as a Hemlock Forest that had been over-logged. We spent a lot of time then in this little piece of the forest that was still there. And… it was not only birds that interested us; we collected butterflies, we studied herbs and trees, herbs, bushes and trees, flowering plants in general. And it was just very exciting to learn to recognize all these things and to recognize their associations, and to know if you came to a certain area what kind of bird you would likely hear singing there, and so on and so forth.
 

I was very interested in archaeology, and my early reading was in… largely in ancient history and archaeology. My brother taught me to read when I was about three. We started with a Sunshine Crackerbox in the apartment of our cousins, the Walkers… and before long I was reading ancient history and learning about archaeology, and I dreamt of being an archaeologist, learning about ancient cultures and ancient languages and perhaps discovering new ones, ones new to science and that sort of thing. And so at that time I began to have what was a lifelong interest in a great many subjects. Oh, by the way – another thing was etymology, my father had a couple of books on etymology of English words.
[Q] Was your father teaching languages at that time? Was that the time he had a language school?
No. He had a language school before I was born. He tried a number of things after the orphan asylum. He worked on Wall Street for a while. He was there in fact when that huge explosion took place in 1920, I think it was, 1919 or 1920… a huge explosion in front of the Morgan Bank. He was in an office right across the street and – the way he told the story – two pieces of plate glass from the window blew by him, one on each side. Either one would probably have killed him. Then he worked for a toy importer and… he also, when he was younger, took a course in pharmaceutical chemistry at Columbia and completed the course. I saw his drawings and copies of slides and all these things that he used for the courses…
[Q] So, so you grew up…
...amazingly, amazingly industrious and careful and… but he lacked $5.00 for the fee, the graduation fee, and so he didn't get his pharmaceutical chemistry certificate. Sometimes I think only a European could have done that. I can't imagine anyone born in this country failing to achieve something like that through lacking a $5.00 fee. But anyway, he finally ended up with the language school. He taught English to immigrants, trying to get rid of their accents and improve their grammar and so on and so forth. And… and he taught German, then he hired teachers for some other subjects.

I was very interested in etymology, and I still am. I'm very interested in history of languages and the relationships of languages... extremely interested. And... all of these subjects resemble one another a little bit in that they deal with... areas in which individuality is very important, diversity is very important, evolutionary processes are very important, evolutionary trees of one sort or another are very important.
[Q] Now I can now see your passion for Santa Fe Institute, which we'll talk about later, but I can see that the groundwork was laid very early. Could you say anything about... religion and politics? Was that a theme in your household or growing up?
Religion certainly was not much of a theme...politics, yes... liberal, even left wing politics, but my father was very sceptical about Stalin and... the Stalinist branch of... socialism. He realised that the... Soviet communists had... done a lot to industrialize the country rapidly – of course there’s no assurance that it couldn’t have been industrialized better and faster under capitalism, which was just taking hold... when the First World War broke out. But... he recognized that, but he... he was very... sceptical about the... the lack of freedom in the... in the... the Soviet Union.

The influence of my mother was important, too, because she was very interested in promoting my... my future career. And she was... unlike my father, she was a very positive person. She had been bright when she was a girl and passed her high school courses with very good grades, but when I knew her she seemed to know very little. I don't quite understand how that happened, it may have been the result of some mental aberration, because she did show some, later on, some symptoms of mental illness, and this ignorance or even occasional stupidity may have been... connected with that, because... from every indication she was quite bright when she was a girl. But what was very positive about her was that she liked me and believed in me, and... wanted me to have a great career some day. And so she pursued various things, but particularly trying to get me into a private school with a full scholarship, because my father's language school started to fail just when I was born. The... stock market crash came a few weeks after I was born. The very drastic immigration law went into effect at the same... about the same time, and... both of those ended up seriously threatening the school that my father ran, the school of languages, so that within a few years the income had fallen virtually to zero. And it wasn't until 1933 that he got his job in a bank, which he kept until he retired. Very... it was a job at a very low salary. So we had very little money and I could go to a private school only if I had a full scholarship. Well she didn't succeed somehow, she dragged me to one school after another and I took lots of tests – I never knew what was going on, but... but finally a music teacher... had some... connection with somebody who had a connection with the Columbia Grammar School... or Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School if you want to use the longer name. And... in 1937 I got in there with a full scholarship, and they put me in the sixth grade so that I was... three years younger than most of the other students. And I stayed there until I graduated from high school. I stayed for seven years: 1937 to 1944. And... it was when I was admitted there that we moved back to Manhattan, in fact just across the street from the school.

I had one very exciting teacher, Dow Bunyan Beene, called Doc Beene, because he was a Doctor of Divinity. He was, I think a Baptist minister from Georgia who had lost his faith in the divinity and was now a... a hard-drinking teacher who... talked a lot about sex also in the classes, and... he was wonderful. He was genuinely devoted to intellectual things. His... his subjects were Latin and Greek. The Columbia Grammar School had been known for Greek during the 19th century when Charles Anthon was the headmaster – he founded the American Numismatic Society and he was a famous Professor of Greek at Columbia, who wrote the textbook that most American children used for learning elementary Greek in the middle 19th century. But although that was a tradition, at that moment they didn't teach Greek. But he gave courses in Latin, and then he was used also to teach algebra, French, English and so on, whatever... whatever was needed. But I took Latin with him and I loved Latin anyway, it was particularly amusing to study it, in Doc Beene's class. Any question, any intellectual question, any question about fact or interpretation was exciting for him. And instead of giving some off-hand reply – probably wrong like most teachers – he would try to find out what the answer was. He would say, ‘Well, I don't know that. Why don't you go to the library, quickly look it up somewhere and then report back what you find?’ No matter what the question was, if he couldn't answer it. He was splendid.

I had already tried to study physics because... I tried to study all the subjects at home first, long before I learnt them in school, and I tried to study physics and I just couldn't get interested in what they called elementary physics. And the course in school...
[Q] Inclined planes and...
Terrible. The seven kinds of simple machine: the inclined plane, the screw, the pulley and... and we had to calculate mechanical advantage by counting strings on pulleys and... it was really... it seemed so silly. Then the course mentioned and discussed a little bit of different phenomena: light, heat, wave motion, electricity, magnetism, and so on. But it didn't hint that these were all connected somehow, or most of them were connected somehow. They were all different subjects, and that struck me as extremely peculiar.

When I filled out the application form for Yale, I consulted my father – not something that I usually did but in this case I did – and… I said, ‘There's a blank here for… the probable for the major subject. What do you think?’ And my father said, ‘Well, what were you going to put down?’ I said, ‘Well, if they permit it, I would like to put down linguistics or archaeology, something of that kind. Or maybe some form of... some kind of biology that's related to natural history’. What I meant really was evolutionary biology. He said, ‘Oh that's absurd – you'll starve!’ because he was so much influenced by the Depression and the problems that he had had in providing for his family. It was only for a very few years when the school flourished that he was… that he felt at all secure financially. And that ended just when I was born... I said, ‘Well, what do you think… what do you think I should put down?’ He said, ‘Engineering, then you'll be able to earn a living’. I said, ‘Well, I don't like engineering. I'm not good at it. If I designed something it would fall apart, and besides I really don't like it. I'd rather starve than be an engineer’. So he said, ‘Well, why don't we compromise on physics?’ And then I explained what I thought about the physics course, physics textbooks and physics courses that I had… with which I had come into contact, and he said, ‘Oh, it'll get much better. You don't understand, advanced physics will include relativity and quantum mechanics, and those are beautiful subjects and you'll love them’. So I thought, well, why don't I just write down physics and please the old man. If I'm actually admitted to Yale, if I really receive the one scholarship that would permit me to attend Yale – the Medill McCormick Scholarship – then I can look into this matter again and I can always change my mind when I get to Newhaven, and major in… use as a major subject whatever I want. But then I was admitted to Yale and I did get that one scholarship that would permit me to attend and when I got there I was too lazy to switch. So I took physics courses and pretty soon I got to quantum mechanics and relativity and my father was absolutely right, they were very exciting.

Good teachers are so very rare that it's worth mentioning. This was Henry Margenau, who died only very recently. He lived to be 97 or something like that. And he was a very good teacher. He taught a course that was called something like Philosophical Foundations of Physics or something of that sort, I forget the exact name, but... through calling it philosophy he was able to present very advanced material, which otherwise might not have been considered suitable for sophomores or juniors or whatever.
[Q] Was that… he wrote this book Nature of Physical Reality...
Well, that was later...
[Q] Which was later, but it..?
...this was Margenau and Murphy… no, was it? Wait a minute, was it..?
[Q] Margenau and Murphy was the Mathematical...
No, that was Mathematical Method, so it wasn't that...
[Q] But he had written this book later and I wondered if that… 
Maybe it was Margenau…
[Q]… that sort of was the text...?
…maybe it was Margenau. I really can't remember whether it was by him alone or by him and Murphy, but either way what happened… the way the course went was the following: he would say, ‘Now, we’re going to do… right at the beginning… we're going to do Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics. Now, you all know the calculus of variations, don't you?’ And everybody looked blank. And he said, ‘Well, they haven't taught you the calculus of variations? What do they do in your math classes? They must waste your time with epsilons and deltas. Why don't they teach you the calculus of variations? I can't understand’.
[Q] He is a man after our own hearts! 
Of course, exactly, exactly. ‘Can't understand why they would waste your time with that stuff instead of teaching you the calculus of variations. Well’, he said, ‘It's not a problem. On Tuesday we will learn the calculus of variations, and on Thursday we will begin Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics, and we'll do it on Thursday, Saturday and the following Tuesday’. Something like that, and that was plenty. And he did discuss the philosophical foundations. For example, he showed us how the principles – the principle of least time, the principle of least action, and so on – were… appeared to be teleological, the physical laws appeared to be teleological, they appeared to be heading toward the objective of satisfying the principle of least action and so on. But, he said, since they're mathematically equivalent to Newton's differential equations, now there is no problem. They're not teleological, they are in fact just progression from one instant of time to the next. And by bringing in these very simple philosophical lessons he stuck to the promise of the course while actually telling us a lot of very interesting material about actual physics. Then he went on to the next subject, which was… well, I don't know, he covered many subjects, but one of them was special relativity which took, I think, two days, and then general relativity. And when he got to general relativity, he asked the same question, he said, ‘You all know tensor analysis, I assume’. We said, no, we don't. He said, ‘Well, what do they do in those math classes? Why don't they teach you tensor analysis instead of all those stupid epsilons and deltas?’ And he said, ‘Well, that’s not a problem. Tuesday and Thursday we'll do tensor analysis and then we'll do general relativity’. And that's exactly the way it worked, and general relativity took only a few days, and he made some wise philosophical remarks about general relativity as well, while teaching us the actual stuff, the actual equations. And then he went on to quantum mechanics and he did the same thing with quantum mechanics. He said, ‘I assume you know Sturm-Liouville theory?’ We said no. He said, ‘Well, what do they teach you in those math classes?’ Then he said, ‘No problem, we'll do Sturm-Liousville theory, and then we'll do vector spaces and then we'll do quantum mechanics’. And that's what he did, and he showed us wave mechanics and matrix mechanics and how they're equivalent and so on, which was very nice.
[Q] So he gave… he gave a complete survey basically, of all the... 
… of the advanced ideas of modern physics…
[Q]…modern physics..?
…of the advanced ideas of… well, he didn't do quantum field theory or, and he didn't cover peculiar particles like the neutrino, anti-matter. Those were the things I read about in science fiction stories. That was another entrée by the way, through reading science fiction I became acquainted with the idea of anti-matter, which my courses never discussed. And neutrinos...
[Q] Do you mean at Yale you never learnt about anti-matter… no one taught a course about Dirac and..? Interesting.
And I asked the graduate students whether they had ever heard about neutrinos or anti-matter, and they said no. But of course, Yale was a backwater.

Gregory Breit arrived from Wisconsin, and he was supposed to bring the latest in physics and I, as an undergraduate, I took his graduate courses, but he was so strange. He was very bright, Breit. Breit was very bright, but he was extremely strange, psychotic really. And it was very difficult to deal with him. He permitted no questions. If anyone asked a question he left the room and wouldn't come back until some of his students that he had brought with him from Wisconsin went out into the hall and begged him to return, saying, ‘Well, these Yale students don't understand the rules, they don't understand how wrong it is to ask a question, and they promise never to ask any more questions. Please, come back and teach some more’. Then he would come back and teach. Another thing that wasn't permitted was reading books. Sometimes after class, when it was permitted to ask a question, someone would ask him a question, and he would say, ‘I can tell! You've read a book!’ For example Bethe's Little Book [of Scientific Principles] was forbidden and… another thing you mustn't do was to learn about general relativity. He said it was very bad for young students to learn about general relativity. They get all sorts of big ideas and they want to combine general relativity with quantum mechanics and so on and so on, and they get led off into paths that lead nowhere. They… they go off on paths that lead nowhere and it’s very bad. And so, if anybody asked him a question connected with general relativity, he flew into a rage. A very strange man.
[Q] So by the time you graduated there, did you feel you were a physicist? 
Well, I didn't know, I didn't… no, no I certainly didn't feel I was a physicist. My father had always filled me with this idea that really understanding things was way in the future, because he had struggled so hard to understand Einstein and so on and so forth, and he gave me the impression that these things were very difficult. Just the opposite of Margenau who said they were all very easy – and showed us that they were all very easy.
 [Q] So that must have been very important, I mean Margenau's role seems like it was extremely important in your development.
And who were the other students in that class? Paul MacCready, my best friend, Harold Morowitz, whom I see all the time now at the Santa Fe Institute, and so on.

Well, the war of course impoverished the teaching staff because they were… many of them were off to war. Margenau was not. Leigh Page was around – he wasn't off to the war, so I took his course, his graduate courses and so on. But the war ended rather soon. I mean the war ended only less than a year… just under a year after I arrived at Yale, and then people started drifting back from their wartime jobs. But still Yale was very weak in modern physics, modern theoretical physics, and relied on Gregory Breit to supply that, but Gregory Breit was so strange that it wasn't quite satisfactory.
[Q] And so you graduated in ’48?
Yes.
[Q] An…  and then you ultimately went to MIT.
I… I should have graduated in January ’48, and I discussed with people at the university whether to graduate in June ’47 or June ’48, because I didn't want to graduate in January, it didn't seem to me sensible. Because of the war system, I had finished my courses by January. They suggested that I graduate a term early and get a Henry Fellowship to Cambridge, but it was a day late for applying to the Henry Fellowship, and they wouldn't compromise. So then the scholarship office gave me a scholarship for the ninth… for the ninth term.

They suggested that, as long as I was there, that I do something that they wanted, namely, to write a letter of thanks to the unknown benefactor who had set up the Medill McCormick scholarship. And I tried to do that, but I couldn't do it because I associated those names with the extreme right wing family of Bertie McCormick, the owner and publisher of the Chicago Tribune, and Joseph Medill Patterson of the New York Daily News who had similar views. I felt that these people were more or less on the wrong side in the war, and was very upset at the idea of thanking some member of that family for this scholarship without at the same time complaining about it. At that time, I had left-wing views which dissipated about a year later, or maybe a few months later, but I still had them at this moment, and I… I found it very hard to write the letter and in the end I didn't write it. Then, 30 years later in a garden in Aspen Colorado, I met Treenie Barnes, Katrina McCormick Barnes, who now lives near here in Santa Fe, a wonderful, wonderful woman, and I found out that she was the unknown benefactor. And she hated Bertie McCormick, she hated everything that whole crew stood for, and when her parents died and she inherited a portion of the fortune she didn't want to have anything to do with it. She hired a secretary and rented an office and gave it all away. And one thing she gave it for was the Medill McCormick scholarship, named in honor of her dead brother who died as a very young man, a boy in fact, and didn't have a chance to go to the university.
[Q] Did… what about..?
If I had sent that letter complaining about politics she would have loved it.

I took a course in ornithology, I took a course in archaeology with Irvin Rowse, I took courses in various other things, a sprinkling of various things, a lot of history courses. Those worked very well. History courses with Hajo Hoborn and Dunham's course in English constitutional history, which was very good. I loved that. But I didn't succeed in… somehow in connecting up with what I was really excited about.
[Q] Which… which was?
Well the… the kind of approach to archaeology, linguistics —­  oh, I took a couple of linguistics courses too  — but the… the kind of approach to archaeology, linguistics, biology and so on that would have made me happy somehow was not, didn't seem to be in these courses. I couldn't define it very well, but…  
[Q] So it was..?
It somehow… I found them somehow un… mostly unsatisfying. The only thing I did pick up, in the bacteriology course that Harold Morowitz and I both took, there I began to pick up the modern synthesis in biology, and that I found very exciting; that is, the combination of genetics and evolution that constitutes the modern synthesis in biology. I understood that and I loved it, and I started to write an essay, which I never completed, on cancer, arguing that cancer probably consisted mostly of somatic mutations, distinct from germ cell mutations, and that… and so on and so forth. And, of course, it was quite right, but my friends with whom I discussed it couldn't see that there was much point in saying this and so I never finished it.
[Q] So do you see your involvement now with, for example, the Santa Fe Institute and so on, your helping to create that, as a fruition of that desire that you first felt at Yale, that you weren't getting fed at Yale? 
Yes, yes, to a great extent, yes. Not so much what goes on at the Santa Fe Institute, but what the visitors…
[Q] No, but I mean the ideas.
… what the visitors to the Santa Fe Institute do, and some of what goes on at the Santa Fe Institute. Like your work with Jim Brown, for example, that is just the kind of thing I was hoping for, and somehow didn't find in those courses. They were not so elementary, they were undergraduate courses, but they were relatively advanced undergraduate courses. I stayed away from the… from the freshman survey courses in just about all subjects. I didn't like them, I felt I knew most of the material already and it wasn't very exciting. So I took somewhat more advanced courses in these things, but still I just didn't… didn't find them exciting, as exciting as I expected.

I was impressed with the Ivy League, and so my preference was for some graduate school in the Ivy League. Princeton was supposed to be a wonderful place for theoretical physics, and Harvard was supposed to be very good, so those were the two places I wanted to go. I would have considered also staying at Yale, although I knew that Harvard and Princeton were probably better for modern theoretical physics. I talked with Ernie Pollard, the nuclear physicist on the faculty, who was a Fellow of my college and, I think, a graduate of Cambridge, and he suggested Michigan as a good place. So I thought of applying to Michigan; I'm not sure if I actually got around to filling out the application, but I did, I know I did apply to Harvard and Princeton, and Yale. But there was a problem. I had signed up for a senior essay with Henry Margenau, but he assigned me a problem in ambipolar diffusion and I understood nothing about how to tackle such a problem, how to make approximations, how to consider data, experimental data in making suitable approximations. Going back and talking with him about suggestions and so on, I had some fantastic idea that what I should do is take the equations and somehow solve them, which was absurd. I had no understanding of what a theoretical physicist would do in such a case. If I had had some understanding, I probably could have done something, or might have been able to do something useful, but I had no idea what the context was for working on such a thing, so I actually didn't do anything. And I think that affected my record very seriously, even though my course grades were very high and I was… I would have been first in my class in science if I had graduated in ’47. In the last year I took a number of very large classes, graded... where the examinations and essays were graded by graduate students and so on, and the marks just didn't get very high in those subjects. So my average went down and I… I paid no attention to things like that, but what happened was my average went down and so I was second in science when I actually graduated in ‘48...
[Q] Who...
 ...but the problem, I think, was the essay, which I hadn't done. Pardon?
[Q] Who was first?
A mathematician.  And so actually these applications were in many cases not so successful. Princeton, I was rejected. Harvard, I was accepted but they didn't offer me a scholarship or, I might have gotten an assistantship but they didn't suggest it, they… I presumably would have had to do something myself to get one and I was discouraged. Later on people told me I was refused at Harvard, but that wasn't true, I got a letter… I did get a letter of acceptance from Harvard but no further encouragement to deal with the financial problems. At Yale I was accepted in mathematics although I had applied in physics. The mathematicians loved me, and...
[Q] I mean… without epsilons and deltas?
Well, I'd taken a lot of graduate courses in mathematics and they – the mathematics professors – liked me and they thought I would… would be good in mathematics. I don't know if I would have been good in mathematics or not. The motivation might have been lacking to work on that pure mathematics, but… but anyway they liked me, they admitted me to graduate school, but the physicists didn't. The physics department at Yale didn't admit me to graduate school, presumably because of this essay matter, at least, that's what I assume. I've never seen the documents. Years later I gave a lecture at Princeton University and I happened to mention on my visit that I hadn't been admitted to graduate school at Princeton. And Arthur Whiteman and Eugene Wigner went over to the Graduate College to look at the records, but my records had disappeared. So we never found out what the problem… we never found out what the problem was.

I had applied to MIT. The application to MIT was a very simple one and I happened to have it and I filled it out and sent it in. I hadn't any intention of going to MIT.
[Q] MIT was known to be a center of modern physics…?
Well, I didn't know that. I just knew it wasn't Ivy League.
[Q] It wasn't a place that you wanted to go to…
It seemed to me kind of grubby.
[Q] Yes.
I imagined it was a grubby place and I didn't really want to go there and then… I got admitted. Not only did I get admitted but I got a letter from Victor Weisskopf saying, ‘We don't have scholarships here that would pay for all your expenses, we understand that that’s what you need, but you could come here and be my assistant. And the pay for that would cover your tuition, your room and board, and whatever you need, and we would very much like you to come’. Well, I was miserable, I was very unhappy, and I seriously thought of suicide. But then it occurred to me, as I've discussed in various publications…
[Q] Why were you so unhappy?
...it occurred to me that I could try MIT first, and then commit suicide, whereas I couldn't do things in the reverse order: if I committed suicide I could not then afterwards try MIT, the… the two operators didn't commute.
[Q] Don't commute.
Exactly. So I talked, had another talk with Professor Pollard, Ernie Pollard, and he said, ‘Oh’, he said, ‘Weisskopf is wonderful! You'll have a great time at MIT. Don't worry at all about it. It’s going to be fine. Just go there and everything will be very good’.
[Q] Why… why were you so unhappy? Because you hadn't gotten into Harvard and..?
I hadn't gotten… well, I did get into Harvard but not…
[Q] I mean, yes, into Princeton and getting the scholarship to Harvard and all the... 
Right, and Yale turned me down, the Yale physics group turned me down and so on.
[Q] Now, was the —  one thing we haven't discussed of course is the fact that you were very young, relatively speaking. 
Well, I had stayed another term so I was… 
[Q] But still, you were still relatively young for incoming graduate students. 
Yeah, it would be just before my 19th birthday that I would go to graduate school.
[Q] That’s right. And did that play any role, do you think, in the way you were viewed or...?
No, I don't think so. I imagine that was probably positive.
[Q] I would have thought so, yes.
I imagine, but of course I can't be sure because I've never seen any of the records. Anyway, MIT was delighted with my application and Viki [Victor Weisskopf] wrote me this splendid letter and after talking with Pollard I decided — yes, I'll go, I'll try it. Why not?

I spent the summer travelling around the country, something I'd never done before. First, I worked in a… a in Rojay Sportswear, folding t-shirts and mailing them to various department stores around the country to earn a little bit of money. And then with two friends, I drove around the West, which I'd never seen. That was marvellous. And in September I went to MIT, and after a week in a depressing boarding house I was admitted to the graduate house, the graduate dormitory, and I found that there were lots and lots of Ivy League people there. And... and lots... I had lots of friends, lots of people I already knew, lots of splendid people that I hadn't known but got to know soon, and Viki [Victor Weisskopf] was wonderful and the whole thing was a very positive experience, despite the fact that the atmosphere was a little grubby.
[Q] How many incoming graduate students were there?
Oh, I don't know. I have no idea.
[Q] And you made obviously very close friends during that period, I mean, are there any names that we can associate with that period?
Well, Bob Noyce was a fellow student. I didn't see much of him much later, but when we were graduate students and just afterwards we saw quite a bit of each other. We walked up Mount Katahdin together, for example, and things of that kind. In later years, I didn't see him very much until finally he came to the Santa Fe Institute, and we resumed our acquaintance and then unfortunately he died.

It was mainly Viki [Victor Weisskopf] and the people in Viki's group, the post-docs and graduate students, those were the people I interacted with. Murph Goldberger came after the first year. He came as a post-doc and I learned a great deal from him and, well I, of course had a very close relationship with him for — a professional relationship — for many years. And I talked with the other post-docs and with the other graduate students and with Viki. That was… those were my main interactions. Herman Feshbach was also on the faculty. He was a protegeé of Viki's, and Viki thought very highly of him, but I never thought he was anywhere near as interesting as Viki.
[Q] How about Morse? Did Morse play any..?
Phil Morse was around… I didn't see much of him. Seemed like a very nice man but I didn't… I didn't see much of him.

The course in mathematical physics was taught by Herman, and one thing I remember about Herman's class, and that is that he assigned one day – and I've written about this also – he assigned one day a problem that consisted of proving by reflection of co-ordinates that parity is conserved. And I spent the weekend on the problem and no matter how I twisted it, I could not prove from mathematics alone that parity was conserved, and so I turned in a little note on Monday that said I don't believe that parity can… parity conservation can be proved by reflection of co-ordinates. It’s a matter of how the Hamiltonian behaves under reflection of co-ordinates and that’s a matter of the laws of physics, and it would be possible, to have… in principle… to have laws of physics that were not symmetrical. The actual electromagnetic theory is symmetrical, but some other theory might not be. So I was not one of those people who thought that parity had to be conserved. And there were others, I discovered. I discovered that Dick Feynman was not particularly impressed with the need to have parity conserved under all conditions, Fermi also, and Dirac. These were all people who felt that parity conservation was a property of certain laws and that you can have others. In fact, if you look back at Fermi's 1934 paper on beta decay you will discover that he adds… that he has a vector interaction for the…  how does it work? A vector interaction for the neutron and proton multiplied… a vector current for the neutron and proton, multiplied by an axial vector current for the electron and neutrino,  something like that.
[Q] I see, so he…
Now, that actually, because of the special properties of the mass-less neutrino and so on, and that actually doesn't have any parity-violating properties because you can transform it into the… into a parity conserving transformation just by defining a new neutrino which is gamma five times the old neutrino. But it indicates that Fermi was paying absolutely no attention to parity, and he never thought that it was a fundamental inviolable principle. So there were a number of people who didn't think it was an inviolable principle. But apart from that, I don't remember learning much from Herman.

What I learnt from Viki [Victor Weisskopf] was mainly an attitude which I've described in a paper that I presented in his honor called 'The Garden of Live Flowers. He kept insisting on a pedestrian approach. Now, a pedestrian approach is not my approach, I like clean mathematical results and elegant demonstrations and so on… and so on. But nevertheless there was part of Viki's style that I was able to benefit from, and that was a sort of unpretentiousness: the idea that you shouldn't try to construct right away, ab initio, the ultimate theory of things. But you should try and learn something... try and learn whatever you can learn about the theory of a process or a phenomenon and then gradually learn more and more and finally putting the pieces together as, say, Maxwell did, you might be able to construct a very fundamental description. And it was that emphasis on the primacy of physical law over mathematical elegance that was the… the main lesson that I learned from Viki. Concentrate on trying to learn something about the physical laws while you're doing your theoretical work, and don't feel that you've made huge progress just because you've written down something that’s mathematically elegant, because what's important is learning more about the phenomenon. So between that and my natural predilection for using formalism, I was able to develop a sort of a compromise approach in which I looked for elegant mathematical aspects of things that could throw light on the physical laws, lead us to learn more about them, and hope that some day these would congeal into a real theory, rather than trying right away to write down the theory. And as I pointed out in that paper, it was very fortunate that I was working in a field where, once you'd understood some symmetry properties and some dispersion properties, and so on and so forth, of the physical laws, you could then construct the actual laws. For example, Yang-Mills theory which underlies most of what we finally described in the synthesis - that's called the standard model - the Yang-Mills theory is such that once you know the symmetries you know the theory, pretty much. And, of course, one of the best ways of using elegant and simple mathematics to learn about the properties of physical laws was through symmetry. And it just so happened that the final step going from the symmetry to the dynamics, which might in principle have been very, very difficult, was actually very easy.

We were just coming out of a period in which theory was in disgrace. I have described that also in some of my writings. The… during that period, quantum field theory, which seemed to be the tool that one should use for describing elementary particle physics, led to very nice formulae in lowest order plus infinite corrections, and so it was a disgrace. Some people proposed throwing away the higher corrections, but that was absurd. As Barber said, just because something is infinite, doesn't mean it’s zero. The… in that same period of confusion people tried to interpret the muon as Yukawa's meson, and of course the muon's properties were totally different from those of Yukawa's meson. So theory was in disgrace in that department as well. Things were very bad, but just before I arrived at graduate school in MIT, things got cleared up — that very year, the previous year. It was… the Lamb shift was measured, and it took this measurement of an electromagnetic correction, a correction to quantum electrodynamics, to persuade people to calculate it seriously on the assumption that it was finite. Before it was measured, did people suppose it was actually infinite? It was only once it was measured, and they had a number that people were inspired actually to calculate it seriously... and, of course, several theories showed right then that you could get a finite result.

Hans Bethe first of all calculated the Lamb shift with a cut-off at the electron mass, right away, right after the Shelter Island meeting, within a day. And... and then Viki [Victor Weisskopf] and his graduate student Bruce French, [Norman] Kroll and [Willis] Lamb himself, and two of the people who were working on the newer relativistic methods, Dick Feynman and Julian Schwinger, all started to calculate the relativistic Lamb shift using mass renormalization and the cancellation of the infinities in the vertex and the propagator, for the electron. And French and Weisskopf actually won the race, they got the right answer first, but because [Richard] Feynman and [Julian] Schwinger using the relativistic methods, got different answers at that moment, they were… Weisskopf was discouraged. French was not, he knew he was right, but Viki Weisskopf insisted on waiting and so Kroll and Lamb, using old-fashioned methods, were actually the first ones to publish the correct calculation. It could have been French and Weisskopf if they hadn't been put off by Feynman and Schwinger. Dick Feynman in his paper manipulated his footnotes with stars and daggers and so on, so that the footnote referring to this was numbered 13. And then he wrote, 'I had some difficulty', he wrote, 'in reconciling the relativistic method with the non-relativistic cut-off of Bethe, and therefore I made a mistake at that point. And French and Weisskopf were discouraged by that, and I'm sorry. This footnote is appropriately numbered'. Something like that. Schwinger of course never said he was sorry. So that quantum field theory was okay. Then the pion was discovered by [César] Lattes, [César] Occhialini, [Cecil] Powell and that was all fine, too, then. In the meantime, just before the pion was discovered...
[Q] That was fine because we now understood Yukawa?
Right, but just before that, Marshak had suggested that there were two different particles:  what we now call the pi, which was Yukawa's particle, more or less, and the muon, which was more like the electron. And he suggested the actual properties of the pi and the muon, and within a few months they were confirmed. So, suddenly theory wasn't so bad. The two crippling contradictions were both removed, and it was in that atmosphere that I arrived at MIT.

Viki [Victor Weisskopf] assigned me a nuclear physics problem, which arose in the following way. Another thing that people learned just at that time was the correctness of the shell model with J-coupling, and that happened just, well, when I arrived at MIT for graduate school. Now, the shell model was based on very weak coupling ideas, independent particles in fact, whereas - especially in heavy nuclei - the prevailing idea was that there was very strong coupling. And [Niels] Bohr's notion prevailed that a neutron coming into a heavy nucleus sort of got lost in there for a long time, didn't come out for a long time because of strong coupling.

There was a contradiction between the statistical approach – especially the heavy nuclei based on very strong coupling – and the apparently simple independent particle approach that gave rise to the j-j coupling shell model which seemed to work, at least for the lighter and intermediate nuclei, and maybe even for the heavier ones. So Viki [Victor Weisskopf] had the idea that somebody should look at this very difficult regime of intermediate coupling inside the nucleus and see if these two notions could somehow be reconciled.
Now the strong coupling, especially in heavy nuclei, but even in intermediate ones and a great extent in light ones, was expressed by the fact that there were many, many, many more levels than you would have gotten with an absolutely pure independent particle model. There were many more levels because of the coupling. You coupled to a lot of states that involved other configurations, and the average width of the levels was reduced by the same factor that the number of levels was increased, so that the ratio of the width to the spacing remained roughly the same. So that was sort of constant as you turned on the coupling, but you went to a quite strong coupling regime in which there was a gigantic ratio for heavy nuclei of levels to the number of levels that…  a number of levels to the number of levels  one would have with an absolutely pure independent particle picture, a single particle picture. So somehow, as one turned on the coupling, there was an intermediate regime in which one had some features left of the weak coupling situation and, nevertheless, a lot of features of the strong coupling situation. Well, I looked into that and I constructed a formalism for it which was a generalization of the formalism of [Leonard] Eisenbud and [Eugene] Wigner I think it was... somebody or other and Wigner, I think it was Eisenbud and Wigner. And I made some observations about the situation and about how in weak coupling the levels would not – I mean in intermediate coupling – the levels would not be reduced so thoroughly to a lot of narrow ones.
But I didn't appreciate the main point, which was worked out later by Wigner, [Anthony] Lane, and [Robert] Thomas. What they showed later on, several years later, was that there were traces of the independent particle model if you plotted the widths of these narrow levels as a function of energy. You would find that the widths tended to get broader and narrower, broader and narrower and so on, on average as the energy varied. And that those... that curve of average behavior of the widths of the levels, followed to some extent the weak coupling curve, the curve that would show the weak coupling levels. And that was what was left in nuclear reactions of the… of the weak coupling model. I didn't get that insight in my dissertation and, when it came out I realized that that's what I should have found. I did a lot of very useful things, but I had no idea they were useful. I derived a number of formulae... I derived a number of concepts that actually were not known and... or not well known... and could have been papers and so on, but I had absolutely no idea.
[Q] You wrote no paper based on your thesis?
No. I had no idea what was publishable and what was not. One thing I did was to find some new - what I thought were new - formulae for the Clebsch… no… Clebsch-Gordon coefficients, or the correlation coefficients between angular momenta… yeah, the Clebsch-Gordon coefficients. But then, when I got to the Institute for Advanced Study a little while later, I talked with Giulio Racah or R'cah – depending on whether you use the Italian or the Hebrew form – and he explained that he had found those formulae in 1942 and that they were published in some obscure place, and the reprints were stuck at Mount Scopus where he couldn't get at them.

MIT graduate students were allowed to take any courses they wanted to at Harvard.
[Q] So did you meet [Julian] Schwinger at that stage?
So I took... well, I signed up for Schwinger's course, the first year, but it was taught instead by Norman Ramsey, and it was very nice. I got to know Norman Ramsey a little bit and I learned some things about… what…  what’s it called – spin… spin precession. The kinds of things he had done in… in Robby's lab and he then did in his own lab and so forth. That was interesting.
And then the following year, I signed up again for Schwinger's course, and this time Schwinger actually appeared. And he had very strange teaching habits. He would come in very late and he would begin in the upper left-hand corner of the blackboard and just write equations and equations and equations and equations, and then he would finish in the lower right-hand corner of the blackboard just at the moment when lunch in the cafeteria was no longer being served, 20 minutes after the supposed end of the class. He had come in 20 minutes late, he finished 20 minutes late; people often couldn't get to lunch in time, and he did this so that people wouldn't come and ask him questions afterwards, because he had a lot of students, a lot of PhD students and a lot of other students and he didn't want them to pester him.
[Q] By the time I sat in on that same course, many, many years later, he would start as the bell began, and he would finish with a period as the bell rang, and he would walk out of the class.
Oh, I see.
[Q] And you could never catch him. 
What was in common between the two was that he finished and then left.
[Q] Yes.
Anyway, I didn't get much out of his lectures which were so beautiful because they just passed through one somehow like mineral oil, they didn't… they didn't leave any residue.
[Q] Were you exposed to [Richard] Feynman... were you exposed to Feynman’s techniques, not... not, obviously not in Schwinger's class, but I mean anywhere in the Cambridge area? 
Oh, yes, yes. Viki [Victor Weisskopf] wanted me to read Dick's papers and to learn about the methods, and I did. I learned about them. That was one… that was one of the things that I found exciting. I was a little disappointed to work on the dissertation in nuclear physics, because I would have preferred elementary particle physics.

I would have liked to be a Member of the Society of Fellows at Harvard, but that didn't work, they didn't accept me. And… and then there was another thing that Viki [Victor Weisskopf] tried and that didn't work either. I forget what that was. So then, he tried the Institute for Advanced Study, and there I was accepted. But then I delayed writing up the dissertation. I should have written it up by June 1950, which would be two academic years of work, because I'd done most of the work, I just had to write up the dissertation. But I've always had this terrible, terrible problem since I was a little boy of writing things up. And I delayed and Viki left for France where he was a visiting professor that year, and I stayed around MIT. And then something else happened that was bad. The assistantship had been replaced by an AEC scholarship, the Atomic Energy Commission scholarship. I got one the very first year they were offered, and that covered everything, so I didn't need to be an assistant any more. The scholarship was very good. But, then, it was discovered that one of these scholarships had gone to a communist.
[Q] Horror of horrors.
And to the Senate the idea of associating AEC, Atomic Energy Commission, with communism was just too much to bear. So they passed the O'Mahoney amendment, named after Senator O'Mahoney of Wyoming, I believe, which required a full AEC clearance for anyone who had an AEC scholarship. Well, that of course stopped the payments on my scholarship until I could get an AEC clearance, which dragged on and on and on and on. So, I had no money and I hadn't finished the dissertation and I was paralyzed, I just somehow couldn't work on it. And I sat around reading The Tibetan Book of the Dead in Evans-Wentz's translation in twelve volumes from the graduate house library, and things like that, and living clandestinely in the graduate house as the guest of my former room-mates and other people. I made some wonderful friends that way, actually. These new, there were some new room-mates whom I got to know... two European... two European graduate students.
[Q] So this is what… this is ’51? ‘50? 1950?
This was, no, this was… this was ’50.
[Q] So you'd basically done your dissertation in two years?
In two years.
[Q] And in ‘51...
So I should have... graduated in June ’50...
[Q] ... June ’50, but you stayed and then went...
 ... at the age of 20...
[Q] Twenty, exactly.
But I stayed on over the summer and into the fall, living in this hand-to-mouth way. And then my friends started to lend me money because I didn't have any cash. So I formed this investment syndicate, people investing in me, and I was able to eat that way. And I lived rent-free as a clandestine room-mate, an extra room-mate and so on and so on.
Finally, New Year’s Eve came, and I just felt I just couldn't go on this way anymore. The Institute for Advanced Study kept calling and saying, ‘When are you coming? What's going on here? Are you a ringer? Do you really exist?’ And, so finally, New Year’s Eve I drank quite a lot and started to write the dissertation, and within a few days I had it written and I had the... the exam and got the PhD in January ’51. And then I went to Washington, I was invited to Washington for a clearance interview, and we thrashed out what was worrying them about my former left-wing ideas and contacts – which were minimal – and everything was all right. I got the... the clearance, they paid me my back-pay. I had pay now from the Institute for Advanced Study, where I went...
[Q] So you were suddenly a rich man. 
... promptly. So I had money, I was able to pay back all my friends, which I'm not sure they expected, and I was able to buy a car. So I was at the Institute for Advanced Study, I had my PhD, I had a car, I had enough money to live on, I'd paid back my debts – everything was very good.

It’s a sort of hotel, of course, and there were people there for the year, for the academic year, invited by the management. And Robert and a couple of senior members… and Robert favored formalism. He had a very different set of criteria for judging things from Viki's. He was very impressed with the relativistic methods of calculation that Dick Feynman had developed, and Stückelberg.  Schwinger's method was quite clumsy, although it was covariant it was quite clumsy and I think nobody has ever used it except Schwinger and his students. But the Stückelberg-Feynman method was very useful. And Robert was impressed with the formalism that went with deriving it. Feynman, of course, had his own derivation which was perfectly adequate, it wasn't very elegant. Freeman Dyson had a sort of a sketch of a derivation that he published and he impressed Robert enormously. Why, I never really understood, but, Robert was very enthusiastic about Freeman, and I couldn't see that he had contributed very much except to make the derivation slightly better.
 [Q] The derivation here... do you mean renormalization scheme?
 No, the derivation of...
 [Q] Or do you mean the derivation of the rules?
 ...the derivation of Dick Feynman's… of the rules… rules, or the Stückelberg rules, whichever you want to call them. And... and then, yes, the other thing that Freeman did was to give a very, very crude sketch of how to renormalize to all orders, but it was extremely crude. It was improved and turned into a real proof by Salam and Matthews in a paper that I think was 140 pages long, and by John Ward in a letter that was maybe 20 lines long. Graham should be delighted that John Ward was then at Oxford and Salam and Matthews at Cambridge. The…
[Q] Did you know Ward, incidentally?
Oh, Ward, I knew Ward extremely well… he was a remarkable character, a remarkable character… he came to the institute and I saw a lot of him and I knew him very, very well.
[Q] What was the atmosphere like there?
Yeah, so they... anyway, what I was going to say was that the atmosphere was rather peculiar because, Robert invited a lot of people who had done formal things that somewhat resembled the formal method for deriving the Feynman rules in Dyson's manner. So lots of people who had fiddled with wiggly surfaces and in space-time, wiggly space-like surfaces in space-time and various other things; Costa… Olivier Costa de Beauregard, le Comte Olivier Costa de Beauregard, who had played with positrons as electrons going backwards in time. In other words, anyone who had done anything formal that vaguely resembled these advances in formalism that Stückelberg and Feynman had accomplished, was invited there. Well, these people were not very creative, most of them. They had done some little bit of formalism on, for example, on wiggly space-like surfaces, but they were not really doing much in the way of physics. There were a few people who were very interested in physics and were very clever. I was there during two… two academic years because I spent the calendar year ’51 there, so I actually met two sets of people, which was very nice.

I met Francis Low as soon as I arrived and he and I worked together. And… 
[Q] In fact that was your first paper, first published paper...
... my first published paper was with Francis… was with Francis… Low and unfortunately it was on formalism, which, given my interactions with Viki,  was not something I preferred, but, it was quite useful formalism.
The people at the institute were discussing the Bethe-Salpeter equation for bound states, and of course it could be derived from the Feynman-Stückelberg rules by some generalization that would permit a bound state, and it was fairly obviously correct if one included all the higher terms. But a formal derivation wasn't, hadn't been given and we did that. In the course of that we invented some quite useful bits of formalism, which people have used ever since. But I wasn't terribly proud of it because it was formal; I wanted to do something that really made an improvement in our understanding of physics. I tried to do that... for... Francis and I did that during the... the first term, the spring of ’51. In the fall of ’51, I tried to do something different, actually calculate things, strong coupling or whatever. I played with the idea of a... a classical approximation in quantum field theory, a WKBJ method in quantum field theory and so on. But I didn't really accomplish very much. But one of my problems was that I didn't recognize when I'd done something publishable, and that problem persisted really for years and years and years. I never had any idea what was something new or interesting and what wasn't.

During the summer of ’51 I was in Urbana, Illinois, the University of Illinois. Sid Dancoff who was one of the people at the institute, invited me to come... invited Keith Brueckner and me, to come and participate in a classified project. It was in connection with the effort to develop a radar system for defense against airplane attacks. And the Korean War was on then, it had started in June 1950 and was still going strong at that time, and it stimulated this project to try to develop this system. But in... in connection with that, the project that Dancoff... with which Dancoff was concerned, involved an institution called the Control Systems Laboratory which wanted to look at problems related to control of a big radar system in a very general way by inviting a lot of biologists, a lot of what we would now call information theorists and so on. And so I got to meet very interesting people from a great variety of fields. It was sort of a... a foreshadowing of the Santa Fe Institute in a way. There were many wonderful biologists including Luca Cavalli-Sforza and Buzzati... or was it Buzzati [sic] or Buzzati? I forget, one or the other. Maybe Buzzati. And... Buzzati-Traverso, I guess was his name... and Colin Pittendrigh and a number of other biologists. And then people who worked on cybernetics like Mackay. I forget whether Warren McCulloch showed up – I think he did. Then Heinz von Foerster, the electrical engineer was a professor at Urbana, so he was around part of the time.

Keith and I worked on a problem of what to do to make a computer that was reliable out of extremely unreliable elements. It was a very interesting problem, although the practical motivation disappeared after a while because at that time, we were thinking in terms of very unreliable vacuum tubes and, of course, they were succeeded by extremely reliable transistors. We didn't know that. But at that time, it seemed to be interesting to look at how to improve the performance of a computer made of very unreliable parts. And, of course, it was a very general problem, and so what we did was to purify the outputs by having a majority voting unit so that we would do each problem three times and have a majority vote. And we'd do that over and over and over again, and the assumption was that... we... we made the assumption of going to the extreme, so that the probability of a correct functioning of the individual unit was 50% plus epsilon, where epsilon is very small, and the probability of its doing it wrong was 50% minus epsilon. Then we did an expansion in epsilon and... the... then we connected the various majority voting units in a sort of random pattern. We were trying to prove that doing that we would get an exponential correction in the... exponentially improving correction, as we put in more and more and more of these units. So that we could take individual elements that were very unreliable and make a reliable computer out of them.
Well, John von Neumann came through as our consultant. I'd never met him before although he was at the institute. I'd seen him but I'd never actually interacted with him before, and he was paid by the Control Systems Laboratory to help Keith and me for a day or so. And he was very impressive solving the cubic equation in his head in an expansion in epsilon and so on for the majority voter and all that, but it was mainly fairly mechanical help that he gave. He endorsed the idea of doing an exponential, but he didn't really supply a proof that it would work. We were looking for a rather rigorous proof. Well, years later in a very famous lecture at Caltech which was published – before I got to Caltech by the way – von Neumann repeated all this; asserted that the exponential improvement would be achieved with this random method, and footnoted Brueckner and me for the majority voter – not for the general idea. And, of course, Sid Dancoff had some responsibility for the general idea, too, because he assigned the problem. Well, I was so flattered to be mentioned in a footnote by John von Neumann that it didn't occur to me that he hadn't actually credited us with what we were doing.

During the lectures at the Control Systems Laboratory during the summer, I doodled and thought about elementary particle theory. And I invented what was later called the Chelean representation [sic], representing the exact propagators for electron and photon in quantum field theory in... as integrals over virtual... over various masses, with weights for the masses. As you know this played an extremely important part later in the renormalization group work, and I noticed already that summer that, for the electron, the weights were both positive and negative, even though it looked as if you could prove they would always be positive. But in a theory with gauge invariants they didn't have to be positive for a charged particle. For a neutral particle they did, so the photon had positive weights and the electron had masses running over positive values and negative values, with the weights being sometimes positive and sometimes negative. I did all that, but I had no idea that that was a new contribution to theoretical physics, so I never told anybody or published it or anything – well, I must have told a few people but I didn't tell a great...  I didn't give a seminar on it or... or publish it.
[Q] Did you have anything in mind?
And this was a year before Chelean, so it would have been my representation.
[Q] But were you thinking about quantum electrodynamics per se? I mean...
Field theory in general, including quantum electrodynamics, and I worked out the weights in quantum electrodynamics and saw that they were positive and negative. That was very important because years and years and years later that's how asymptotic freedom came to be recognized because the weights were... when, in Yang-Mills theory, which hadn't yet been invented in 1951, or discovered, whichever you want to call it, in Yang-Mills theory the quanta also have charges and therefore the quanta can have weights that are both positive and negative. And therefore the theorems about the photon that come from the purely positive weights in this representation no longer hold. And that's how you can have the opposite behavior in Yang-Mills theory from what you have in quantum electrodynamics. Anyway, I noted a lot of this and Francis [Low] and I put it into our paper, two, three years later, on what some people called the renormalization group. But actually I discovered it in 1951 while doodling…
[Q] That was also?
…while doodling at seminars at the Control Systems Laboratory.
[Q] The work with Francis was also in Urbana, right, so you must have returned?
It was also in Urbana, two years later, so I spent two summers in Urbana. Very, very, very hot weather in the summer, and only a few rooms were air-conditioned. The Control Systems Laboratory was air-conditioned for the equipment, of course.
[Q] Not for the people.
Right, and so that summer I had air-conditioning, and in ’53 Francis and I were sometimes allowed into air-conditioned rooms so we could think better. But it was only for equipment that people had air-conditioning at that time. Anyway, that was an example of how I actually discovered certain things but didn't realize they were of any importance. So in the fall of ’51 I could have written up this representation and then could have done work based on it and so on and so forth, but it never occurred to me to do that. Instead I kept looking ahead at things that I hadn't done and couldn't do, hoping that I could make progress on some important work.

Einstein was around. We saw him most days, he would come in. He would walk in sometimes with Gödel, but they looked like Mutt and Jeff, tall Einstein and little tiny Gödel. They were deep in conversation about something or other, I don't know what. I never spoke with Einstein except to say hello, and you know,  'Good morning', or something. And I suppose he would answer, 'Guten morning' or whatever.
[Q] He was not involved, or interested, I should say, with... I know he wasn't involved  He showed no great interest in sort of what was called particle physics at the time... 
No, no. He didn't believe in any of it. And that's why I didn't interact with him. I thought it would be pretentious and artificial to cultivate a relationship with Einstein when he didn't believe anything that we were doing, because he didn't believe quantum mechanics, and he didn't think that all these elementary particles were of any importance. He thought they would all be derived some day from a theory of electromagnetism and gravity. So I knew that there wouldn't be any real overlap in our work, and this idea of... of striking up a friendship or a relationship with this distinguished old man for the sake of historical associations struck me as the kind of thing that people I didn't like did. Today I would feel completely different. Today I wouldn't have those ideas. I would want to know this important, interesting figure. 
[Q] He died not so long after that.
He died in ’55 when I was there on my second visit. And if I remember correctly, the newspaper people were taking pictures of Fuld Hall with the flag at half-staff in connection with reporting his death. And they wanted some human figure in the picture, preferably a pretty young lady, and so my fiancé Margaret was the one they asked to pose, with her legs crossed in front of the Institute for Advanced Study, so that... so that they could have a... they could have a human figure in the... in the picture of Fuld Hall with the... with the flag at half-staff.
[Q] You didn't interact with him on your second visit?
No, I didn't... He was probably... ...I didn't ever... well, then he was quite ill, by then he was quite ill. In ’51 he wasn't that ill. I had missed his last seminar. His last seminar was given about a month before I arrived and everybody was still talking about it. If I had not delayed so long in writing up my dissertation I would have been there and seen and heard his last seminar at the institute. He talked, of course, about his attempts to construct a unified theory of gravitation and electromagnetism. It was an entirely unsuitable theory and of course one knows that it should have been a theory including a lot of other particles and a lot of other forces, and it should have been quantum mechanical and so on and so on. We know that and we even suspected it then of course. And the theory just wasn't... didn't make a lot of sense. It didn't have very sensible interactions between gravity and electromagnetism. But it had nice formal properties which appealed to Einstein. And by the way Schrödinger, at just about the same time, came up with just about the same theory except for using i equals the square root of minus one in his equation, so in other words instead of an unsymmetrical metric  he had... or connection... he had a... a complex one, a Hermitian one.
[Q] Did you interact with Oppenheimer much?
Oh yes, oh yes, a great deal, but... no, but I was about to say something... oh, about Einstein's last seminar. What they were talking about was not the content; what they were talking about was that they weren't able to concentrate on the content because of the presentation. He was dressed in the costume that he conventionally wore after his second wife died, and he neglected himself very much after she died. He had on a pair of baggy trousers unpressed, and shoes with no socks... just to have more time for work I guess,  and... and a sweatshirt, an old, grubby, grey sweatshirt. But the particular additional feature when he gave the seminar was that the fly of the trousers was open and the sweatshirt protruded obscenely through the fly, and they were all looking at that and concentrating on that feature, and they were unable to follow what he was saying about the mathematics. Anyway, I didn't know him, and now, of course, I regret it. It would have been very nice to get to know him in 1951.

Oppenheimer very much appreciated this formal piece of work that Francis and I did... 
[Q] On the bound states?
...on the bound states, he liked it very much. That was the kind of thing that appealed to him.
[Q] You didn't discuss the representation of spectro functions?
No! For example, no I didn't, I didn't talk about that with him. It never occurred to me that I had discovered something interesting or important. And... well  anyway I used to talk with him about a lot of things and what he did mainly was to express his great enthusiasm for whatever Freeman Dyson was doing. And of course shortly afterwards he attracted Freeman back to the institute and he was very happy about that. He loved formal work and claims of formal achievement.

The atmosphere was one of competition because, oh, there were by now very few jobs of the kind that we thought we would like to have, namely assistant professorships at… ten-year track assistant professorships at distinguished universities. By this time people coming out of the war or people finishing their education just after the war and so on, had pretty much filled up all those positions so that in the spring of ’51 for example, there was not much available. The one job of that kind that was offered was a professorship… an assistant professorship at Indiana, which they gave to Keith Brueckner. And otherwise people found jobs as, you know, found second post-doctoral positions or various other things, or they tried to stay around at the institute for another year or whatever. Now of course I was there for two halves of academic years and at the end of that time I didn't request help with finding a job because Murph Goldberger found me one. We had become friends when he was a post-doc at MIT and we shared an office with other people as well, but we talked a lot and we even worked together a little bit on various things. And, so he was now in a… he had turned down an assistant professorship at Harvard and accepted one instead at Chicago, where he had done his graduate work. And he prevailed on the Institute of Nuclear Studies at Chicago to offer me an instructorship. Well I asked Frank Yang about it, because I got to know him quite well at the Institute for Advanced Study, and he and I had many conversations about physics, tried to understand a number of things together. So I asked him about it. I said ‘You had that job, didn't you?’ He said, ‘Yes’. I said, ‘Well, what is it like? Are… are there many instructors?"’He said, ‘You'll be the only one’. I said, ‘Is there any chance of an instructor being offered a promotion?’ He said, ‘Almost certainly’. And the salary was quite good and the teaching load extremely low, so I thought I would just take it rather than looking for some phantom assistant professorship somewhere that didn't exist. This way I was at a premier institution. Not only that, but my friend Murph was there and we could work together and I would get to know Fermi and various other famous physicists. But I would also get to know Harold Urey in chemistry, and Szilárd, Leó ,who has gone… who had gone from physics to biology and many, many other distinguished people.

We had a theoretical physics discussion group that met every Monday afternoon after lunch. We met in Gregor Wentzel's office because Gregor smoked cigars and Fermi couldn't stand smoke, cigar smoke in his own office. He didn't mind tolerating it for a couple of hours for the sake of a discussion, but he didn't want smoke hanging around in his office. So we met in Gregor's office andit was just a very few people: Murph, Ed Adams who was a… also an assistant professor, and Wentzel and Fermi and I. I think that was basically all really, just the five of us. And it was a wonderful experience. A lot of it consisted of my asking questions of Fermi which he answered, and then I would ask him some more questions based on the answers and so on. And he spent a huge amount of time thinking about physics. He didn't sleep a lot and his waking hours were devoted, in many… much… were devoted mainly to working out physics problems, physics exercises.

He kept a little notebook with useful formulae, which were all exact–perfect. Every factor of two correct, every sign correct, every dimension correct, everything was right. He never put anything into his little notebook that he carried around with him without making sure it was perfectly correct. And that made it possible for him to do a lot of practical problems just on being asked because he had worked them out before and some of the critical formulae were in his little book. Most things he had thought about before in some form or other, most questions in physics were questions… were… were new forms of questions that he had already answered. And so if you asked him something he would begin at the top left of the blackboard and write line after line and then later on, perhaps at the bottom right or else before that, he would get the answer and put a box around it. And the answer was always correct; he never made any mistakes. A greater contrast with Viki Weisskopf could not be imagined. Everything Viki wrote was modular powers of two, powers of pi, powers of i–the numerator and denominator could well be interchanged. I remember when in a nuclear theory class he tried to derive the resonance formula…
[Q] The Breit-Wigner? The Breit-Wigner formula?
The Breit-Wigner formula, which in atomic theory was called the Weisskopf-Wigner formula. Breit and Wigner sort of generalized it to nuclear theory, but it was exactly the same formula as the Weisskopf-Wigner formula in atomic theory. Well, he got it all wrong, just completely wrong. The… the numerator was in the denominator, the denominator was in the numerator, the sign was wrong, the values, there were factors of two and pi floating around. So he said ‘Well’, he said,’ this time I haven't prepared, I have to admit, I haven't prepared this lecture, so… but next time I'll come in prepared and I'll derive it correctly’. Well he came in next time and again he tried to derive it and failed again. Now of course every student in that class learnt how to derive the formula. So it was much more effective than Julian Schwinger's smooth presentation, which really didn't leave you learning anything because he glossed over all the difficulties and presented only a very smooth picture of what was happening.   Really didn't leave you with much of an idea of how to do it yourself, whereas Viki's mistakes were very educational. Now Fermi got everything right, but he wasn't a formalism person at all. He just calculated things usually with arithmetic, and got the answer by some trick that was very, very simple. However, it was a trick, and it was based on the fact that he had solved the problem several times before in different guises and put the… put the answers in his little notebook. So that it was a little hard to learn from him also because you would–if you were to do the problem yourself— you would have to invent that trick, which was not necessarily so easy. He didn't do it in, he didn't do a problem in a general way so that you would immediately recognize that that was the same way that you would do the problem. He had his own little twist, which you would have had to invent if you were to do it yourself. Anyway, it was all fine. But if you asked him a question to which he didn't know the answer, then things got much more difficult. He was not so happy about that and the discussion became difficult, and very interesting, but difficult. And of course I asked him fairly often things that he didn't, questions to which he didn't really know the answer, and we had some very interesting discussions as a result.

There was a fourth project which Murph and I regarded, or at least I regarded as very important, but it never got anywhere. I thought of it as my principle occupation during this time and I deviated from it occasionally to work on strangeness, dispersion theory and the renormalization group. The main thing I was doing was this project with Murph, on trying to do a… a field theory without perturbation theory with other approximations, maybe strong coupling or something of that kind. What we did was to omit closed loop, or at least–well, no, not necessarily closed loops. We omitted meson-meson interactions in meson theory. So we were dealing with pseudo-scalar meson theory, which people thought was right with the pion being the meson and having isotopic spin 1, and being pseudo-scalar and so on and so on and so on. But we wanted to look at relativistic pseudo-scalar meson theory, and do something with it that was not just perturbation theory. But in order to make some kind of an approximation that would make the problem manageable we dropped meson-meson scattering. All the remaining diagrams we wanted to sum with a simple formalism. And we did it by constructing a field theory of… in which the square root, essentially the square root of the Feynman propagator for the… for the meson was put in multiplying a creation operator, and then its complex conjugate was put in multiplying a destruction operator. In this way we were able to reproduce all of the diagrams other than, that didn't include meson-meson scattering, from a closed form.
[Q] Was this related to the Thulo type of model? 
No, because it was fully relativistic.
[Q] When, let's see, when did they do that? I have..?
 I'm not sure, ’53, ’54, ’53, no, ’54…
[Q] But there was a lot of interest at that period..?
...’54, I think. I think it was ’54, ’55.
[Q] ‘54 was it? But during that, those, the early ‘50s everybody was doing these?
Well we were all in it. Everybody thought that pseudo-scalar meson theory was a good theory and that we should try to calculate…
[Q] And finding new ways, non-perturbative ways of..? 
Non-perturbative ways of calculating–that was the sort of standard problem to work on. Except for Enrico [Fermi]. Enrico said, ‘What makes you think this is the right theory?’ And we couldn't understand his attitude. He had some, he and Frank Yang published some weird–what we considered a very weird idea–that the mesons might be bound states of nucleons and anti-nucleons, which was in a way a forerunner of the idea… Exactly, I was going to say… …that they were bound states of quarks and anti-quarks. But most of us regarded that as very weird and what we wanted was to be able to solve pseudo-scalar meson theory in some approximation that was non-perturbative and serious. So Murph and I constructed this formalism which would add up all the diagrams without closed loops, and we could even put in some closed loops by including a fancier propagator for the meson. And then we tried to find a strong coupling approximation, as well as the weak coupling. The weak coupling of course was just perturbation theory without closed loops. The strong coupling we didn't know what, whether it was going to be. Well, we worked off and on on that, but it didn't really get anywhere and of course the…  since the theory was totally wrong, it didn't really matter whether, what we accomplished on it. In the meantime these three diversions were all quite important.

The atmosphere in Chicago at our place was very different from the atmosphere that we discussed a few minutes ago at the Institute for Advanced Study. The Institute for Advanced Study is… I indicated there was a good deal of competitiveness, and if you came up with an idea people were likely—if you want to caricature the situation—likely to say, ‘Oh well, that's not very important and besides, I did it first’, and… and so on and so forth. ‘And besides, it's wrong. It's wrong, but it's not very important and I did first’. ‘And if it were right I would have done it first’... ‘and if it were right I would have done it first’, and so on. I didn't run into much of that in Chicago, and instead people, and… and also because it was both an experimental and theoretical place with a lot of experimental work going on, there was a lot of interaction between the discussions of experiments and the independent discussion of theory, which was very healthy. There was some of that at the Institute for Advanced Study as well, but less because the experiments weren't going on right there in the basement, they were going on at other institutions.

We discussed a lot with Enrico; the pion nucleon scattering, his analysis of it in terms of phase shifts,  the presence, or absence of a resonance. He didn't like the resonance; in fact I don't think till his dying day he believed in a resonance. He favored a phase shift solution in which the phase shift didn't go through ninety degrees. And it took one of his students talking with Hans Bethe or a student of Hans Bethe, to discover that there was another phase shift solution that described the experiments equally well and where…in which the phase shift in the 3-3 state, the 3 halves 3 halves state actually did go through ninety degrees and produce a resonance. But of course that resonance had been expected for many, many, many years. In strong coupling it had been predicted by Pauli and Dancoff back in 1942, and then Keith Brueckner had made himself famous by doing some intermediate coupling calculations in the non-relativistic version of the pseudo-scalar meson theory, and showing that you would get a 3-3 resonance there. So we had a lot of practical discussions of that kind that were very educational and of course isotopic spin conservation was being confirmed further, if it needed further conservation… further, yes, further, sorry, if it needed further demonstration, in Fermi's… the experiments that Fermi and others were doing on the pion nucleon scattering. And we devoted a good deal of time to discussing symmetries and as I mentioned a little while ago, that was one way in which I felt it was possible to make progress, important progress on understanding what was going on without attempting something too ambitious–namely writing down the ultimate theory. Symmetry was, exploring symmetry was, one way to do that.

Murph and I looked at another way to learn about theory in very important and general and elegant ways, without trying to write down the final theory. And that was to look at the properties of field theory as evidenced by the Feynman diagrams to all orders and to abstract from the Feynman diagrams, to all orders, certain properties; particularly symmetry properties, but also dispersion relations and other things. And… and then to suppose that those were general principles that would apply non-perturbatively to the real theory: not an unreasonable supposition. And that approach is a way to describe a great deal of what my friends and I were doing at that time. In that paper 'The Garden of Live Flowers' dedicated to Viki, that's what I… I make that point.

Murph and I did a variety of things. One was we noticed the crossing relations, coming from the fact that diagrams would always have symmetry between crossed and uncrossed lines. And that gave rise to a symmetry in the relativistic scattering amplitudes in which one interchanged positive and negative momenta and so on and so forth, as you know. So these crossing relations we discovered, we never really wrote them up. We referred to them in various things that we wrote, but we never actually wrote them up as a discovery. Another example of this business of not taking important things seriously, if… if we had done them or if I had done them. Now of course the old-timers in quantum mechanics knew about  such as symmetry vaguely. It was a kind of folk theorem. They never wrote it down either, and they never used it for anything much, but they did know that there was such a thing, even in the old-fashioned form of quantum field theory. Another thing we did then was to look at forward scattering amplitudes for massless particles, say a photon, so, forward photon scattering, and return to the old work on dispersion relations which had given rise to quantum mechanics in the work of Kramers, Heisenberg, Born and so on, in 1924–just before quantum mechanics. And we showed that there were these forward scattering dispersion relations. We found a new one for spin flip with the opposite crossing symmetry, and then later on Murph and some collaborators showed that there were these relations even when you didn't have a massless particle like the photon. And then Polkinghorne and I, and a great number of other people, showed that you would have them also for non-forward scattering, for fixed momentum transfer. That was very exciting because all of this work was on the mass shell.

We were beginning to study quantum field theory on the mass shell, looking at scattering amplitudes on the mass shell, coming from all Feynman diagrams to all orders, and presumably therefore getting results that were true, non-perturbatively, non-perturbitively on the mass shell. So by 1955 we had crossing and we had dispersion relations, not only forward dispersion relations for a massless particle being scattered, but non-forward relations for a massive particle as well. And to that we then added a generalization of unitarity for scattering amplitudes, namely unitarity on the mass shell, for amplitudes on the mass shell, but carried away from real momenta into the complex momenta that you could get on the mass shell in… in these problems. Well, putting all of those together I  suggested then at the Rochester meeting in 1956, having thought about it for quite a while, since ’55, I suggested that these three principles; the crossing, the dispersion relations, and the generalized unitarity could be used to characterize scattering amplitudes on the mass shell. One would get, they would be non-perturbatively correct. But of course, so as not to be pretentious, what I said at the meeting was that they were true to all orders. But what I meant of course was that they could be used non-perturbatively, and that therefore with the addition of a Born approximation to get started, or a condition at infinity or something like that, one could actually get a set of equations that would determine the scattering amplitudes in a given theory–but on the mass shell, without ever going off the mass shell. So this was a way of doing the whole of quantum field theory but staying on the mass shell. Well, I've looked at it that way ever since: it is quantum field theory on the mass shell. In the course of my talk at Rochester in early ’56–of course by that time I was at Caltech, but it was part of this same work–in the course of the talk I referred almost jokingly to Heisenberg and his use of the Breit-Wheeler S matrix. Because Heisenberg said, ‘Well you know, we don't have to derive the S matrix, we might guess it’. And, I was sort of, I thought it was sort of a joke to refer to this Heisenberg S matrix program in a sentence or two.

Geoff Chew, who had been working with Francis Low on the Chew-Low approach to the non-relativistic meson theory–that is non-relativistic for the nucleons. Geoff came to visit and I admired him greatly and I enjoyed interacting with him a lot. And Murph and I tried to teach him this new method on mass shell field theory. And he offered great resistance to learning it. He said he didn't understand how we were going to put in, which theory we were talking about. And we said, "Well, either through a Born approximation or through some boundary condition". He said, "Well, somehow that doesn't satisfy me, I don't understand what you're doing", and so on and so forth, and this continued for a number of years. Gradually he began to like it.

In 1961 we held a meeting in La Jolla for which there were unfortunately no proceedings. It was a very exciting meeting in which Goldberger and Blankenbeckler talked about  Regge trajectories; I talked about the... the eight-fold way, and the mass formula and the eight-fold way. Okubo talked about the same mass formula; people presented many new and interesting results of different kinds in particle theory. I helped greatly to organize that meeting, and Keith Brueckner had just moved to La Jolla so I thought La Jolla would be a great place to have the meeting because it would put Keith's new place on the map, and he played a big role in making it happen. So we worked together I suppose with some other people on the organizing committee. And the organizing committee took Robert Oppenheimer to lunch at the Hotel Del Coronado, this old place where lots of admirals stayed and so on and so on. I used to say there were heads of stuffed admirals on the wall. And to be respectful to Oppenheimer who fancied himself as a wine buff, I suggested that he order the wine. So we called over the aged, uniformed waiter and asked him what year a certain wine was, because the year wasn't listed on the menu, on the wine list. And the waiter drew himself up to his full height and said ‘Sir, all of our wines are at least five years old.’  Oppenheimer didn't know what to say to that.

At the meeting we had all these interesting results presented by the various people, but Geoffrey Chew had a surprise for us. He got up and announced that he had always been a modest calculator of effects, not somebody who made grand pronouncements about general theory, but that this time he was going to make an exception and he was going to say something very general and he thought very important, and then he would go back and hide in the bushes again and do his calculations but he had to tell us this important thing; namely that field theory was wrong, except maybe for electromagnetism and gravitation, but for strong interactions it was wrong–and instead something called S-matrix theory was correct. Whereupon he repeated everything that we had tried to teach him over the years about dispersion relations, crossing, and generalized unitarity, and how you could use those instead–on the mass shell instead of the usual apparatus of field theory in order to do calculations–provided you supplied some boundary conditions or a Born approximation or something. Well, I was appalled. I thought this was really peculiar because I continued to believe that all of this, that dispersion theory was just a way of doing field theory on the mass shell. And I didn't understand why he said that field theory was wrong but this other way of looking at it was right and so on.

Geoffrey's principal collaborator Stanley Mandelstam never believed in the Chew–what I called the Chew-vian religion. He… he said that if the scattering amplitudes on the mass shell obeying their non-linear relations—if… if the non-linear relations coming from generalized unitarity, dispersion relations and crossing, if they were correct and had solutions on the mass shell, they weren't complicated non-linear equations—wouldn't the linear equations that allowed you to go off the mass shell also have solutions? In which case you could have field theory; because if you… if you extrapolate off the mass shell with the linear relations–linear dispersion relations that take you off the shell–you get the whole of field theory. And so Stanley never believed in this idea but Geoff held it firmly and for all I know still does. So my… although I strongly embraced the… the method, I never had this view of what… what it was, and I believe that I was right.

In 1961 Chew and Steve Frautschi put out another idea, related to this, which was that if you used the dispersion method for calculation there was a principle for the hadrons, for the strongly interacting particles alone, that would allow you to put in some sort of boundary condition, a boundary condition of going to zero at infinity, or something of that kind, that would then define a particular theory. And that particular theory would have the property that all the strongly interacting particles would be equally elementary or non-elementary. And this was the bootstrap. And the way I used to describe the bootstrap to people was that the… there was a certain list of hadrons, and these hadrons could be the particles being scattered, they could also be the particles being exchanged to give the forces, and they would also be the particles that resulted as bound states. And this self-consistency among all these different roles for the list of particles was basically the idea of the bootstrap, crudely speaking. Well that I liked very much. I didn't see why the dispersion theory method had to be distinct from field theory in order for this to be a good idea. And what I especially liked was this idea that the… all of the hadrons were equally elementary or not elementary: that seemed like a nice principle. Geoff called it nuclear democracy, I would rather call it hadronic egalitarianism, but it was the same thing. And it influenced me greatly later on in connection with the quarks two years later, because I changed it slightly to say that no observable hadron was more elementary than any other. Which is still true. Which is still true. In spite of having elementary objects. Yes. The elementary objects were not observable in the hadrons, but no observable hadron was any more elementary than any other. And I thought of that the same day that I thought of the quarks, on a visit to Columbia. And I've believed in it ever since. I think it's right.

The summer of ’53, I spent another hot summer in Urbana, the temperature was often at 104 degrees Fahrenheit. Francis and I were so fascinated by what we were doing that we hardly noticed. And occasionally we were allowed to use one of the air-conditioned rooms.
[Q] Why, incidentally, were you back in Illinois that… that summer?
Well… 
[Q] Was Francis  there, incidentally? Francis was at the university…
Yes, Francis was there by then. What happened was that they had an assistant professorship open, and Francis and I both applied for it because these jobs, these 10-year track jobs at reasonably respectable universities were still scarce, as they had been a year or two earlier. My instructorship at Chicago was eventually going – I think it was for one or two years – it was eventually going to expire, and if the Chicago people didn't promote me to assistant professor I would have to be assistant professor somewhere else. I gave lectures at Wisconsin, Minnesota,  Indiana... all the… Purdue - all the mid-Western universities - and they were all somewhat interested in having me as an assistant professor. The one I liked best I thought was Urbana, University of Illinois, and they offered me the professorship. They hesitated between Francis and me because they liked the work we had done together and they didn't know which one to offer the job to. But after a while they… they offered it to me, and I was ready to take it. And I went in and told the head of the Institute of Nuclear Studies, Sam Allison, that I had this offer. And he said, ‘Well, I'm sure you'll have a very distinguished career at the University of Illinois.’ But then Murph and Ed Adams complained to Enrico  and to Sam, saying that they should try to keep me. And so before long, sure enough, there was an offer: assistant professorship at Chicago. I didn't like living in Chicago but it was such a great university and the group was so wonderful, the scientists were so distinguished that I felt I would just stay on there. And… and then they offered the job in Urbana to Francis. He took it and in the summer of ’53 I went down there and collaborated with him. It was wonderful working together; it was very, very nice. And there were a lot of very good people around: TD Lee was there that summer. I knew him from the Institute for Advanced Study because  he was  in the ’51... he was in the ’51... ’52 contingent,  and a number of other people. We had a very good time that summer. And Francis and I worked very hard.

We pursued this idea that has subsequently been called the renormalization group, but was actually called the renormalization group around that time because unbeknownst to us – in fact we didn't learn about the work for many, many, many years – Peterman and Stückelberg worked on something similar. It was not the complete story that we had, it was a portion of the story, but they did work on it. They worked on it the same year – ’53 – but they published it right away, which we didn't do, so their publication is a bit earlier. And they I think used the name renormalization group which is a pompous name and not really very good because I don't believe it's really a group, it's… it’s more of a semi-group. Anyway, our work we just called quantum electrodynamics of small distances, short distances, but it was... we did a very complete – in our published paper that was published in ’54 - we did a very complete discussion of the… of the problem, including the work that was subsequently called Callen-Symanzic. I don't know why our ψ function had to be relabeled. Psi of x was relabeled the square root of x beta of the square root of x, when I thought our name for it was perfectly okay and our work on it was perfectly okay.


We included, I think in an appendix, all the formulae for the ψ function and the essential feature of what people call the renormalization group,  that as the scale changed the problem remained the same, but with a different coupling constant, and the ψ function described how the coupling constant varied with scale. The... there were two possibilities that were envisaged. One was that the function would diverge, that the integral, that the x/ψ of x would diverge at infinity, in which case there would be a... an infinite renormalization for the electric charge in quantum electrodynamics. The other possibility we envisaged was that it would diverge at a finite value, and then there would be a finite value of the charge renormalization. What didn't occur to us was that the theory of quantum electrodynamics might be inconsistent with itself, in which... which would be represented by having our integral converge.

Our work was copied by Bogolyubov and Shirkov in Russia. They copied it almost word for word and the equations with the notation and the equation numbers and so on; they had the nerve to refer to us saying that we had done something similar but wrong, and it was wrong because we used the wrong gauge. Now, how in a gauge invariant theory by using a different gauge one can commit a crime I can't understand, I never could. Anyway, their paper somehow got more attention than ours, so many people thought of this work as the work of Bogolyubov and Shirkov. It was only when Drell and Bjorken published their book that people realized that the work was really ours because they researched the literature and discovered that we had done it and that they had just copied it from us.

In 1956, when some of us went to Russia for the Moscow meeting on particle physics, there were discussions about this issue. Landau and his group - Ioffe, Abrikosov, Termatirossian and so on and so on - claimed that they had shown that quantum electrodynamics was self-inconsistent, which meant in the terms that Francis and I used, that our integral dx over ψ of x would converge – but this depends on ψ of x at very large x. But all you can determine from perturbation theory is ψ of x at very small x. So the work that Landau and his friends did using leading logs didn't seem to us to be convincing, so that while they might be right, that the theory was self-inconsistent, we felt they hadn't shown it at all. But it was impossible to tell that to Landau and his group, first of all because Landau never listened to anything very much, or very rarely listened to anything; but besides that there was a special feature, which was that they hated Bogolyubov. They and Bogolyubov were scientific and political rivals and enemies and… and anything Bogolyubov had done was automatically wrong, suspect, mustn't be discussed and so on. And they thought of this work as Bogolyubov's, not ours. So we were unable to raise the issue with them in our terms. Francis wasn't there actually; I did it myself, but I represented our… our point of view.

It was a fascinating experience going to Moscow in 1956. It was like visiting another planet. Some of the people in our group, like Viki, had been there twenty years before and they could compare, they had lots of friends. The rest of us made friends quickly though with the same people, these Russian physicists who had been around in 1936–and of course with the younger ones as well. In a few days we got to know them very well and we talked about all sorts of matters, and it was even possible to discuss some political questions because of the thaw, or whatever you want to call it – the… the change in the political climate. Khrushchev had just given his anti-Stalin speech. It hadn't been published but it was circulated, by word of mouth. The Party official in each work group throughout the country was supposed to tell his or her fellow workers about the speech. Millions of people had been released from confinement in prisons and labor camps. The guards who were fired because they weren't needed any more constituted a huge population of unemployed in addition to the prisoners that had been released. And probably some of the people we saw cleaning the spittoons in the physics labs were, had recently been, guards in labor camps. And we heard all sorts of stories of scientists who had been confined and… and terrible things done to them but were now free. The whole situation was amazing.

The conversations with Landau and his group – although we… they were carried on in a very friendly manner, didn't get anywhere. They kept saying, ‘Well, show what's wrong with our method.’ We said, ‘Well, your method is just adding up a few leading logs. Now, we looked into it more deeply. We have this formula that applies to all orders and presumably is non-perturbative. And you can see that the different cases depend on what happens to the ψ of x function at very large x–some people would say β/x at very large x but it's the same thing. And you… and you can't possibly tell that from the first few orders of perturbation theory.’
[Q] Were you impressed by Landau?
In a way, but I generally like people who are more open, and I was much more impressed therefore with Yakov Zel'dovich. But of course over there in the pecking order Landau was much higher than Zel'dovich and Landau used to make fun of Zel'dovich all the time. In fact, there's a terribly sad story that's also funny. You know that Landau suffered this horrible automobile accident between Moscow and Dubna, and his brain was very seriously damaged. He couldn't really do scientific work any more after that and he’d lost a lot of short-term memory. I couldn't bear to go in and see him after the accident in ’64, but I was told that if I had he would probably have recognized me and spoken to me in English, but that a minute or two later he wouldn't have remembered that… that he had spoken to me and he would say hello all over again and so on. It's terrible. But anyway, the story is that after he recovered a bit from the accident and was able to talk and so on, one of the first things he said was ‘I'm afraid my brain is just not the same as it was. I'll never again be able to do physics like Landau. Maybe I could do physics like Zel'dovich.’ But anyway, I really preferred Zel'dovich because it seemed to me he was a much more open, much more flexible person. Landau was so stubborn.

Ken Wilson–who had been my student at Caltech–applied the renormalization group to condensed matter problems near critical points; near transitions, and phase transitions. And  got enormous numbers of wonderful results from it. The asymptotic region where the power laws became exact, approached being exact, was of course the reason... region near the transition point. Ken, I believe, when he did that work didn't know that Francis and I had worked on the… on the problem and had found this… this machinery. I think he probably attributed it to Bogolyubov and Shirkov. And I think the condensed matter community as a whole doesn't know about it.

The peramaterization that we found... that I found and we found and that Chelean [sic] had found in-between, has positive weights if the particle is uncharged in a gauge theory. In Yang-Mills theory the quanta have charge and therefore the quantum can have negative weights as well as positive weights. That's how it is possible for the purtubation theoretic results to be correct at large momenta for a Yang-Mills theory while they are correct for small momenta in the case of a… quantum electrodynamics.

Heisenberg–who of course had been a very, very great physicist a long time ago after the war, after his working on the Nazi uranium project–was not so good as a physicist any more. Heisenberg came up with a kooky idea that… about which he made a tremendous fuss. He wrote down the equation: Gamma.psi = psi psi psi and said that this equation–which didn't have much meaning actually since it was so singular-this equation somehow contained the key to elementary particle physics. He had to cope with the fact that theory was very singular and he postulated that somehow in the presence of a lot of interactions maybe the propagators went way down. And Harry investigated the spectral representation in order to see whether this would be possible or not. But by that time Heisenberg had had another screwy idea of a negative metric and how he could have a negative metric without having negative probabilities. I never figured that out. He also had some other screwy ideas. He didn't believe in strangeness. He thought there were only two fundamental objects: something like the neutron and proton, or perhaps they were the neutron and proton; and that the strange particles weren't really there. He got them by doubling the vacuum, so that the neutron had another state, the lambda particle. Presumably if he had two neutrons he would have to quadruple the vacuum in order to get nn, n lambda, lambda n, and lambda lambda. The whole thing made essentially no sense. At first Wolfgang Pauli somehow was prevailed upon to sign up with him and to investigate this theory in collaboration with him. Pauli then came to the US and spoke in New York where he was rather severely criticized, and then he came on to Pasadena where Feynman and I both worked on him. Feynman said, ‘Your theory is as indefinite as your metric’, and I gave him some more specific criticisms as to why I thought the theory didn't make any sense whatever. And from Pasadena, I believe, he wrote the letter renouncing his collaboration with Heisenberg, and after that he attacked this foolishness.

I had heard about strange particles, that is hadron–well, we didn't know at that time that they were hadrons–particles found in cosmic radiation, initially in cosmic radiation, which were apparently copiously produced–not perhaps as copiously as the pion, but still they were quite copiously produced–but decayed rather slowly. I first heard about them when Leprince-Ringuet came to MIT when I was a graduate student and he spoke about his work.  Then we heard about Rochester and Butler in England. And then all of that work was pursued at Caltech by Carl Anderson and his team. They were called hooks and forks, from the forms of the tracks in a bubble chamber, or later on in a cloud chamber–I mean, sorry, in a cloud chamber or later on in a bubble chamber. And Carl had a… a sign on his blackboard that read: 'What have you done about hooks and forks today?' And in the laboratory that he and Leighton and others used on top of White Mountain–almost as high as Mount Whitney and on the other side of the… of the valley. In that laboratory they found I think the second through the thirteenth lambda particle, or something like that. And they found psi particles–what I later called psi particles and so on and so forth. But anyway, I had heard about these strange particles and I was of course interested like all other theorists in knowing what they were.

Dick Dalitz did some beautiful work on the spectrum of the three pions in the so-called tau decay–what is now called a charged K particle–decayed into three charged pions. And that mode of decay was originally thought to be a special particle and was called tau. And what Dick did was to study the spectrum of tau decay; what it indicated about the symmetry of the wave function of the three pions, and therefore about the isotopic spin of the three pions. And he showed that the three pions were in an isotopic spin 1 state. Well that paper should have been received with great enthusiasm by the theoretical physics community, but instead some people told Dalitz that he should probably not work on this kind of thing; that for a young theorist to study this kind of problem was unwise because he would get the reputation of being the sort of theorist who studied these weird things. Now what was so weird about studying the spectrum of a decay that had been observed in the laboratory I don't know, but it was somehow not respectable.

In Chicago – I naturally made certain assumptions. One was that there was a difference between baryons and... well, no, let me start differently. One was that there were various interactions: there was gravitation; there was electromagnetism; there was a weak interaction giving rise to β decay, μ decay, μ absorption and strange analogues of β decay and μ absorption. And then there was the strong interaction. And certain particles participated in the strong interaction – like π and nucleons – and others did not – like μ and electrons and neutrinos. Then isotopic spin was presumably applicable to the strongly interacting particles, and the μ had isotopic spin I and the nucleon had isotopic spin one half, and isotopic spin was approximately conserve, but its conservation was broken by electromagnetism because the electromagnetic current had a portion of it which was isotopic spin I and a portion that was isotopic spin zero. So in the emission of a photon you could either conserve isotopic spin or change it by a unit. In the emission of – emission and absorption of – a virtual photon you could violate isotopic spin conservation. That isotopic spin was a good concept for both pions and nucleons was being shown in our own laboratory in the experiments of Fermi and his collaborators. So it naturally occurred to me that isotopic spin might have something to do with the strange particles. The strange particles might be strongly interacting particles participating in the strong interaction, produced copiously because they were strongly interacting – but inhibited from decay, from rapid…  but prevented from decaying rapidly by a conservation law, which was however slightly broken so that they could actually finally decay, but slowly. And I thought maybe isotopic spin was this conservation law that would prevent them from decaying rapidly. Then a strange particle might for example have isotopic spin five halves, if it had only enough energy to decay into a nucleon and one pion – but not two – then isotopic spin would prevent its decay into nucleon plus one pion. But – and here's the catch – electromagnetism would violate the conservation of isotopic spin and then permit it after all to decay – a little bit more slowly into nucleon plus pion, but only a little bit more slowly because electromagnetism is not that weak. So when I proposed this idea and we discussed it in our theory group at Caltech, it became clear that... well, I just discussed it with Goldberger and Adams, not with anyone else; not with Enrico, just with Goldberger and Adams. It was clear that the idea by itself wouldn't work.

Dave Peaslee – who had worked with Weisskopf just before me at MIT, he had left MIT by the time I arrived. Dave Peaslee was then at Columbia and he wrote up this idea and why it wouldn't work, but very obscurely; it was not easy to read his letter, but since I had done the same thing I was able to understand his letter. Then I went to the Institute for Advanced Study on a visit in the spring of 1952 on my way to Europe. I had awarded myself the Murray Gell-Mann travelling fellowship to Europe and I was going to pay my first visit to Britain, France, Italy, Spain, and Switzerland. And when I stopped in Princeton, visiting the hospital or there also for a minor surgical procedure, I was invited to give a little talk at the Institute for Advanced Study. Oh no, perhaps I wasn't invited to give a talk. Anyway, I visited–I guess I was in Princeton anyway–and I visited the institute and visited my old colleagues there. And they asked me if I understood what Peaslee's letter was about, because they had read Peaslee's letter and they couldn't understand it. And I said yes, I hadn't read it very thoroughly either, but since I had worked out the same ideas I could explain my ideas, and it was an idea for how the strange particles could be explained but it was an idea that was flawed and I would explain the flaw.
So they hustled me into the conference room and the seminar room and I gave what amounted to a seminar. I described the idea and then I described how…  I was going to describe how electromagnetism would prevent it from working and so on. Well, in fact I did that. I described the idea and I described how electromagnetism would prevent it from working, and then I gave an example. I said, ‘Suppose for example the v one zero’, which is what we later called the lambda, I mean yes, what… what was called the lambda later on–this was in June, or May–May probably, May 1952. And the names lambda and so on weren't given until 1953 at the conference at Bagnères-de-Bigorre–which I didn't attend unfortunately. Anyway, in May 1952 I presented the idea and I told about why electromagnetism would ruin it and then I started to give an example. I said, ‘Suppose the v one zero is a member of a multiplet, and isotopic multiplet with i = 5/2.’ Now of course there's the difficulty that i = 5/2, that's lots of charged states and nobody had observed a great many multiple charge states such as i = 5/2 would have. But I was going to assume that somebody might discover them some day later, and I would still explain how the idea would function and then why it would be ruined by electromagnetism. I had explained it in general and I was now going to explain it in the specific case. However, instead of saying i =l 5/2, I said i = 1 – just a slip of the tongue. But as soon as I said it I realized that if it were i = 1 there would be no problem: there was no way that electromagnetism could convert i = 1 into i = 3/2; whereas it could easily convert i = 5/2 into i = 3/2. And then I went through in my mind as I stood there all the reasons why i = 1 would be thought to be impossible and I couldn't see that any of them held water. So I said ‘I think this is it! I think this is the explanation.‘ Well everybody pooh-poohed it, and they said, ‘Well, we don't understand what you're talking about and this doesn't seem like a very good idea, and this is just a special case and what we have already been saying,’ and so on and so forth. So I didn't pursue it further at that moment.

I lectured on the… on this idea but very, very vaguely at Leprince-Ringuet's summer retreat to which I was invited. It was a very nice thing to invite me along with all the lab members to his country house in Burgundy where he had the summer retreat, and there I gave a little talk about this problem, but isotopic spin was considered something very advanced that you couldn't discuss with experimentalists, so I spoke in the vaguest terms and didn't really announce the theory. When I returned to Chicago in the fall though, I talked about it at the weekly Institute of Nuclear Studies seminar, which was a strange thing: it was like a Quaker prayer meeting. All these distinguished folk met–including Urey, Fermi, Szilard and so on and so on and so on–and whoever wanted to say something would get up and say it, and then there would be a discussion. So I rose and gave this... presented these ideas. Fermi wasn't there; he was somewhere else lecturing or perhaps he was at Los Alamos working with Nick Metropolis or something of that kind, so he didn't hear it. But Dick Garwin was there and Dick Garwin pooh-poohed it and said he didn't understand what the point was and what it would accomplish and so on. Which was really too bad because Dick Garwin was performing precisely the experiment that was crucial in this connection; namely looking for n plus a neutron plus neutron gives lambda plus lambda, because some people such as Nambu and  Pais and so on had suggested associated production. Well, my theory led to a kind of associated production, but it forbade neutron plus neutron going into lambda plus lambda. Pontecorvo did this–or Poniacorva [sic] if you want the Russian pronunciation–did the same experiment in Russia. And he also failed to find neutron plus neutron going to lambda plus lambda, which should be a strong interaction according… a strong production reaction according to the plane associated production ideas, but was forbidden in my scheme. And so it's a pity that Garwin and I didn't pursue it further and that he didn't see that it was interesting and so on. But I was very reluctant to push my own ideas. For years and years and years I was reluctant to push them, and so if people pooh-poohed something I just retreated into myself and didn't… didn’t push it very far.
[Q] But that didn’t persist in later years?
 A long time later I got over it to some extent, but I was always worried because I was very worried about making a mistake. My father was such a perfectionist and I became a perfectionist and I hated the idea of making a mistake. And I would rather throw away fifty good ideas than make one mistake.
[Q] That must also relate to the problems you have writing things up?
Yes, exactly. I couldn't write things up because I was worried there might be some flaws and where I wouldn't write it up… 
[Q] Especially in writing?
Yes, I wouldn't write it up perfectly, exactly. Well, Dick Garwin later apologized very handsomely and publicly for this, which is really nice. He said later that he should have understood it and he was sorry that he made negative noises about this idea at Chicago and so on. He was very nice about it.

It was now May 1953, and June–in fact June and July 1953–the time when I went down to Urbana to work with Francis on what some people called the renormalization group. What happened was that Sam Allison's secretary had forgotten to send in a renewal of the notification to my draft board that I was working in a scientific laboratory and my… and that I should continue to receive a draft deferment. So, when I came back to Chicago I received a draft notice, and I thought I was going to be drafted and sent over to Korea and so on. I wasn't so terribly concerned about that in itself, but I was worried that I wouldn't be able to do any more work on physics for a long time, and… but in the mean time I tried to correct the error and get myself undrafted, but I decided I’d better write up some ideas before leaving for the army. And so I put together a written version of this idea and sent it in to the Physical Review Letters–well Physical Review. It was a letter to the Physical Review, at that time there wasn’t a separate 
[Q] There wasn't a separate journal?
There wasn't a separate journal; it was a letter to the Physical Review. I worked on it in Val Telegdi's lab, which was air-conditioned for the sake of equipment. There was no air-conditioning, as I said before, for the sake of people. I thought of getting a wax pencil;  it would be a very important part of my equipment, and it would melt when the temperature was over ninety, so that I could get air-conditioning for my equipment, but that didn't work. Anyway I worked in Val's lab–he later put up a plaque over the desk where I wrote up this stuff.

I wrote the letter to the Physical Review about what I didn't yet call strangeness. I did call it that privately but I didn't call it that in the… in the letter. But I did call the letter something like 'Isotopic Spin and Strange Particles.' Well, the Physical Review had a lot of problems with my letter. First of all they didn't like strange particles or curious particles or peculiar particles; they wanted new unstable particles because that was more pompous. Then their reviewer had terrible problems with the idea that a neutral meson, K0, could be different from its antiparticle, K0-bar, because everyone knew that a neutral meson like pi-zero was its own antiparticle. Well, I remembered vaguely reading Nick Kemmer's article in which he proposed the pi-zero, the isotopic spin one pion, or meson as they called it then. And I looked it up, and a huge part of the paper was devoted to showing that a neutral meson could be its own antiparticle, because the neutral… the spin zero formalism was the formalism of Pauli and Weisskopf. And Pauli and Weisskopf in their so-called anti-Dirac paper which gave the results of Weisskopf's one-year post-doc with… with Pauli… what they… what they did was to write a theory of scalar…charged scalar particles showing that it could be made perfectly consistent and that charged particles didn't have to have spin 1/2; they could have spin zero. It was okay. Well, the way they constructed the neutral spin zero particle was to take the Pauli-Weisskopf theory and take away the charge, which left them with a particle and its antiparticle–distinct from each other. Like the plus and minus that Pauli and Weisskopf had, only now they were neutral. Then what Kemmer did was to take the sum and the difference of these charged… of these uncharged fields which  were antiparticles of each other and show that the sum or the difference could be interpreted as a single meson field  which was neutral and which was its own antiparticle. You could then throw away the other one and get pi-zero. Well, I pointed this out to the Physical Review, and they agreed that it was okay. Then they had another problem,  that was that  everybody knew that a particle obeying Fermi-Dirac statistics, because it had half-integral spin, had to have half-integral isotopic spin. And everybody knew that a particle obeying Bose-Einstein statistics, because it had integral spin, had to have integral isotopic spin. Well, I went through the whole argument, showing that you could define, generalize statistics including isotopic spin. And it didn't matter; you could have fermions with either integral or half integral isotopic spin and mesons with either integral or half integral isotopic spin and you could still have generalized statistics including isotopic spin and it will all be okay. Then they printed it. By this time it was the fall of 1953. The secretary had sent in the notice, the draft board said it was okay, I didn't have to be drafted, but the paper was now in print.

Fermi was around now and I went in and talked to him about it, that's what it was. I went in and talked to him about my idea, and he listened and said, ‘Oh, that's quite interesting. But you know I am convinced that these new particles are particles of high angular momentum. And Dick Feynman, whom I visited in California, thinks the same. We both believe that these are particles of high angular momentum, they're made by the strong interaction but they're prevented from decaying by the centrifugal barrier which makes the life-time much longer than otherwise. That's all… that's all there is to it. And a number of people are working out the formulae for the inhibition factor from the centrifugal barrier for high angular momentum.’ Well, I was fairly discouraged. Enrico thought the idea didn't… he thought it was interesting but it didn't have much chance of being right and here I had sent out the paper and it was being printed, it was probably wrong.
I didn't have this idea of publication that for example Lee and Yang did; namely that as long as your paper was mathematically correct it was okay, that the purpose of a theorist was to point out the consequences of a hypothesis, to formulate a hypothesis and point out the consequences experimentally. And as long as the math was okay the paper was not wrong. It might be inappropriate, it might not lead to the right answer physically, but it was a correct paper and you should be proud of it. Well that wasn't my idea. What I wanted was to get the right answer, actually to predict what was going to happen in the actual world. And it's a pity that I had that idea because a lot of things that I thought of could have been written up in a contingent in a—what shall I say–as contingencies. I could have said there are these possibilities: maybe so and so, in that case so and so; or else this, in which case that. And each has certain arguments in favor and let's see what actually happens. I could have published many, many more of my good ideas if I had been willing to loosen up to that extent, but I was so tight and so inhibited and so worried about being… and so perfectionist. I only wanted to publish things that would actually correspond to the way nature worked.
And now Fermi was telling me that this idea was probably wrong and high angular momentum was probably right and so on, and I was very discouraged. And that evening I was in the office, and walked up and down nervously, walked into the secretary's office–I think her name was Vivian. She was also Fermi's secretary and in her typewriter was a letter, almost finished–or maybe it wasn't even in the typewriter, maybe she'd taken it out and was lying on the desk–it was ready for Enrico's signature. It was a letter to his friend  Cocconi, and I guess it was in English because Vivian, I don't think Vivian could type in Italian, so I guess it was in English. And it said ‘Dear Cocconi. Thank you so much for your calculations that you are doing on the high angular momentum hypothesis for the new strange, for the new peculiar particles. I'm very glad you did these calculations they look correct. However, you should know that Gell-Mann here at the Institute of Nuclear Studies is speculating about a completely different idea for these particles. He suggests...’ and then he described my theory at great length, and then signed it. So I was not too happy with Enrico. Obviously he thought my idea was very good, he just didn't want to tell me that he thought it was very good. But I was much happier about everything else. A little bit angry with him but very happy about the situation because he was obviously taking it very seriously.

They were doing experimental work on these particles at the Brookhaven accelerator. And I called up Courtenay Wright of our lab, who was visiting Brookhaven, and I said, ‘Courtenay, I understand they've found an event with a charged peculiar meson and a charged peculiar baryon. Is that right? He said, ‘Yes.’ I said, ‘Well, which was which, which was positive and which was negative?’ He said, ‘Oh, I don't know, does it matter?’ And I said, ‘Yes! It matters - because one of them is allowed and one of them is forbidden!’ Then he said, ‘I'll check’, and he left the phone for a little while, then he came back and he said that it was a… a positive meson and negative baryon. And I let out a whoop which he didn't understand at all because it confirmed the theory. And then it turned out there was a great excess of positive over negatives which nobody could explain in the cosmic rays as well as in the machines. So it looked as if, it began to look as if maybe it was right. Then I wrote up two other pre-prints which I never published. Herb Anderson at the Institute of Nuclear Studies was–who later lived out here and whose widow Jean still lives…  Still lives here, yes. …here. Well, I guess they were divorced at the very end and he married someone younger, but anyway, Jean still lives here. Herb Anderson was very enthusiastic about my work. He taught it in his class and he was very excited about it. And then Herb came rushing in to me one day and said, ‘Hey, do you know they've found a cascade particle? Can you explain that?’ And so I wrote another note called ‘On the Classification of Particles’ listing all the things that the theory would allow. And the cascade of course was one of them, and I predicted that it would–this was a negative one they'd found which I labelled psi minus—and I suggested that there had to be a psi zero, and of course when the psi zero was found they sent me the photo, which I had on the wall for a long time. If I can find it I'm going to put it back on the wall. Similarly, I predicted the sigma zero, I named the sigmas and I predicted the sigma zero, and then that was found and so on and so forth. And it was extremely exciting.

He was one of the people who had suggested–along with Nambu and some others, working all independently–the idea of associated production. But he had a different idea, not… when he... when he expanded the idea of associated production–which by itself was not enough to describe the facts--when he expanded it he did it in terms of a kind of parity, a sort of odd-even rule, whereas in fact it was not an odd-even rule. It was a strangeness, or the Z component of isotopic spin was a parameter that could assume discrete values going all the way up to plus infinity and minus infinity; it was not just an odd/even thing. So the idea wasn't really… beyond associated production the rest of the idea was wrong.

I didn't know about the associated production ideas. When I worked on the isotopic spin I was just thinking about isotopic spin, and it’s only afterwards when I proposed the idea that people told me about associated production. Later on, in writing about it in the... in The Scientific American and elsewhere, I described it as if—for pedagogical purposes-- as if I had first heard about associated production and then within that idea had suggested strangeness and isotopic spin. But that isn't true. I had never heard of associated production, I just developed the idea of isotopic spin and strangeness, and then discovered that it was a special case of something that people had been discussing called associated production. But it was a much more restrictive case and forbade a great many reactions that the associated production idea allowed; such as neutron plus neutron gives lambda plus lambda, and such as the thing I discussed with Courtenay Wright on the phone: if the charges had been the opposite it would have been forbidden.

I gave a class at Chicago which was attended by Fermi, and when Fermi came to anyone else's lecture, whether it was a seminar or a class or whatever, if he didn't like or understand something he would just stop the proceedings right there and not allow anything to go on until he was satisfied. And if it took him till the next lecture or the one after that he would still stubbornly refuse to allow anything to happen, he'd just keep asking his questions and making his objections over and over again. Well in my class he objected to this idea of K0 and K0-bar, because he said, ‘Can't you take the sum and the difference?’ Well, I knew all about that because of my controversy with the Physical Review and my checking over Nick Kemmer's paper of 1937, so I was able to answer him. I said, ‘Yes, you're absolutely right, and the K0 and K0-bar can be looked at in terms of their sum and the difference. However, in production it's the K0 and the K0-bar that matters, because K0 is allowed under certain circumstances while K0-bar is forbidden.’ and so on. So in a production reaction those are the relevant states. But in a decay it may vary and in many cases it may be that it's the sum and the difference that have particular decay properties, particularly if charge conjugation is involved. Well, after a while he accepted that. But then I developed that further and as I developed it I was in communication with Pais. We worked together a little bit. In the summer of ’54 we presented a paper together in Glasgow with my correct ideas and his wrong ideas. And… and then we also presented a model that we developed together which included strangeness but included extra particles as well as the ones that were known, so as to shift the centre of charge of the whole system back to plus a half. So that meant that besides the lambda there was also a positive analogue of the lambda which was an isotopic singlet and so on and so forth. Well, what we were doing was really inventing charm. We left out a couple of states with charm but almost…  it was almost a correct presentation of charm. But with a very unphysical hypothesis that the charm mass was similar to the strange mass, that the charm… the mass difference occasioned by charm was not very different from the mass difference occasioned by strangeness–which is of course totally wrong. But if you ignore that then what we presented was extremely close to the charm model, so we presented three models in Glasgow. Anyway, after that we continued to work together a little bit and we explored this matter of the K01 and K02. I really had had all the ideas myself, with the aid of Fermi's question, and I thank Fermi, at the end of the paper. It says, 'One of us wishes to thank Enrico Fermi for a very interesting discussion.' It was something like that. But I wrote it up with Pais anyway; I was feeling generous.
[Q] He was at the institute at the time?
Yes. And I thought I would write it up with him even though he hadn't really contributed anything significant. I didn't realize then that he made a habit of sort of seizing credit for things, or I would have protested, but I was quite relaxed about it at the time.

I visited the Institute for Advanced Study again in… for the spring term of 1955. I was on leave from Chicago in the fall at Columbia where they were offering me a tenured associate professorship and that's when I became engaged to Margaret. I had met her in the spring at the Institute for Advanced Study where she worked as the assistant to a lady archaeology professor, and when she came back from England in the fall we saw each other a great deal and we became engaged in November or so. And I decided I didn't want to go back to Chicago right away, I wanted to spend the spring at the Institute for Advanced Study, which I did. And that was when, as I described, when Einstein died and they took pictures of Margaret along with the institute and so on. Well, the Yang-Mills theory was very new at that time, in the spring of ’55. I was quite interested in it, but an incident occurred that impressed me very much with the situation in mathematics and the relation between mathematics and science. SS Chern was visiting Princeton then. He was a very famous mathematician working at Berkeley and he had been Frank Yang's teacher in China. They knew each other very, very well. They spent a lot of time together, their children played together; their wives saw each other and so on and so forth, during that spring in Princeton. Well, Frank spoke once or twice about the Yang-Mills theory, which was quite new. And SS Chern gave a series of lectures in the other building on mathematics, speaking on fiber bundles. And the number of physicists who were mathematically inclined attended the lectures on fiber bundles. But even at the end of that lecture series, and even after Frank had given a talk or two on the Yang-Mills theory, no one realized that these were the same thing… essentially the same thing; that the Yang-Mills theory was a special case of a fiber bundle, a non-trivial fiber bundle. And this despite the fact that Frank and Chern were so close together, they –I mean so close, such close friends and such close associates. They saw each other all the time, each one explained his ideas and neither of them realized that these ideas were essentially the same. It's amazing. But it's a consequence of the mood in mathematics at that time.

In the ’40s mathematics moved from its traditional way of presenting results to a highly abstract approach favored by Bourbaki, this group of French purists. And it became forbidden to explain in a mathematics article what you were going to do; or what you had done when you finished; to give any motivation; to give any non-trivial examples even. You could give a trivial example in a line or two, but you were not allowed to give, to explore a non-trivial examples. And as a result mathematics and science, particularly physics, drifted apart where previously they'd had a lot of mutual stimulation. It was very sad and I'm glad that later on the trend moved in the opposite direction to some extent.
In any case, I was quite impressed with… with the Yang-Mills theory although I didn't see how in its precise form it was applicable to anything. An exact gauge invariant theory with the group SU(2), and I didn't know what that would apply to. But I assumed that it would be very important some day in some connection, especially if we could develop a soft mechanism for breaking its symmetry; but I didn't see how to do that at the time. I didn't… I don't imagine that in ’55 I was already thinking about how, in a Yang-Mills world, knowing about symmetries would tell you almost immediately about dynamics. That's something I understood only much later, but it's certainly true.

I was thinking of going to Copenhagen and spending the next year in Copenhagen. And I was learning some Danish and I thought that Margaret and I would get married, which we did in April, and that we might spend the next year together in Copenhagen. But my draft board was getting very upset. They said they understood a student and they understood a professor, but these, all these research positions and post-doctoral positions and things like that they didn't understand and they wanted me to go and have a regular professorship at a regular teaching institution and then they could defer me. So I gave up the… the trip to Copenhagen. We did go there for a few weeks in the summer, but I gave up the idea of going there for a term or a year–and I accepted the offer from Caltech, not from Columbia. I think there were some other offers as well, but I… I turned down everything but Caltech. Well, Chicago by that time was offering me a similar job.
[Q] And what did you find so attractive about going to Caltech at the time?
Well, I thought highly of Feynman. Although I didn't know him very well, I'd met him a few times. I thought highly of the experimental group of Anderson et al. who had discovered all these strange particles, or at least the… the second through twentieth examples or second through fifth examples of various strange particles. I thought of it as a place where the politics would be congenial, as opposed, say, to Berkeley where there was a huge split between people with exaggerated ideas about national security and so on and people who weren't like that. In fact there was that long-standing lawsuit, as you know, by people who had left Berkeley, because of the oath controversy and sued to get their jobs back. They won, actually, although very few of them really returned. So I thought of it as both scientifically and politically pleasant and I knew that the campus was rather attractive; clean, neat, not a messy place like Columbia.
[Q] Were you concerned–given your early broad interests— were you concerned about going to an Institute of Technology, quote, as distinct from a broad university?
Yes. Viki Weisskopf warned me about that. He came to the little house in Princeton and Margaret cooked dinner for us–I had a tiny little place right near the Institute for Advanced Study and so the three of us spent the evening together talking. And Viki said, ‘Well, if you go out there, you know, there'll be some things that are pretty strange. For example, very little in the way of bookshops, maybe a drug store with a few magazines.’ Actually there is one very famous bookstop… bookshop in Pasadena, but anyway I… I could see what he meant later on. He said very little in the way of cultured discussions, and that was absolutely true, cultured conversation was rare. Then he described going camping. Bellbrook [sic], his old pal, had taken him out camping in the desert and he had told him that it essentially never rains in the desert so they didn't have to worry about tents or anything. But then it did rain, and not only did it rain, but after the rain the palm trees emptied the water on him, the water that had accumulated in the palm fronds fell on him making him even wetter than he had been before on account of the rain and so on and so on and so forth. He didn't make it sound like a really wonderful place to be. So I was a little worried, and it turned out I was not… not really that happy there. I found it very narrow. There was a lot of good science, but not archaeology or natural history or evolutionary biology or linguistics or ecology or all the things that really turned me on outside of physics.

Before I accepted the job at Caltech I visited there in Christmas ’54 with Margaret, and then I went back by myself. She had to return to her job in Princeton, but then I went back. After we went to San Francisco she flew back to Princeton and I went back to Pasadena, and I gave a couple of seminars. One was on mesons and baryons, and mesons theory and so on; the other one however was on the K01, K02 idea which impressed Feynman enormously because he said he hadn't thought of it and he was just amazed and... and then I talked also about the renormalization group work, which he hadn't thought of either; and he didn't think there was anything in quantum electrodynamics that he hadn't thought of. So they offered me a job immediately. At that time it didn't take a year or so the way it does now with all the government regulations and so on. It took two days or so for them to have a faculty meeting and… and offer me a job, and later on that… that spring I… I accepted it. And when I went there in… starting in April–yeah, in April or early May ’55--it was taken for granted that… that Richard and I would work together. And we did. We did a lot of very amusing things; we discussed things, we had lot of fun together at that time. Later on I got sort of fed up with his self-absorption–what I considered his self-absorption and his ego and so on. But that time that hadn't happened yet and we worked quite happily together.

We talked about strong interactions and weak interactions and electromagnetism and all… all the problems of elementary particle physics and on different days we talked about different things. And the… the nature of the weak interaction was certainly very important, and at one point I went into him and said, ‘What if… could the zero mass of the neutrino be explained by a parity violating weak interaction?’ Because I never paid much attention to the–I mean I didn't believe in the fundamental character of parity conservation, as I explained. I said, ‘What if we really have one plus gamma five times the neutrino?’ And we talked about that for a while and then, I don't know, somehow we dismissed it and we didn't go back to it. We were both very interested in the idea of an intermediate boson for the weak interactions and a real universal family interaction–not just something that looked vaguely like a universal family interaction, but a real interaction analogous to electromagnetism through an intermediate boson, one or more intermediate bosons. We were interested in that too. But we couldn't fix on a particular set of ideas.

There was an idea which I had had actually for a number of years and which I had mentioned to Pais and other people back in… in ’54 for accounting for what was called 'the τθ puzzle'. The τθ decayed into three pions; it was i = 1, it was a rather flat spectrum and it looked very much like a zero minus particle. But exactly at the same mass there was a decay into two π which looked very much like a zero plus particle. And how could this happen? Well, one way it could happen, I thought, was through parity doubling. And I worked out this idea that if the π was... if the  K particle was parity doubled, then probably the λ was parity doubled also, and so on and so forth. And then the ψ could either be a singlet or a triplet under this, and so forth: it would be a new variable. The ψ wouldn't have to be parity doubled, but the λ and the Σ would, and the K would and so on. I didn't publish that, but I talked about it a lot of places. And then Yang and Lee came up with this same idea and they did publish it and made a huge fuss about it. I was a little upset. I was sorry that I hadn't put it forward under my own name. Feynman said, ‘Well, don't worry, we don't know it's true, so what do you care?’ And I thought, well, maybe he's right, but then what is the explanation? And I didn't know. Then at the Rochester meeting in ’56… ’56? Yeah, ’56; the same one I guess where I spoke about the dispersion theory program. Marty Block, the experimentalist, was rooming with Feynman, and Marty Block said, ‘Well, what if parity isn't conserved?’  Presumably meaning in the weak interaction. ‘Then couldn't the τ and θ be the same thing?’ And Luis Alvarez had been suggesting - without understanding anything about parity - he had been suggesting that somehow the τ and θ could be the same particle, maybe. But anyway Marty posed this question to Feynman instead of posing it to the meeting and so Feynman thought about it and he couldn't think of any real reason why you couldn't have a parity of non-conserving weak interaction. And in fact, although neither of us had paid much attention, we had actually discussed such a thing together in connection with this 'one plus γ five' idea. So he said to Marty, ‘Well, I don't know of any reason why not. Let me ask Murray.’ So he grabbed hold of me and he said, ‘Murray, what if the weak interaction violates parity?’ Well, he didn't say it  that way, he said, ‘What if parity isn't conserved, and the τ and θ are the same particle?’ I said ‘Well, in the weak interaction, it could be that parity isn't conserved. Nobody knows really, nobody has ever proved it one way or the other. Could be true. I don't know of any reason why not.’ I was still interested in my parity doubling hypothesis which Yang and Lee had then put forward, but I had to admit this was a perfectly possible hypothesis. And so Feynman announced it to the meeting. He said, ‘My roommate, Marty Block is suggesting that parity is not conserved in the weak interaction.’ Well, he didn't say, in the weak interaction, but he said ‘is not conserved’. What he meant was in the weak interaction. And maybe that's the explanation and the τ and θ are the same thing.

Yang was the chairman of the session and so the question was posed formally to the chairman. And Yang said, ‘Well, TD Lee and I have looked at that, but it doesn't lead anywhere, or we didn't find that it… we didn’t find that it led anywhere.’ That was it. So Feynman didn't push this much further.
Then in May in Moscow, at that meeting that I described, I mentioned that there were various hypotheses about the τ and θ and parity, and so they scheduled a lecture on the subject. And the hall was completely full, standing room only — and there were people standing – and there were many people who couldn't get in. And I described this idea, ascribing it to Marty Block and saying that Feynman had proposed it to the meeting and that I had endorsed it and that it was a possible idea that parity was simply not conserved in the weak interaction; or there was the idea of parity doubling which I had thought of and not published and which Yang and Lee had published. And the third hypothesis which I thought was very unlikely was Marshak's very ugly hypothesis – Marshak was right there – I said Marshak's very ugly hypothesis that it's a two plus state, and that the τ spectrum is really not what it seems to be, then parity is conserved.
[Q] You wouldn't have a flat spectrum of course?
No. So… well, the idea that parity was not conserved was very upsetting to some people, and they got up and said, ‘But parity has to be conserved! Are you suggesting that Lorentz invariance is wrong, too? What about rotational invariance? This is just a silly idea.’ And I said, ‘Well look, I didn't propose this, but it is a perfectly possible hypothesis. Parity conservation does not come from reflection of co-ordinates; it comes from the transformation properties of the Hamiltonian, of the interaction concerned. In the case of the weak interaction nobody has ever really tested whether parity is conserved.’ Well, actually I didn't know it, but there had been an experiment in 1928 that tested it and found that it wasn't conserved. It's still not known whether that experiment was really correct or whether the result was an artifact, but I didn't know that it had been tested back in 1928. What I should have done if I had been a real… a really serious person was to propose a test right there. I could have said, ‘Well, sigma.p is a… is a pseudo-scalar if… if the spin depends on the momentum… the spin direction depends on the momentum direction. Then yes, it would be… it would be not violated.’ I didn't say that unfortunately. Anyway, there was so much interest that I had to repeat the talk immediately afterwards for a whole other audience, which also had standing room only. But the reaction of the big shots was very hostile to the parity violation idea. The parity doubling idea intrigued them, but the parity violation idea they didn't like at all. Well, the more they resisted it the more I thought, well, maybe its true. Well, when I got back Yang and Lee had changed their opinion and put forward the idea that it was not conserved, and had some… had this very, very complicated test of it which was being carried out at low temperatures by Mrs Wu and Ambler… and Ambler instead of suggesting just that they look for polar and longitudinal polarization of beta rays which would have been much simpler. Well then, of course the result was announced and parity was violated and many people were very, very shocked. To me it was a very important development, but it was certainly not shocking. And to Feynman it wasn't shocking and to so some other people like Fermi and Dirac it wasn't shocking. I'm told that when they announced to Dirac that parity was violated in the weak interaction, he said, ‘Parity? Oh yes, parity conservation. Is that in my book?’ And of course it isn't. The… well, as a… as a consequence of that people began to think about possible theories. And Salam and Landau — who was finally converted, although he hadn't believed in the whole thing — and I think maybe one other person suggested this 'one plus gamma five' idea, which I had been thinking about for a brief period earlier; but it was actually one minus gamma five that they were talking about because the data supposedly indicated scalar and tensor interaction and therefore the parity, the sign of the parity violation was… was actually wrong. People thought the electrons were spinning in one direction when they were really spinning in the other.

Art Rosenfeld and I started to write an article for the Annual Reviews of Nuclear Science [sic] on elementary particle physics–including the weak interaction–and in the course of writing that article we began to wonder whether the scalar and tensor assignment was really correct, whether it might not be vector and axial vector. In which case you could really have a real universal Fermi interaction compatible… Fermi interaction compatible with a intermediate boson and so on, instead of this messy scalar and tensor thing… stuff. Well, we ran into George Sudarshan and Bob Marshak, and George had been looking at this as a student of Marshak. And he had concluded that the experimental evidence was suspect, that there were actually flaws in the experiments. We had a summit meeting at Rand, the Rand Corporation–I don't know, remember why it was at the Rand Corporation but that's where it was–with Marshak and Sudarshan and Rosenfeld and me, and I think Felix Boehm, the experimentalist from Caltech. And we talked about the whole set of issues, and we concluded that this idea was… was a good one. Now, in the meantime Rosenfeld and I had written it up in our article, we called it 'The Last Stand of the Universal Fermi Interaction'. We calculated all the numbers, we showed that they came out very good, the coupling constants all came out very closely equal and there was really no reason why this couldn't be true if only we could get over these experiments that allegedly pointed to S and T, and allegedly pointed to this electron spinning in a particular way. So we put it in there as 'The Last Stand of the Universal Fermi Interaction', we explained which experiments would have to be wrong, and so on. And I took it fairly seriously. I didn't mind publishing an idea in this vague form and besides, I knew that Sudarshan and Marshak had done a lot of the work and they were going to write it up.

I have to mention something that happened while we were writing the article. A… a man came in who said he worked for the government and showed us a badge - it was like he was obviously from the CIA - and he said, ‘Are you Murray Gell-Mann?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ He said, ‘I'd like to talk with you - alone.’ Well, Art Rosenfeld was upset; he went down to the library to work on our article while I was interviewed by this government person who wanted to talk with me alone. And he said, ‘You were recently in Russia?’ I said, ‘Yes’. He said, and he was reading from a piece of paper but he obviously didn't understand what was on the piece of paper, he was some low-level person that didn't know what he was saying, he was just reading from this telegram that he'd got. And he said, ‘You were there and we heard that recently the…’ ...how did this work... ‘recently a prize was awarded, a Stalin prize or Lenin prize, or something of that kind, was awarded for prediction of catalysis of fusion reactions by muons and… and that the work was experimentally confirmed. Now you've visited a lot of Soviet laboratories. Will you tell us in which laboratory this confirmation was carried out?’ And I said, ‘Oh yes, I think I know what you're talking about.’ In the meantime I had wrenched the paper away from him, I wasn't supposed to look at this piece of paper, it was classified or something, but I had–since he was stumbling over it so much—I had wrenched the paper away and read it and then I understood what he was asking, because he didn't understand enough to ask the question intelligibly. I said ‘Oh, I see, you mean this award of a prize for predicting muon catalysis, and the announcement that somewhere in some laboratory this had been confirmed. Well the laboratory was not in the Soviet Union. It was confirmed at Berkeley, at the radiation lab, by the man you just threw out of the room–and his collaborators.’ He didn't see the humor. That was very funny. But, anyway, in that article we put in the universal Fermi interaction: the last stand. We describe the vector plus axial vector, the electron spinning the other way, the interaction being really universal, the coupling constants coming out okay, and all these experiments having to be wrong.

Feynman was back from Brazil or wherever he had been, I think it was Brazil. And he had talked with Felix Boehm and said, ‘How are the experiments going? What's happening with the weak interaction?’ And Felix Boehm said, ‘Well, Murray thinks it's vector and axial vector.’ And Feynman said, ‘Oh my God! If it's vector and axial vector, then it could really be universal!And  this and this and this and this! Not realizing that of course I would have thought of all that too. So he wrote some very pompous paper about it with some fancy reason why the theory had to be left-hand, had to be two components; why the neutrino had to be a two component neutrino and why the theory had to be this way and so on and so on. Essentially saying much the same things that… that we had put very modestly, extremely modestly in this little paragraph about the last stand of the universal Fermi interaction. But here he was proposing it, not just saying it was the last stand. He thought it was ridiculous to suggest something as ‘the last stand’ of something, he thought that was totally ridiculous as he was really proposing it seriously, making a huge fuss about it. I thought well, I wasn't going to write any more about this, but if you're going to put forward this fancy article proposing this which I'd already thought of some time ago and which Sudarshan and Marshak are discussing as well, I had better write an article too. So I started to write an article, much less pompous but with the same ideas in extenso instead of just a little paragraph on how it would work.
But then Bob Barker who was the Dean of the Division, the Chairman of the Division or something of that kind, Chairman of the Division or Dean of the Faculty, or something, I guess he was Chairman of the Division… Chairman of the Division of Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy,said that it wouldn't look good if two physicists who collaborated a great deal and were… worked in the same building in neighbouring offices were to write two rival papers with the same idea. He thought it wouldn't look very good and we shouldn't do it, that we should sign the same paper. So Dick said, ‘Well, why don't you add some things to this paper?’ So I added some ideas about strangeness and strange particles, participation in the weak interaction and some other things. But they weren't very carefully done because I didn't have any time, this paper was already written and out and it was written in a notation that I abhorred and with these ideas that I didn't share about the necessity of having two components and–I don't know, the whole thing was–I didn't like very much.
[Q] Was there friction between you?
Well, I was a little upset about this whole thing, I must say. And… and… but then the CVC was in there too because we had to discuss why the coupling constants were so accurately the same and... but it turned out that Gerstein and Zel'dovich had already proposed the CVC a year or so earlier, a year or two earlier. But we… our proposal was of course completely independent. CVC for a conserved vector current. But the current in the weak interaction, the vector current in the weak interaction was actually an isotopic spin current, so that the pion for example would make a contribution and so on and so forth.

[Q] Were you thinking at that time, I mean, either about the possibility, now that you had a conserved vector current, of unification ‘quote’, with electromagnetism, or... and alsoabout PCAC? Was that already sort of in the back of your mind?
Well, not exactly, but a little bit, in the following sense. If the vector current was isotopic spin–that couldn't be an isolated fact in my opinion–it had to be that the actual vector current was also an important quantity, a sort of axial pseudo-scalar isotopic spin with some important role to play. And then there was also a strangeness changing part, and that had to be important; that strangeness changing operator and the gamma five analogue had to be important operators as well. And these had to form a group of some kind, only I didn't think of it as a group–I meant a closed algebraic system. I had completely forgotten all that I had learned about group theory. I had studied group theory as an undergraduate taking graduate math courses at Yale. Then Racah or R'cah had given lectures, very learned lectures on group theory at the Institute for Advanced Study, which I attended; but I'd completely forgotten the whole thing, and I didn't think in terms of groups and I'd completely forgotten the Planck RA classification and all of these things. So I just thought in terms of closed algebraic systems and I thought the closed algebraic systems–closed under commutation–would have to be worked out by hand,  it didn't occur to me that they were all tabulated and so on. It's really unfortunate because I could have had all these ideas much clearer at a much earlier time. But the idea that these, all these operators would have to form a closed algebraic system, closed under commutation, was very important to me, right away.
[Q] That was already..?
Right away! I see. Right away. As soon as we had the CVC. Yes, yes. So this was in late ’57.
 [Q] I see. So well before the thinking about the eightfold way and quarks?
Oh yes. Obviously. Oh yes. I felt there had to be...
[Q] In spite of the fact that it waited for that before it became sort of a tool?
Well, also I proposed in that same year a higher symmetry with further operators. I proposed this global symmetry as a way of understanding the relations among the nucleon lambda, sigma and psi, and I got a mass formula. The mass formula was slight–very similar to the eightfold way mass formula but with the three and the one interchanged.
[Q] Two and the one?
 Three and the one.
 [Q] Isn’t it two and the one?
Three and the one. Yes?  Instead of three M lambda plus M sigma over four... It’s the other way... ...equals M nucleon plus M psi over two: the three and the one were the other way round. And I knew, in fact, that the formula would be better if the three and the one were interchanged, but I didn't of course know how to get it. But you had to wait for SU(3) of course ... I didn't know how to get there, yes.

At the Stanford meeting of the American Physical Society in December ’57, Feynman and I both appeared and we both gave little papers, they were just ten minute papers. And Feynman talked about the main idea of the universal Fermi interaction, and I talked about other aspects. And I mentioned how he and I had calculated the decay of muon into electron plus photon with an intermediate boson, and how we had tried various ways of making the intermediate boson interact with the photon, including the Yang-Mills way; which was the only one that gave a finite result. So we already knew about a Yang-Mills type interaction between the intermediate boson and the photon. And I said how the rate, even when it was finite, still came out much too big and therefore something was wrong. Either there was no intermediate boson, which seemed a pity; or there was a cut-off at very, very…  cut-off of field theory at some very low energy before the intermediate boson mass was reached; or there were two different kinds of neutrinos: red and blue neutrinos, one for the electron and one for the muon. And the people who later did the neutrino experiment were sitting right there, Lederman and Steinberger, and so on, but they never quoted my talk and I was very unhappy about that. They all heard it. They were all… I'm sure they all understood it, but they never quoted it. Now of course I never took the trouble to publish it–well, actually I did write up an article on it, which I wanted to sign with Feynman, but Feynman refused to sign it for some reason.

Gerald Feinberg I think his name was, at… at Columbia had done the same calculation of the mu into e plus gamma with an intermediate boson and showed that it was too, too fast and there had to be something to prevent it from… from going–which could be two different neutrinos. Then Yang and Lee noticed something very important which was that if you had two different neutrinos you could distinguish them by doing experiments in which there were neutrino beams. Now that had been considered rather impossible… that had been considered next to impossible. But they pointed out that the cross-section keeps going up until you reach the cut off that comes from an intermediate boson, but for energies lower than that the cross-section keeps rising very steeply; so that at very high energies you could actually have neutrino beams and you could detect them, you could detect reactions induced by them. So… and then of course that was done and it was confirmed that the muon neutrino was different from the electron neutrino.

In the summer of ’58, Dick Feynman and I worked together on another little paper which he presented in Geneva at the–not at the International Meeting on Particle Physics, but at another meeting which was on the uses of atomic energy or something like that. But at that meeting there was a little session on pure physics and there he presented a little paper by the two of us on various issues in connection with the strong and the weak interactions. After that we didn't collaborate very much any more. I like the situation where one thought in terms of 'we'; we do this, we do that. And I am… under those conditions I am willing to be very generous about credit and so on, pooling ideas and joint responsibility; whereas Dick kept thinking in terms of what I did: I did this, I thought of that, I thought of this, I thought of that and so on. And actually he thought very highly of me and of my contributions, that wasn't the problem. It was just the… the way in which he operated was very much–what shall I say–was one of being very self-contained, even though we were collaborating. And I didn't like it very much. I didn't… I don't think we did very much collaboration after that.
[Q] Did you talk much physics after that? 
Oh yeah, we continued to talk about physics for quite a while and off and on we did until the very end. Just before he died we had a conversation about the interpretation of quantum mechanics, for example, on which we had very similar views, and... no, we had… we had quite compatible views on a lot of things and we did talk from time to time, but it's just that I was so irritated by his constantly speaking about what I did, meaning himself. And this despite the fact that he did not really depreciate my contributions to anything. I know that he didn't, but somehow he was incapable of a… of a collective approach to anything.

I think it was in ’57 that I proposed the global symmetry, and it didn't give a very good mass formula and of course I wasn't very happy with it. And its predicted power wasn't very great and of course, we know it was wrong. I assumed that some version of Yang-Mills theory was to be used for both the weak interaction and the strong interaction. The big problem with that, which got more and more serious over the years, until color made its appearance, was that the two got in each others way if they operated in the same space of charges, and… and that was a serious obstacle to thinking that both the strong and the weak interactions were somehow Yang-Mills theories.
[Q] You weren't concerned about the mass loss in itself, the gauge bosons?
Well, I knew that you had to modify the Yang-Mills theory if you wanted to get the intermediate boson for the weak interactions along with the photon. You had to violate its symmetry somehow and get massive particles. I didn't know how to do that. When I wrote my Eightfold Way pre-print in January 1961 I actually advertised for what I called a soft mass mechanism. But this was a year or two after my collaborators and I had used the sigma model as an example of a number of things. And of course starting from the sigma model it's very easy to get to the correct explanation of how the Yang-Mills theory can have its symmetry violated in a soft manner so as not to violate renormalizability. Salam and Kumar in London, Imperial College, while I was visiting there or near the time when I was visiting there in ’59 and '60, pointed out that Yang-Mills theory would be okay, renormalizable, if… if the symmetry weren't broken; but if it were broken in any brute force manner, just by sticking in a mass for the bosons, for example, then it was no longer renormal izable. So it was clear that a soft mass mechanism was needed and well , if I had been thinking carefully I probably would have found it a lot earlier than… than it was found, but… but I didn't. Playing with the sigma model we were very, very close to… to the correct answer. Actually it was Phil Anderson working in condensed matter physics who found the mechanism for getting a massive intermediate boson. The so-called Higgs, Kibble and so on and so on and so on mechanism should also be named after Anderson. And I said in my book, kidding him, that if the elementary particle physics community had given him adequate credit for this idea he… we would have been spared his public objections to the construction of new accelerators.

I was thinking of charges in several different ways. I was thinking of charges forming closed systems under commutation. I didn't realize that they were Lie algebras until a little bit later, but I did understand forming closed systems under commutation, and these charges were then… had different origins or different character depending on the problem. First of all, there were the charges that we mentioned a few minutes ago that occur in the currents of the… that… that are integrals of the… of the time components of the parts of the weak current. So we have isotopic spin, you have a pseudo-scalar analogue of isotopic spin, then you have a strangeness changing term and a strangeness changing pseudo-scalar charge. And commuting all of these you get some sort of closed system. What was it? Second question was: what is the Yang-Mills theory involved in the weak interactions; and what is the Yang-Mills theory involved in the strong interactions; what are their sets of charges? And the third is: what are the symmetries, the broken symmetries of the strongly interacting particles that allow us to go beyond isotopic spin in classifying the hadrons, so that hadrons are classified into super multiplets that go beyond the isotopic spin multiplets. Well, these were three closely related uses of–four actually, four closely related uses of various charge operators and I didn't somehow take the trouble to sort out the logical relationships among all these different things; I just hoped for an insight of some sort that would clarify it all.
But these were really four slightly different questions: what is the closed system of these charges for the weak current, the different parts of the weak current? What is… is the set of charges for the Yang-Mills theory for the strong interaction? What is the set of charges for the Yang-Mills theory for the weak interaction? And finally: what is the set of operators that give a higher symmetry for classifying the super multiplets among the hadrons? Well, I played with all of those and I played with them without–unfortunately without—using the concept of Lie algebras and Lie groups, which would have been immensely useful and to which I had been exposed, both in mathematics classes at Yale when I took graduate courses as an undergraduate, and also in Racah's lectures. But I didn't remember any of that, so I just fiddled around by hand with closed systems of commutation, of commuting operators; systems closed under commutation, working them out by hand and trying to find some scheme that would somehow answer all these four questions with various charges.

Another thing I did was to look at what was called the Sakata model. Although Dick Feynman and I developed it actually independently, we didn't publish it but we… we thought of it independently and worked with it a good deal. That was the supposition that somehow neutron, proton and lambda were fundamental, and the other particles were made out of them. Well that is an SU(3) scheme, but I didn't think of it in terms of SU(3); I thought of it in terms of S3, permutations among three things. Now, actually, mathematicians have shown that the representations of the permutation group and the representations of the unitary group are very closely related, so that I was able to construct the irreducible representations of SU(3) without knowing that I was working with SU(3) just by using permutations. And I actually did it. So I found the fifteen dimensional representation, for example, and the six dimensional representation and so on. And I thought that maybe that's where psi belonged, that we had n, p, and lambda and then sigma and psi belonged to a fifteen along with a lot of other particles that hadn't been seen yet, and so forth. I worked all that out mathematically, but it looked very ugly, so I didn't really sign on to it. But what I was doing was the Sakata model although of course I didn't assign that name to it since we had thought of it ourselves, and I had worked out these multiplets by myself. I didn't like it very much, but anyway I played with it. Likewise I played with a field theory model for the purpose of abstracting results in which I had three fundamental objects, like neutron, proton and lambda, and a single vector boson, giving a force among them. I knew this wasn't the right theory but I thought that some properties of the true theory could be abstracted from it. Later on, after the proposal of quarks, I used a three quark field theory with a single vector boson–no, a single neutral vector boson, knowing it was wrong but hoping that some correct results could be abstracted from it.

 ’59 in the fall, I went to Paris and spent the year in Paris from—well I was, first of all I was in the summer I was at Imperial College in London where everybody was interested in Yang-Mills theories, and Salam and Kumar were working on the project that I mentioned. Then around the end of October I moved to Paris where I was at the Collège de France–I was, I think, the first visiting professor in the history of the Collège de France. And then I… I also had a job at the university, initially the university job was actually… actually involved having an office at the École Normale which is not part of the university. But in the spring the campus at Orsée was established and my office, my university office was out there in Orsée. So I spent some time at the College and some time at Orsée. Maurice Lévy and I collaborated all during the year, and also Jeremy Bernstein came over from the US and he worked with me for a while. Fubini and Thirring both came by and we worked with them a little bit for a few days, and so there were papers signed with these various collaborators during the year. What we were working on, from our point of view, was very similar to what Nambu and collaborators were working on from their point of view, and Goldstone from his point of view. Namely: what happened if you had an axial vector charge that was nearly conserved but did not lead to degeneracies, to approximate degeneracies? It would instead lead to a nearly massless pseudo-scalar boson. And so we thought about that; we called it partially conserved axial vector current; we looked at it from many different points of view; pole dominance and so on and so forth. But from this…these various points of view that we investigated, it was the same idea, and in the limit of perfect conservation of the axial charge without producing degeneracy, it would produce an exactly zero mass boson. So it was the same really as the Nambu Goldstone boson.

We played with the sigma model and used it as an example of many different things. I don't think we were the first ever to use it, but we certainly made a great deal more use of it than had been… than had… than  before. We also developed the non-linear sigma model which somebody else may have had before, I  don’t know whether it was absolutely original, but that's… but again we did much more with it than anyone else and possibly we discovered it, I don't know. Feynman didn't want to have anything to do with the non-linear sigma model. He said he didn't believe in square roots of fields, he didn't understand square roots of fields, he didn't want to discuss square roots of fields–and so he wouldn't sign any paper that included them. So we had to leave him off of the ones that mentioned it, and the ones that didn't mention it he–as far as the ones that didn't mention it were concerned–he hadn't contributed to those. So he didn't co-sign any of the papers I wrote in Paris.

Shelly Glashow was there in Paris and I had a lot of conversations with him. He… he was a student of Schwinger's, and partly under Schwinger's influence, he suggested models of the weak interaction in which the Yang-Mills theory was applied somehow to the intermediate boson–the positive and negative intermediate bosons, the photon and one other particle, which would be a neutral intermediate boson. How that was to be reconciled with the strangeness changing rules was not so clear, but it was a very interesting idea otherwise. And I formulated it I think a little better than he did, although it was his idea. And when I returned from Europe and Africa in the fall of '60, I gave a report on his idea to the Rochester Conference–which was I believe in Rochester. And... and I described it as Yang-Mills theory based on the usual group SU(2) or whatever it’s called, and a singlet which we would call U1; so it was an SU(2) times U1 theory. And I just described exactly how it would… how it would work. But Shelly... But Shelly had included some wrong stuff. He had said that this type of theory was renormalizable, with brute force mass, and of course that wasn't true, as Salam and Kumar had shown.
[Q] But he'd already done SU(2) cross U1 by then, by that Rochester meeting? 
Oh, before that, even. Yes, yes. He had written a dissertation perhaps, and anyway a long paper including it and including the mass… the symmetry break and claiming it was renormalizable, which it wasn't. But otherwise it was clever and it was essentially correct.
[Q] Because Schwinger had done SU(2),  right? Prior… prior to that. Because he was looking for real unification as distinct from...
Yeah, but that didn't work, of course. No, it didn't work, no, absolutely. That didn't work. Also he tried to deform it into a scalar and tensor theory somehow, because at that time some people, most people thought the weak interaction was scalar and tensor. That didn't work either. But anyway, Shelly and I talked a lot. And we talked also about a Yang-Mills theory for the strong interaction and what the charges could be, and whether these charges would then be the same as the ones that would give super multiplets for classifying the hadrons beyond isotopic spin, and if so, what would that system be. Well, I worked out what it would have to be: to generalize–the idea was to generalize Yang and Mills'... Yang's and Mills' work. What algebraic system could replace isotopic spin? Well, I wrote down the rules for Yang-Mills theory and... that would permit a Yang... a generalized Yang-Mills theory, and I found what the rules were. I had charges that I called F, and the commutator of Fi with Fj had to be–you had to be able to write in a suitable representation as little 'i' the square root of -1, times little fijk, times capital FK summed over K, where little fijk had to be… there had to be a… a way of doing it so that little fijk was totally anti-symmetric. And the Fi's were remission. Well, that's certainly true of isotopic spin where little fijk is eijk, the totally anti-symmetric tensor with indices running from one to three. But what was the generalization of this?

I realized that in modern notation you could have SU(2) times SU(2); you could have SU(2) times SU(2) times SU(2); you could have SU(2) times U1; you could have SU(2) times U1 times U1; SU(2) times SU(2) times U1 and so on and forth–any product of SU(2)s and U1s, as we would phrase it today, would be a possible group, and the corresponding algebra would be the right algebra. That would be fine. But was there anything else? Well, I worked on it, by brute force. I'd totally forgotten everything I'd learned about Lie algebras and so on and…
[Q] That's trivial!…
I worked on it — trivial! But I worked on it – in this academic year ’59-60, particularly in the fall of ’59, I worked on it every afternoon. But the problem was every noon, when I was working at the Collège de France I would go across the street to Les Trois Bourriques [sic] and have lunch with a lot of excellent French red wine, and after the lunch with the wine I would sit there in my office trying to work out whether there was a solution with five operators, with six operators, with seven operators. And I showed that there was up to seven there was nothing but SU(2)s and U1s. And the thought after all that wine of going on to eight was just too much! What was particularly amusing w
as that a lot of the time one of my companions at lunch was a professor at the Collège de France named Serre, who was probably the world's greatest expert on Lie algebras and Lie groups. But even if I had shown him the problem, it wouldn't have done the least good because he would not have recognized in this practical form the things that he worked with every day, because he treated them so abstractly. So I didn't know during that whole year whether there was really something beyond SU(2) and U1. But of course, if I had taken the trouble to remember, or if I… if I'd remembered about Lie algebras and so on, I would have had it immediately. Getting to eight, which I hadn't tried, I'd gotten only as far as seven, getting to eight, there would have been a new solution, namely SU(3), which is not made up of SU(2) and U1.
Well, my enlightenment about this issue came then a year late, in the fall of 1960 when I returned from Africa, from Europe and Africa,  gave my talk on Shelly's ideas and some talk on my ideas as well, at Rochester, and then went back to Caltech. I found an Assistant Professor of Mathematics in our building–actually it was a new building which we shared, which some of us physicists shared with mathematicians, so it promoted interaction between physicists and mathematicians–I found an Assistant Professor of Mathematics named Block, Dick Block, and I asked him whether he'd ever seen such equations. And he said, ‘Oh, that's a canonical form for a product, for a… the Lie algebra associated with the product of simple Lie groups. That's all it is. You just… and the simple Lie groups have been classified, so all the solutions to this problem are known.’ So in… in two to three sentences he cleared up the whole matter. Well, I looked at the next one, SU(3), and it looked beautiful. And by Christmas I had understood how to do the whole thing and I went out to the desert for New Year’s Eve, returning I think, the day after New Year’s Day and started to work out the whole idea of the Eightfold Way.

It was January ’61 when I worked it out and very soon I completed it and I was feeling in a… I was in a very good mood that year,  my mental health was very good, I was brimming with mental health. So as soon as I finished it I wrote it up as a Caltech report. I didn't know that a Caltech report wasn't a publication,  that it was just a pre-print. I assumed if I wrote something up as a Caltech report it was a… it was a paper, because Caltech reports were brand new, they'd just been started: Syncotron Laboratory Research Reports and I assumed they were… constituted publication. Anyway, I wrote it up, but I was a little worried about it because there were a number of issues that were unresolved. And those I have discussed in the paper that I gave later in Catalonia in 1983, Sant Feliu de Guíxols. I was worried because of the clash between the strong interaction and the weak interaction theory if they were both Yang-Mills theories in the same charge space, because in that paper I had an SU(3) Yang-Mills theory for the strong interaction. I also used the charges for a higher symmetry of the strong interactions beyond isotopic spin, and that worked beautifully: that gave me the super multiplets; the mass rule. If one put in splitting by eighth component of the octet, the mass rule worked very well; lots of other things seemed very good. But I was worried about the Yang-Mills theory for the strong interactions clashing with the Yang-Mills theory for the weak interactions. I was worried about how to make the theory renormalizable because one had to introduce violations and I knew that those destroyed the renormalizability. So in the pre-print I advertised for a weak… a… a soft mass breaking mechanism, not thinking that if I revisited our work on the sigma model I might get that mechanism. But anyway, I asked for one. There were other things that bothered me, too.

The role of the pion, though it was double because it was also in the limit of the conservation of axial vector charge, it was also the zero mass boson associated with its conservation in that limit. How did we put that in? Was the… should we regard the axial charges after all as producing degeneracy instead of producing zero mass bosons? All of these things were troublesome. Another thing was the parallel between the leptons and the hadrons. If the fundamental group for the hadrons was SU(3)… for classifying the hadrons and for the strong interaction was SU(3);  that suggested  a  parallel with the three leptons: electron, muon and neutrino. But what about the red and blue neutrinos? If there really were red and blue neutrinos, and the experiment hadn't been done yet, then there would be four. Does that mean there ought to be an SU(4) for the hadrons? In other words, should we have charm? But I didn't of course use that word or that idea, but that was the basic question, and I was uncertain about that.
Another thing was the weak interaction: should the weak… if the parallel was with three leptons, then we might think that the weak interaction would be half strangeness preserving and half strangeness changing; like e plus mu over the square root of two times neutrino, if there were one neutrino. But if there were two neutrinos, then we would rather have what Lévy and I had proposed from Paris: namely an angle between the neutron and the lambda: n cosine theta plus lambda sine theta–what was later called the Cabibbo angle. But we actually suggested it because although we wrote cosine theta as one over the square root of one plus epsilon squared, and we wrote sine theta as epsilon over the square root of one plus epsilon squared. But of course that's exactly the same thing–for every theta there's an epsilon, for every epsilon there's a theta; it's exactly the same formula. So I didn't know whether to propose that the strangeness changing weak interaction would be just a little extra bit of the weak interaction, or whether it would be on an equal footing with the strangeness preserving part. I liked the idea of the epsilon, because it made the coupling constants come out perfect, absolutely perfect as Lévy and I had remarked in our paper from Paris the previous year. On the other hand the parallel with electron and muon with one neutrino would suggest that the strangeness changing and strangeness preserving parts would be on a par. I didn't know where to have it.
All of these hesitations and worries I described in that paper that I wrote in 1983 for the Catalonia meeting. It was published several years later, when the proceedings of that conference came out;  the first troubadour they called it, the first troubadour in the history of science.

The Eightfold Way report had the Yang-Mills theory of the strong interaction based on SU(3) as well as using SU(3) for classification. Then people started telling me that if evidence, the experimental evidence favored a sigma and lambda with different parity, that the relative parity of sigma and lambda was negative instead of positive–experimentally. It wasn't true, but it worried me a lot and I began to wonder whether we shouldn't go back to the other model which was like the one proposed by Sakata but which we had worked on actually independently without publishing them. So in the summer when I lectured in India I scarcely mentioned the Eightfold Way, even though the name was inspired by oriental religions–as a joke of course. But then in the fall I came back to the Eightfold Way and re-wrote the paper completely, starting with the… essentially the Sakata model but then modifying it to give the Eightfold Way. And what I was doing in that paper then was sort of groping toward quarks, because I used the three fundamental particles in one part of the paper and then I threw them away and just went to the abstraction of the SU(3) in the latter part of the paper. I also got rid of the Yang-Mills theory for the strong interaction because I was too worried about the clash between the strong charges and the weak charges in the same charge space. And I put in a lot of pole dominance, which was very useful, and a whole bunch of other things. And the… so the paper wasn't published actually until 1962, but it contained a lot of very good material by that time. As a result of all this back-ing and fro-ing it was quite a good paper. I was told later it was at the… at the time the most cited paper in something or other, maybe in the Physical Review, and that made me feel pretty good, even though the number of citations doesn't tell you whether a paper is good or not. Then I realized later on that the only reason it was the most cited paper was that it was the paper in which I had introduced in print the eight lambda matrices for the Eightfold Way. And all these papers that cited it were really just citing these matrices which were a three by three generalization of Pauli's two by two matrices! Meant nothing at all that it was the most-cited paper! Yeah, they became known as the Gell-Mann matrices, of course. Is that right? Yes,many people refer to them as the Gell-Mann matrices. I didn't know that. But anyway, it was funny. The… but all these questions and hesitations remained and I had to work them out and other people had to work them out over the years. The experiment on the red and blue neutrinos was finally done, in 1962 and I was upset that they never mentioned my speech that they had heard–but of course I should have published. Anyway they cited Yang and Lee and Feinberg and so on. But that cleared up the question. There were now four particles: electron, muon, and two neutrinos among the leptons. So that should make it much more plausible then to introduce a fourth degree of freedom for the hadrons. But I didn't do that. Glashow and Bjorken did it in ’64, but they didn't really draw the important conclusions from it they should have.

In 1962, at the International Conference in Geneva, a… an excited psi particle was reported and I looked at the energies of the… the three-three resonance, which of course was now regarded as an excited particle, and the… an excited sigma. And there was the mass, newly reported mass of an excited psi, and the two mass intervals were equal. Well that suggested if the Eightfold Way scheme was correct, that we were dealing with a decimet. In the case of the decimet the two terms in the mass formula both gave the same result–so there was only one term really–and therefore a greater predictive power than for an octet. For an octet there was single linear relation among the masses of the, say the psi, sigma, lambda nucleon, but for the decimet, the prediction was stronger the spacing had to be equal. And the experimental result reported at the conference was that between the delta, as I called it–that is an i equal three halves… i equal three halves  version of the nucleon–between the delta and the sigma, and between the sigma and the psi there was the same spacing, so there ought to be a singlet, with a predictable mass, something like 1670, 1675 MeV.
We applied the formula to the masses themselves in the case of baryons, and to the mass squares in the case of bosons. Well, I got very excited and ran up to the front of the room and wrote something or other on the blackboard. But I was so excited that I had made a mistake: instead of saying that the prediction was of a… a negative particle of strangeness minus three, a singlet, an isotopic singlet, I said it was a neutral particle of strangeness minus three. And I corrected it of course after a while, but it just indicated how excited I was about it. And I indicated the decay schemes. It would have very conspicuous cascade, double cascade decays; decays into K-plus… -minus plus lambda, or into pi-minus plus psi-naught; pi-naught plus psi-minus also, but that would be less conspicuous. And at… immediately afterwards, I think it was at lunch, or at dinner, Nick Samios and Jack [sic] Leitner said that they wanted to search for this new predicted particle at Brookhaven using their bubble chamber research, and would I write a note to Maurice Goldhaber, the director of Brookhaven, suggesting that this is a good idea. So I scrawled a note on a napkin in the CERN cafeteria, or wherever it was we were meeting--I think it was, I'm not sure where we were meeting, CERN hadn't been fully established by then—anyway, I wrote a note on a napkin in the cafeteria and handed it to them. And I said the Eightfold Way scheme clearly predicted this particle with decays… indicated decays and it should be very conspicuous, and I suggested that they look for it. They were given permission to look for it and after scanning two million feet of film they finally found two examples within a few days of each other, one of each decay. One… one was an example of the decay into K-minus plus lambda; and the other was a… an… the first one was an example of pi-minus plus psi-naught, I believe. But that wasn't until, I think February 1st, 1964, the same day that the letter to the Physical Review about quarks appeared.

Yuval was working in military intelligence, he was in the Israeli Army, he was very high up in military intelligence. But he decided that… that he would change careers and work on physics. He was technically trained; he was trained as an engineer. He thought at first he would work in his father's factory, I think, as an engineer, something of that kind. But very soon he got caught up in the military organisation, Hagana, and then in the Israeli Army, and in the late ‘50s he decided he wanted to work on physics, fundamental physics of some kind. And he requested a post as scientific attaché… as military attaché in London. At that time relations were rather cool between Britain and Israel, and he didn't think he'd have much to do as the military attaché and that he could spend most of his time studying physics.
He wanted to study general relativity at, I think University College–one of the… one of the colleges of the University of London way over on that side of town, toward the east. But the Israeli Embassy is in Kensington… I think it might have been King's College actually, that he was interested in. Yes, one of those, one of those colleges anyway. Yeah, I thought it was University College, but I'm not sure at all. In any case, since the embassy is in Kensington he found that the journey by tube was just too long and so he studied at Imperial College instead, right nearby in South Kensington, working with Abdus Salam. But that meant he studied particle physics instead of general relativity, and around the same time that I was working out the Eightfold Way scheme he was doing something very similar. I don't think he got the mass formula, but he did have the SU(3) and multiplets. Neither of us had published anything about the decimet, though. We knew about it of course and well, we had I guess, both of us, published the simple mathematical formula; that if you have two octets—no, no, I'm sorry, no, that if you… if you take three triplets--three times three times three--you get one plus eight plus eight plus ten. So a decimet arises from three triplets, as does an octet and a singlet. But neither of us had predicted the existence of a decimet, although I had speculated and perhaps he had also, about the character of the 3-3 resonance. And certainly a decimet looked like the best assignment. I guess I was wrong in what I said a moment ago, because I must have identified it as a… as a decimet. The reason I think that is that I saw a paper by Jun Sakurai in which he tried to put it into a twenty-seven dimensional representation, and I disagreed with that. So I must have expected that it would fall into a decimet, actually, but I hadn't done any serious research on it or written up the equal mass spacing prediction or anything of that kind, until I heard this remarkable experimental result at the meeting in Geneva.

1961… yes, that was the year that Goldberger and Blankenbecler pointed out that particles of higher and higher angular momentum seemed to lie on Regge trajectories that were quite straight. Again plotted versus mass squared for bosons and versus mass for fermions, and that the odd and even trajectories seemed to be almost degenerate–although they don't have to be by any rigorous principle. I wonder whether–I still wonder, I have wondered all this time and I still wonder—whether the straightness of those trajectories and the accuracy of the first order mass formula for SU(3) aren't somehow related to each other; both are a little bit surprising. In any case, I accepted both field theory and the dispersion theory program of calculating amplitudes on the shell, by means of dispersion relations, generalized unitarity and crossing relations. In fact I had introduced that idea myself back in 1956. So I didn't have any quarrel with the program of Geoffrey Chew and his associates, except for the language that he used to describe it. I thought it was very good to look at self-consistent formulae… self-consistent formulae for scattering amplitudes and so on. Later on I objected to the use of a very, very, very small number of states in these calculations; beating to death with false accuracy one or two states, instead of treating a vast number of states approximately. But that's much later; that's toward the end of the  ‘60s.
 In the meantime, in 1961, I was intrigued by the Regge trajectories and I worked on them a lot. I worked on the consequences of the complex angular momentum plane analysis for high energy scattering, and high energy reactions in general. And a lot of my associates at Caltech were interested in it. I invited Steven… Steven Frautschi, to come to Caltech, he's still there in fact. But I… I didn't accompany my enthusiasm for this work with a rejection of the concepts of quantum field theory. I was gloomy about finding a correct Lagrangian. I put that off into the distant future, although, as you know, as we discussed before, I did have the idea that both the strong and the weak interactions would be connected somehow with Yang-Mills theory. But the model that I used for abstraction, which I knew was wrong but was a definite Lagrangian field theory, was the one with three fermions of spin a half and a single neutral vector boson. And the three could be neutron, proton and lambda, and then later on of course situation was much…much improved by taking up, down and strange quarks. However the… there was not a direct connection between the work on symmetries and abstraction from quantum field theory models on the one hand, and the work on the complex angular momentum plane on the other. But I did a lot of… a lot of research on the complex angular momentum plane–much of it very technical. For example; while I was in Geneva I worked out the so-called sense and nonsense of poles and all of that kind of thing; things involving more than two particles, things involving complicated… complicated situations that can arise when the spins are taken into account.

Yuval came over, which was very nice, and we worked together for quite a while. Fred Zachariasen, was somebody I'd worked with for a long time. Steve Frautschi came, right after he and Geoff wrote that little paper on the bootstrap. And we had a… a number of post-docs, we had a great number of applications and selected some very good people. The facilities for the post-docs weren't very luxurious. They were all in a great big bull-pen with flimsy partitions between the cubicles, but… but we all had a very good time. It was a very exciting time.

Everyone who played with SU(3) thought in terms of a fundamental triplet. And in my first Caltech report in January '61 I mentioned a parallel between the supposed three leptons; although really I thought there were four, with two neutrinos. But anyway, the supposed three leptons and the three entities, whatever they were in this abstract SU(3). For Sakata and company of course it was much easier because they believed that the three things really were the neutron, proton and lambda–but with the eightfold way that didn't work any more and so what were these three things? They were something abstract. The… so the formulae were all written down in terms of the fundamental triplet, even though we didn't know what the fundamental triplet was or whether there was any… actually any such thing as a fundamental triplet.

In January 1963 I started a half academic year in Cambridge, Massachusetts at MIT, and I was being offered a position at… either at MIT or at Harvard or at a mixture of the two. And I was very seriously considering taking it. Murph Goldberger was there on leave also, and Francis Low was there because he was a professor at MIT. And the three of us worked together on some very laborious calculations, which were however interesting - and we drew in a couple of other people. We drew in Fred Zachariasen and a couple of post-docs from Caltech, and so on, into some of the detailed calculations. But the idea had to do with… again with some of Geoffrey Chew's principles–dog… dogmata, whatever you want to call them! He had the idea that the particles in quantum field theory were fixed angular momentum poles, and that the particles in hadron bootstrap theory would be moveable poles on Regge trajectories, accompanied poles accompanied by cuts of course in the angular… complex angular momentum plane. And I didn't see any particular reason for this dogma to hold, and what we noticed was that in quantum field theory, with vector bosons--a form of quantum electrodynamics for example with massive photons, something of that kind–the fixed pole in the angular momentum plane for the electron, say, actually moved when you included higher order radiative corrections.

Murph and I wrote a letter about that, using just second order results. But we needed to check that in higher order the same thing would hold, so we decided to check fourth order, which was very laborious. But Murph and Francis and I, using huge pieces of white paper to do our calculations and checking and re-checking every bit of arithmetic, managed to verify that indeed there was a... a moving pole. So there was no validity to the dogma. In fact, Regge trajectories existed for the so-called elementary particles of quantum field theory, the ones that were put in as fundamental fields, just as much as they did for composite objects. We had some trouble then when we tried to extend the calculation to the, what I called… what I named the Pomeranchuk trajectory. Pomeranchuk didn't believe in any of this stuff, but after I named the trajectory after him he began to like it quite a lot. And that was the trajectory going to one at zero value of the momentum transfer variable, the dominant trajectory in reactions where no quantum numbers were being exchanged. And we kept... we... Murph and Francis and I and a young man named Jeremiah Sullivan, who was I think at the University of Illinois, or went there later or something of that kind, maybe went there laterI guess and is still there now. He was with Murph at Princeton. I guess that's what he was. He was... he was a student of Murph's... A student of Murph’s. …a student of Murph's at Princeton, right. We tried to calculate and we kept getting the result that the radiative corrections pushed the value above one, which would violate unitarity. And actually that was correct result and since it violates unitarity it destroyed the character of a pole, and there were all sorts of things, interesting things thappened which we didn't pursue. They were later pursued by a… a post-doc of mine named Hoon Chang [sic] and somebody else who was–I forget who his collaborator was.
[Q]Wasn't it T T Wu?
Was it T T Wu? It was T T Wu. I thought it was TT Wu–yeah. Anyway, the two of them pursued this later on and discovered the mathematical complications. We were just puzzled. We kept thinking we must have made a mistake in sine and yet when we checked and re-checked our results we hadn't made a mistake in sine. We didn't know quite what to make of it. We should of course have pursued it further and we would have discovered these interesting mathematical phenomena associated with the Pomeranchuk singularity. Now all of that work, as far as I know, is correct; that is the work in its final form. Of course people made errors along the way, but the final form of all these results was correct. Nobody works on it much any more, but...
[Q] You mean the final form meaning the whole... the whole phenomenology and the whole understanding, the Regge poles..? 
Well, the phenomenology we have not yet really understood but we... but we worked it out. Sure. We worked out the phenomenology. We worked out a lot of the theoretical properties of singularities in the complex angular momentum plane and related them to high energy behavior of reaction amplitudes, including scattering amplitudes. And eventually we got a lot of these things right. Nobody pays much attention to them any more–its funny, and yet it's a perfectly correct, perfectly valid subject, just unfashionable. Very interesting. Often when things become unfashionable it's because they were replaced by something else and proved to be wrong. But that's not the case here.

In the theoretical physics… fundamental theoretical physics community I think they were, once quarks were suggested, I think there were people who liked quarks and people who liked the mass shell analysis and the bootstrap and so on, but there were very few who felt comfortable with both. But I felt perfectly happy with the mass shell formulation, which I had helped to develop, and I was of course very happy with the quark formulation as well. And I didn't see any contradiction between them and I still don't. The part… the bootstrap of course is a somewhat ill-defined set of ideas, except that it… it's some sort… it… it utilises the consistency properties of mass shell amplitudes and some kind of condition to specify the theory, some sort of non-singularity condition to specify the theory. But the part I liked best about it was the idea of hadronic egalitarianism—'nuclear democracy' Geoff called it–but as soon as I started dealing with the quarks on that very same day, I decided the principle must be that all the observable hadrons are equally elementary or non-elementary. And I think that holds up to today also.

In the spring of ’63 I was giving a course at MIT on general ideas about elementary particles, and one thing I spoke about was whether the… the conjecture that the triplet of SU(3) in the Eightfold Way might actually be represented by some actual object. And I tried various schemes. I tried of course, three times three times three equals one plus eight plus eight plus ten. It was striking that all the known baryon resonances fitted into singlets, octets and decimets, and it strongly suggested that… that the baryon would be made of three fundamental triplets. But I saw that in that case the triplets would have fractional electric charge. And so I told the class, well, we probably better introduce four things so as to get away from that; a triplet and a singlet, and then we can get away from the fractional charges and we could actually have a fundamental triplet somewhere.

People were already starting to talk that spring about parastatistics, and I didn't see much use for parastatistics, so I didn't pay too much attention to it. It seemed to me like an unnecessary frill in quantum field theory, but anyway I had heard about it. I’d heard a little bit about... I'd heard people talking about it a little bit. Then some time in March I guess it was-approximately in 1963, in March or April–I went down to Columbia to give a talk and Bob Serber asked me over lunch, I believe it was, why I didn't use the formula three times three times three equals one plus eight plus eight plus ten, and postulate some sort of an object, actual object, which would represent the triplet. And I said, ‘Well, of course, I've thought of that and worked on it, but I don't like it too much because the charges come out fractional.’ And on a napkin I wrote out the formulae and showed him the arithmetical formulae and showed him that the charges came out plus two thirds, minus a third and minus a third if you did that. And he said ‘Oh’—he hadn't realized that. I mentioned this conversation sort of as a joke during the colloquium or lecture, whatever it was that I gave that afternoon, but while I was doing it, while I was lecturing and while I was thinking about it that day, it occurred to me that maybe these particles never came out, maybe they were not detectable. They were stuck somehow inside. In that case there would be no contradiction with observation, but of course they might have escaped observation anyway if they're very heavy. But besides that there would be no contradiction with the principle of hadronic egalitarianism, which I liked so much. All you'd have to do is to say that observable hadrons are all equally non-elementary, or… and I liked that very much, and so I began to… to look into the matter, see if it was serious, see if it was possibly serious.

I was very worried about the job situation. I was under a lot of pressure because now I was offered a position also at Berkeley which I loved very much. I didn't know that Berkeley was about to descend into chaos, more than Harvard, and certainly more than MIT, and of course very much more than Caltech, which never had chaos at all. So I thought seriously that I'd like to be a professor at large at the University of California, based mostly in Berkeley. It seemed to me a very attractive position. I loved Berkeley. I was not too fond of Pasadena, but I liked... I liked Berkeley very much. And there were other campuses that were nice too, I could spend some time in San Diego, I could spend some time in Santa Barbara and so on and so on. The whole thing sounded quite nice. But my first wife, Margaret, was somehow never content with the idea of moving to central California. I don't know why, still don't know why, but she didn't like it for some reason, or she didn't like the idea of moving somewhere for the... mainly for the climate. I had been boosting Cambridge Massachusetts for years, saying that it was a place where you could carry on intellectual conversations and so on and so forth, and… and now... we had been talking for a long time about possibly moving there, taking a job either at MIT or at Harvard or a mixture of the two, and now suddenly, from her point of view, there was this intruder, this idea of going to...
[Q] She liked the idea of Cambridge?
Oh yes. Yes, she liked it very much. And now all of a sudden there was this competing idea and all I wanted her to do was to take it seriously, but she wouldn't. But she wasn't in any way trying to dominate the situation. She felt that the decision was mine; that the career involved was mine and I should make the choice and she would happily go along with whatever I wanted to do. All she needed was for her point of view to be taken seriously and her comments to be listened to carefully and taken into account and so on. But I just couldn't do that. The only thing I could think of was that I wanted to... the two of us to agree. I wanted to argue with her, and she didn't like that. Her parents had had very poor relations with each other and argued all the time, and she associated argument somehow with quarrelling, and she didn't like to do it. So, well, I know of course exactly what I should have done. I should have been very nice and listened and talked with her and so on and then made a decision on my own and she would have been very happy with that. Instead I tried arguing and arguing and arguing and trying to get us to agree on something and just didn't work.

I was at Columbia once, visiting, when Julian Schwinger gave the colloquium, and he talked about quantum electrodynamics at short distances—his work on it. And it was all wrong. He told about his calculations and his efforts to look at the behavior of the propagators at small distances, large momenta, and finally he concluded that the most likely form was a power. Well, Francis Low and I had shown that you get... definitely get a power if you leave out photon self-energy parts, and that if you include photon self-energy parts you don’t… absolutely do not get a power: you get a renormalization group result but not a power. And I got up and I said, 'But this… this just isn't true. What you're saying just isn't right.' And then he said, 'Oh, but this agrees with what you and Francis Low have done.' So he... in other words he hadn't mentioned our work, now he showed that he actually was familiar with it, wasn't that he had never heard of it, he was familiar with it, but he deliberately didn't mention it and also got it wrong. I didn't find that kind of behavior very... very… I didn't find it acceptable.
[Q] But you must have admired his elegance as a physicist?
No. I despised it!
[Q] Oh. I just was thinking about your earlier statements as a graduate student and so on. 
No, I thought elegance in the service of things that are correct and original is nice, but elegance in the service of stuff that's either wrong or stolen or both, I didn't consider it to be so... so very impressive.

I was at Woods Hole working on classified problems. I had done the same in the summer of—when was it? ’62? I forget. Anyway, the problem was the strategic significance of active anti-ballistic missile defense of cities. And I was convinced, like a number of other scientists, that it was a… a very poor idea, and that if both the US and the Soviet Union could refrain from deploying such systems it would be a big help to the stability of the security situation. The systems could never actually protect populations in a serious way because there were so many different ways to defeat them and to run around them. What they could do though, was to provoke in the minds of military planners on the other side a fear that the retaliatory strike would be blunted, and therefore it would step up the arms competition in strategic arms greatly. And also, it would reduce crisis stability. The temptation to strike first would be greater because you might possibly be able to cope with the remnant of the enemy's force after you had carried out a first strike using your active anti-ballistic missile defense of cities; whereas you could never hope to cope with the full arsenal on the other side.

I worked on the problem of anti-ballistic missiles and strategy in the summer of ’62 and again in the summer of ’63, in company with a lot of very interesting people. And we wrote a report in ’63 summarizing our conclusions, but the trouble was that we included in the report estimates of numbers of nuclear weapons—which was a very, very highly classified piece of information until quite recently. As a result the classification level of the report was very high and very few people read it. I didn't realize that that was a big problem. I assumed the important people in government had plenty of clearances and that it wouldn't matter. But somehow it did matter and the report was not so very influential. But the point of view ultimately prevailed. After many, many, many years there finally was a treaty, SALT 1, that required both the US and the Soviet Union to exercise very great restraint in deploying these systems. Each side could have one and the United States chose to have it...to have the anti-ballistic missile system protecting a missile base, which is stabilizing, instead of having it protecting a big metropolitan area, which would be destabilizing. So, things came out all right in that... in that department, but it took a long, long time.

I thought that he promoted elegance above correctness and above honesty, and I was put off by that. And especially after studying with Viki Weisskopf who explained that the important thing was to enlarge our understanding of physics, not to present a lot of shiny mathematical material. It's fine, of course, I have no objection to mathematics being elegant and I've written papers about why elegance is a suitable criterion in the choice of a correct theory and so on and so forth, but it should be used in connection with original and correct material. I was a student in Cambridge when Julian presented some fantastically elaborate mathematical formalism for dealing with quantum field theory: for example quantum electrodynamics. He used some weird looking symbols to avoid Feynman diagrams. Later on, by the way, when I spent that term in Massachusetts the early part of ’63, I rented Julian's house, and I looked all over to see where he kept his hidden Feynman diagrams. There was a locked room, the landlord's locked room, and I assumed that the Feynman diagrams were in there. In any case, to go back, when I was student he presented this fancy scheme. And then he tried not only to show how to do the expansion and perturbation theory, which was basically the same as Feynman's diagrams in some other notation, but he also claimed that he was able to put the whole thing in some sort of closed form, or something that was nearly closed form, and that it was the entire theory. But he had blinded himself with this fancy formalism and didn't notice that he was leaving out all photon-photon scattering. Pauli pointed it out to him. I think that it’s… elegance for its own sake is not the point; the point is elegance in the service of advancing our understanding of science.

I was at Woods Hole for a while and… and then we… my son was born, Nicholas. We wanted it to be on July 4th because that was the birthday of Margaret's brother, but of course they… since we lived in Woods Hole and the confinement was going to take place in Boston, at Boston Lying-in Hospital, we had to have the birth induced and the doctors wouldn't do it on a holiday, so his birthday is July 6th. And, anyway all of these things were happening at once: the job question, the birth of a new child, and the thinking about these questions of national security and stability of the… of the security situation, worrying about quarks and so on and so forth, and it was… it was very complicated. The previous summer Murph and I had take a little time off from our discussions of anti-ballistic missiles to write a letter about the moving Regge poles in field theory–that was in the summer of ’62. In the summer of ’63 I didn't do that, it was just too much of a strain writing that report.

I got back to Caltech at the end of the summer, and there I seriously… began seriously to look into these triplets, these fractionally charged triplets and whether they would be confined. Yuval Ne'eman was there and we discussed it together, actually, and looked up some things in the library. My first question was about statistics, of course. You asked that before, and that’s naturally one’s first concern; if the fundamental triplet consists of fermions, then to get the… the right combinations would seem to require some very clumsy spatial wave function in order to get the wave function in spin and isotopic spin correct, and so on and so forth. All of these things were a problem. It'd be much better if they were symmetrical, if they were bosonic; but how can you put together three bosons to make a fermion? It's impossible. So the first thing I thought of was this idea of parastatistics that somebody had told me about at MIT, in the spring. So we looked up a paper on parastatistics and we tried to see whether by putting together three parafermions of rank three we could get out a fermion. In that case the quarks could be parafermions of rank three and the nucleon would be–or the baryon would be a fermion, and everything would be okay. Unfortunately the paper we used was wrong–as you've all pointed out many years later–and so we struggled and struggled and struggled and we couldn't prove that we would get a fermion out because we were using a… a mistaken… a paper that was a mistake. We should have done it ourselves, of course. I didn't understand then of course, that parafermions were exactly the same as taking fermions with three colors and then wiping out a lot of the resulting states. I didn't know that. But that would have made it very easy for us to do the calculation. So I… through this mistake in the paper that we used, I moved away from that idea and I decided to put the statistics question aside. And I didn't do so very much work on what I later called constituent quarks; that is quarks as constituents of the actual baryons and mesons, but worked rather on their current properties–the so-called current quarks. The question arose about how to write it up, and during the fall I struggled with that a little bit. As soon as I got back to Caltech I called Viki Weisskopf, who was then the Director General of CERN, about something, I don't remember what the subject of the phone call was, but while I was talking with him I mentioned this notion that the nucleon was actually made up of three things with fractional charge which were trapped inside and so on and so on. And he said, ‘Please, Murray, this is a long distance call.’ implying that I shouldn't waste his time with this idea.

My student George Zweig had gotten his degree. I was away in Massachusetts so Feynman signed the dissertation, but he had been my student and he had left for CERN where he spent the year '63-'64, so I didn't get a chance to talk with him about quarks. And he apparently developed the same idea independently that fall in… in CERN. He called them aces and he concentrated very much on the constituent aspect. I don't know how he dealt with the statistics. Somehow, I guess, but I don't know how. Anyway, the statistics was a very worrying aspect of the whole thing for years and years and years.

I wrote up the quarks in a very tentative manner. I also included in the letter the possibility of integrally charged... of an integrally charge triple together with a fourth particle; the… the thing I had mentioned at MIT in my lectures that spring. But I said that the quarks, I implied that the quarks were a neater solution. But I did something that has caused problems ever since. I needed a word to describe particles that actually came out and could be seen and used in the laboratory and used for industrial purposes and so on and so on. And I chose the word 'real' for that, reserving ‘mathematical’ or ‘fictitious’ for a particle that couldn't be directly, singly observed in the laboratory, utilized for industrial purposes and so forth. Well, this was a huge mistake. The reason I did it was that I imagined myself in a debate with philosophers, who would ask, 'If this particle doesn't come out to be seen singly by itself and so on, how can you say it's there? How can you say it's real?' And in fact people said that kind of thing. There's a historian of science–he must be a very silly person–called Pickering, Andy Pickering, who wrote something called Constructing Quarks. He's one of these 'social construction of science' people, I guess, or is close to it anyway. And he said in this book, written many years later, that he doesn't think quarks are part of the furniture of the universe. Anyway, it was that kind of thing that I was thinking of when I used this word 'real'. So then I said, well of course, the quarks are less likely to be real than if we have the other scheme with the three particles with integral charges and the fourth one… fourth one as a singlet. I didn't mean that the quarks were less likely to be the right solution, but they were… if they were the solution, they were more likely to be trapped inside because that would account for nobody ever having seen a fractionally charged particle, and so on and so forth. Of course, if they were very heavy, they wouldn't have been seen anyway. But then I had to have some way to describe to people what I meant by their being mathematical, so in that letter I said well, imagine the mass of the quark goes to infinity, that's the kind of thing I mean by mathematical. They're in there all right but mass being infinite they can't come out. They can be in there only bound together, they can't come out.
In 1966, to jump ahead a bit, when I was invited to give the introductory talk to the International Conference on Particle Physics at Berkeley, I used a different description of what I meant. Instead of talking about infinite mass, I said that if the quarks were not real they would… it would be like a situation in which they were trapped in a infinitely high potential barrier and couldn't get out. Well, that's exactly what we believe today to be the case, so my unreal or mathematical or fictitious quarks were precisely the kinds of quarks we believe in today. But many people have alleged that that isn't what I meant at all, that I meant I didn't believe the quarks, that they were a dumb idea and so on and so on, which was not at all the case.

He had a quarrel with Léon van Hove or van Huffel, depending on whether you say it in French or in Flemish. And Léon was some sort of European patriot, and he wanted CERN people to publish in European journals. And George is a very stubborn rebel type and he didn't want to do that, and so they argued and argued and George never got his paper published at all anywhere. His proposals were written up much later in notes for lectures on Erice, or something of that kind, but by then it was much later. It was too bad. Anyway, I've always tried to get him credit for being the co-proposer of this idea.

I proposed the quarks in a letter to the Physical Rev... no, to Physical Review... no, not the Physical Review…
[Q] Physics Letters...
Physics Letters, to Physics Letters.  See, I had no objection to publishing in a European journal. I had had so many problems with letters to the Physical Review and Physical Review Letters that I didn't really like to publish there at all. I still don't very much.
[Q] Do you want to tell any stories about that as an interlude, while we're on it, because that's a very sensitive subject,
Well, I find the policies absurd. It's based on a very reasonable hope, which is that by being very strict they will get high quality material. And by requiring that it be important they will get urgent material because it's an urgent type of publication as compared to the main body of the journal, or the main journal nowadays, which is supposed to take… which takes quite a while for publication. However, it doesn't work out very well in practice, because what happens is that articles that represent rather small improvements in our understanding, are… are easily accepted--letters, I should say, letters that represent rather modest improvements in our understanding are easily accepted and printed. Ones that are more revolutionary have a very, very, very hard time. But crank letters, which are the ones that they are presumably trying to avoid, those are often published because the cranks have infinite patience. The serious people get sick of arguing with referees who don't understand what they're doing and so on, but the cranks will wait as long as necessary to get their stuff into print. So that a number of crank letters actually get through, whereas the letters from serious people who are doing something a bit new have a terrible time. I don't care for that. I don't like it. I think it's silly. Physics Letters seemed to be better. They were… if they got letters from serious people they would publish them, except they did have referees, the referees were checking for mistakes. The serious person can easily make a mistake and then the referee's job is to point out the mistake. The referee's job is not to say, gosh, this interesting, really new idea is one that shouldn't be printed. That's not the purpose of a… of a referee in my opinion. So anyway, after all these bad experiences with letters to the Physical Review and letters to Physical Review Letters, I gave up.

I had been calling them quarks most of the year, but I supposed it was probably spelled k-w-o-r-k or something like that. It seemed the right sound for a new particle that was the fundamental constituent of nuclei and so on, but I didn't know how to spell it. But then paging through Finnegans Wake, which I had done often since my brother had brought home the first American printing in 1939, paging through Finnegans Wake I saw 'Three quarks for Muster Mark!', and of course it’s 'quark', it rhymes with a whole bunch of things; mark, bark, and so on and so forth. But I wanted to pronounce it ‘kwork’ so I invented an excuse for pronouncing it kwork–namely that Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker, whose dream is Finnegans Wake, is the book, is a publican. In fact later on I visited the pub, in Mullingar, the Mullingar, no the Mullingar Pub [sic] it is, just… just near Dublin. And so a number of things in the book are calls for drinks at the bar. Of course the words are multiply determined; they're portmanteau words as in Alice. And the meanings are multiply determined, but one determinant is often calls for drinks at the bar: ‘Three passe porterpease’ for example, has something to do with ‘Three pots of porter, please’. And so here I figured that one of the contributors toward, to ‘Three quarks for Muster Mark!’ might be ‘Three quarts for Mister Mark!’ And it may in fact be true. But if quart is one of the multiple origins, then you would be entitled to pronounce it kwork. So anyway, I put in the reference to Finnegans Wake; in the American edition it's page 383, which is just perfect... in that first American printing it's page 383, which is very good. 383 bar, would be even better, but you can't get a page number 383 bar. But that was very good.

But then I wrote a… a paper also, on basically on current quarks, in which I suggested using the quarks to abstract relations among currents—just as you said. And what I did in there was to construct weak currents and electromagnetic currents and… and yeah, the different parts of the weak current and the electromagnetic current. And to abstract… suggest abstracting various properties from these, including–I forget how much of what was later called current algebra was in there, some of it perhaps, but anyway, maybe quite a bit of it. I've forgotten exactly how much.

In that paper I referred to a… a recipe that Valentine Telegdi had claimed existed, a recipe of Escoffier or somebody like that, for cooking turkey breast between two slices of veal. You use the veal for flavor and then you throw the veal away. The… so what I suggested there was that the… we use for abstraction this theory, which we'd used before actually, but without the quarks. Namely three spin one half fermions—formally they were neutron, proton and lambda, now they were U, D and S quarks, much better of course—and a single neutral vector boson to hold them together. We knew this was the wrong theory, of course, but it must have had… we thought… I thought it had some of the properties of the correct theory. Actually the only thing it lacked was the color variable. This neutral vector boson was correct, but it was a color octet and it was a Yang-Mills generalization of vector meson theory that was needed, that's all. That, and a soft mass mechanism for giving a mass to the gluon. In any case, what I suggested was using this field theory to abstract current algebra results and things of that kind and then to throw away the theory, because it was a wrong theory. And again these vultures, these historians and so on of... of these episodes have claimed that what I wanted to throw away was the quarks, but of course that's not true! What I wanted to… and... and other people have claimed that I wanted to throw away the field theory,  that's also not true. I wanted to throw away that field theory, which… when everybody knew to be wrong. And that… that's simply the case. Now that paper was flawed, unfortunately, by one of those hesitations that I described at great length in my paper for the troubadour in Catalonia. And that is I knew that the axial vector charges should be used to generate low mass pseudo-scalar bosons. We'd been working on that since 1959, but in this particular paper for some reason I reverted to the idea that they would be approximate symmetries of multiplets, giving rise to degeneracy. So I had degenerate—very, very poorly degenerate multiplets—of both parities, which of course is not right. So that paper is marred by that silly, silly hesitation, silly error. But the… the other part is perfectly okay and it's clear that what's to be thrown away is this wrong field theory, not the concept of field theory, nor the quarks.

I tried to find representations but what I did then was to look at infinitely high momenta for the particles, which is very much like looking at things on the light cone. And I looked for those currents that survived, that didn't go like: one over p sub z, or one over p sub z squared, but things that went like: one, as p sub z went to infinity, the momentum in the z direction. And I looked at the algebra of all those things. So what I got was the set of Fourier components oftime… set of Fourier components of the time components of current densities–so in other words charge densities. And those form of course a… an algebra, and that's still correct, there's nothing wrong with that. I looked for representations of it, but I looked for representations of it without pairs, and those are trivial. Those are just non-interacting, single objects. They have no… we… we showed after a long agonizing search that you don't get anything out of that; you have to put in a certain number of pairs. And it's also useful to look at the longitudinal components. And both of those things were done then subsequently in the work of Bjorken, and Feynman's work which sort of popularize Bjorken's ideas, and so on. Now we could have used the transverse Fourier components of the time components of the currents and found representations that were non-trivial by allowing higher values of the quantum numbers. What I did was to restrict the quantum… the total quantum numbers to the ones for the… for the particle itself. In that case we might have gotten some very interesting stuff but we… but we didn't do that.

In February 1964 a lot of things happened. The letter to the Physical Rev…  to Physics Letters about quarks appeared, I think on February 1st. The omega minus was reported about February 1st also. I accepted the invitation to Harvard only to reject it a couple of weeks later… only to cancel my acceptance a couple of weeks later, which made them really angry. And also I went to India to Udaipur, to the Lake Palace Hotel [sic] in the middle of the lake, and to attend a Pugwash meeting. It was the only Pugwash meeting I've ever attended. Originally the Pugwash meetings were somewhat out… out of the mainstream; people who wanted to do something fairly radical about arms control, about the Cold War, and so on and so on. And people were…   who attended were suspected of leftist sympathies and that sort of thing. But by February 1964 this was not the case: US government officials went; former US government officials who had just been in the government until a few days earlier; and so on and so forth, and it represented a sort of informal negotiating forum, at which proposals could be brought up that were later brought up between governments. It was quite interesting. I had a very, very remarkable time there. Of course I love bird-watching and India in winter is fantastic for bird-watching. I saw lots of new things. I made lots of new friends. Just had a really good time.

Carl Kaysen, who had just been the deputy to McGeorge Bundy who was the National… Presidential Assistant for National Security; he had just come back to academic life from being the deputy to Bundy. Jack Ruina, who had been, or maybe still was, the head of ARPA: the… the Advanced Research Projects Agency… Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense. Those two and I presented a paper on the dangers of deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems around metropolitan areas. And out of courtesy to the Soviet delegation, we presented the paper to them first, before circulating it generally. Well, they read it, and the next morning we had an appointment at breakfast. Most of the Soviet delegation consisted of scientists who were pretty much afraid to open their mouths. But the head of the group was the Vice President of the All-Union Academy of Sciences, a physicist named Millionshchikov and Millionshchikov was a… in good odor with the Party and so on and so on and he of course could… could talk. Well, what happened at breakfast was remarkable. We sat outdoors, looking out at the lake that surrounded us, watching flocks of Alexandrian Parrots fly screaming from one island to another in the lake; tall, barefoot servants wearing turbans or tarbushes or something were serving us breakfast and no one said a word, no one said anything till after we'd finished our coffee. And then Millionshchikov started to talk, and he said, 'Niels Bohr once said that in the present state of physics a theory to be correct must be crazy'. He said, 'Well, your paper amply satisfies this requirement. It is completely crazy. Why, everyday in our beautiful capital city of Moscow people come up to me, they recognize my picture, they recognize me from my pictures and they say Comrade Milionshchikov, what can you do? What can our Soviet scientists do to protect us from this terrible threat of American missiles? And I tell them don't worry, comrades, Soviet science can accomplish anything. We will protect you. We will construct a system that will protect you from these awful missiles with their nuclear warheads. Then you'll be able to sleep quietly at night. Now you, with your exchange ratio arguments from the Rand Corporation, you suggest that we should not defend ourselves against these awful missiles? Why? If the Soviet Government adopted this policy it would not receive a single vote at the next election'. Well, we covered out mouths and tried not to laugh too loud at this. Anyway the conversation continued in that vein and was not very productive.

The next summer, summer of ’64, the international meeting was held at Dubna and I was there. And I heard Fitch and Cronin talk about the wonderful, very careful experiment that they had done over the past two years with Christianson and Turlay showing that there were small violations of time reversal invariants in… or CP invariants in the… in weak… certain weak processes. In fact, in connection with the K01 and K02, and I was trying to think what it meant. I was in the cafeteria; way at the end of the cafeteria I found a little quiet… a quiet table that I could have to myself and I was writing some things on a piece of paper trying to imagine what this CP violation could mean, where it could come from. And I noticed out of the corner of my eye a portly gentleman the other end of the cafeteria near the entrance, and after a while he began to catch my attention more and more because he was walking around from table to table obviously looking for someone. And finally he came all the way to the end of the cafeteria where I was and it became clear he was looking for me. It was Millionshchikov. Now he didn't have any particular role at the conference. His specialty was not elementary particle physics. He hadn't given the ceremonial speech at the meeting or anything. He came and sat down at the table and he said, 'Do you remember me?', I said, 'Of course I remember you. You're Millionshchikov'. He said, 'Do you remember that we attended a meeting in India a few months ago?', I said, 'Yes'. He said, 'Do you remember that you and Jack Ruina and Carl Kaysen presented a paper on anti-ballistic missile systems?', I said, 'Yes, I remember it very well'. He said, 'Do you remember what I said about it?', I said, 'I'll never forget it. You said it was completely crazy'. He said, 'Well, it's not so crazy'. He got up, walked out of the cafeteria and went back to Moscow. That message was apparently the entire reason for his trip to Dubna. So, they had succeeded…  somebody had succeeded apparently in getting these ideas into the… into the establishment.

Carl Kaysen and Paul Doty and George Kistiakowsky were in Moscow to meet with a whole bunch of science statesmen, I think one member of the Politburo, and discuss these matters. George was accompanied by his wife Elaine and of course George was Russian originally, so they treated him very, very, very well, because he was there with his wife and he had been born in Russia. He got a beautiful room in the hotel. Carl and Paul shared a much less beautiful room, and when they got into the room they said, ‘Oh shucks, I thought we'd have accommodations like George and Elaine's’. Anyway, they got down to the desk and the little man, who was this little KGB agent, who was the secretary of the All-Union Academy of Sciences, said, ‘I hear you don't like your room’. It's a marvelous story. I think his name was Pavlichenko.

George and Paul and Carl then had conversations with a number of relatively high officials and apparently the idea of an agreement to ban the deployment of ABM, large scale ABM systems around metropolitan areas caught hold a little bit in both governments. And when Kosygin, the Soviet Prime Minister, showed up in Glassboro, New Jersey, the next year in ’65, Bob McNamara, Secretary of Defense, took it up with him. And then it was only the escalation of the war in South East Asia and then the invasion of Czechoslovakia by the Soviet Union that delayed reaching an agreement. And finally in the Nixon administration an agreement was actually reached and we were spared all this extra expense and extra instability. Then of course, when Reagan came in, when we had Star Wars proposed and so on and things went… things went in the opposite direction for a while.

Pole dominance was something that I saw very early to be important, in the pseudo-scalar channels; pole dominance of course becomes overwhelming in the limit of zero mass for the pseudo-scalar bosons. And for light ones it's still very important, pion especially, and that was when we derived the Goldberger-Treiman relation, we were using that. Then in the vector channel, a dominance by the rhomeson gave… and the omega gave rise to a lot of important… similar important relations. And I put all of that into the 1962 paper that was finally printed in the Physical Review about the Eightfold Way.

There were a number of notions, all quite useful, that helped us to understand what was going on in particle physics. They hadn't been assembled into a real theory, but we understood lots and lots of pieces of the puzzle. And I at least had a suspicion, as many others did, that the solution would lie in a Yang-Mills theory for both the strong and the weak interactions of some kind, a soft mass mechanism of some kind. And what I didn't understand was that we would have to go to a new variable, color, so as to clear up this clash which kept getting in the way, between the… a Yang-Mills theory for the strong interactions, and a Yang-Mills theory for the weak ones. The clash was intolerable and we didn't know what to do about it.

In 1966 there was a Festschrift volume prepared for my teacher, Viki Weisskopf, and as usual I... what's the word... procrastinated and didn't write my piece and didn't know what to write and didn't feel like writing and so on. And finally the volume appeared without anything from me, and I was so ashamed of not having contributed to this volume in honor of Viki that I didn't read it. But in it was an article by Yoichiro Nambu, or Nambu Yoichiro, a very good friend of mine whom I'd known for years and years. He was the... my first visitor to come to Caltech to see me when I first arrived at Caltech. And Yoichiro was pursuing some work that he had done with a man name Han–the Han-Nambu picture. And what they had done was to suggest that there were actually three quarks; three U quarks, three D quarks and three S quarks, and that the charges were not  two-thirds minus a third and minus a third, but the integral charges, which when averaged over this new three-valued variable, would give two- thirds minus a third and minus a third. So from the point of view of later work what they were doing was introducing the color variable with a terrible mistake; namely that there was a color term in the electric current, in the charge operator or the electric current operator. Well, the first was correct, the second was wrong. He then suggested that these particles were real, that they could actually come out and be seen, but that they would be largely confined. They would be difficult to get out because there would be a potential between them, which would strongly favor the states that were actually seen.
By this time people had proposed a very crude SU(6) symmetry scheme which involved both the SU(3) variable and the spin, and this was quite useful for classification purposes. It gave rise to a fifty six representation which included the octet of spin one-half and the decimet of spin three-halves .  And let's see, what else? That's forty-eight- there must have been another octet and a… and a singlet. No, just another octet I guess. No, wait a minute, no that's right, no, no, no… no, no it's correct. No, fifty-six is just those two, just those two. It's an octet of spin a half which is sixteen, and eight times two and then a decimet of spin three-halves which is forty, and forty and sixteen is fifty-six. Sorry I got mixed up. Anyway, they would form a single multiplet under this combined spin and SU(3) group–SU(6). And that was what we needed because that was what we saw.

This 56 is totally symmetrical. So one needs… if there was another variable, we needed total anti-symmetry in the other variable. And what Nambu found was that if he introduced a vector boson which was an octet in this new variable then he got indeed the singlet to be the lowest state, the anti-symmetric configuration to be the lowest state. And that way he got a symmetrical configuration in the… in the SU(3) and the spin variables—namely the 56. Perfect. Well, if I had read that paper I would probably have changed the, some of the assumptions. First of all I would have gotten rid of the integral charges, I would have had a… a color variable with no color contribution… no colored contribution to the electromagnetic current or charge. Second, I would have kept the confinement. Third, I would have suggested a Yang-Mills theory instead of just the potential from the exchange of a vector particle. And then we would have had basically quantum chromodynamics. So the… the necessary ideas were there in 1966.

I gave some lectures at the Cavendish on quarks. Dirac attended faithfully. As usual he sat in the back and fell asleep–well, no, I don't know if he was in the back, but as usual he fell asleep, immediately, at the beginning of each lecture and then woke up right at the end. And as usual he asked brilliant questions despite the fact that he had been asleep. Nobody ever understood quite how he did that, whether he was just pretending to be asleep, or whether somehow he... something got through to him despite his being asleep, or whether he was able to ask brilliant questions even without hearing the talk. I don't know what it was. Anyway, the questions indicated that he very, very much liked the quarks. Now, in 1966 that was not usual. Most people in our community thought they were sort of crank, that I had gone bananas and so on. So I… afterwards I asked him. I said, 'Paul Adrien, what is it you like about the quarks? You obviously… they obviously appeal to you a great deal'. He said, 'Oh, oh yes. They do have spin one-half, don't they?' What he meant was, not just that they had spin one-half, but that they obeyed his equation, with only minor corrections in certain some limit. And that proved to be more and more and more true, and these experiments that you mentioned were essential in uncovering that. Or they were essential in confirming rather, because some people had already conjectured it, that the... in the limit of short distances and high momentum transfer that the corrections to the Dirac equation behavior of the quarks would be quite small, sort of perturbative. The first person to suggest that was Bjorken, BJ. He had read my papers on current algebra and he suggested going beyond them, and essentially what he suggested was at least an approximate validity for current algebra equations near the light cone. I believe that's one way to say what he was doing.

He generalized the idea of abstracting current algebra to a different regime, but this was a regime where in the model field theory the current algebra wouldn't actually hold exactly, only for free particles. So basically what he was doing was suggesting that in these limits that he discussed, that the quarks would behave almost like free particles, and that was very interesting because it led to results in agreement with observation. The Stanford and MIT group at SLAC: Dick Taylor, Jerry Friedman, Henry Kendall and many others were doing experiments on deep inelastic scattering; electrons hitting the proton and then going off with a certain momentum transfer, a certain invariant momentum transfer. And what they looked at was what happened… was the probability of that—irrespective of what kind of junk was made on the hadronic side—summing over all the different products that were made on the… out of the proton. They did this in the deep inelastic limit and they had no idea that they were going to be testing the quark idea; they were just interested in what happened in this limit, they thought it would throw some light on physical reality. I don't think they had any notion of testing the quark hypothesis. In fact I think they thought… many people thought that the cross-section would go down, I mean it would be like a standard form factor. But in the long run they found that… in the long run what they accomplished was to confirm the quark hypothesis. What I tell audiences in popular talks is that what they did essentially was to take an electron micrograph of the proton and find that it was made of three nearly punctiform objects with the properties of quarks, including the squares of the charges: four-ninths, one-ninth and one-ninth. Well, Bjorken's idea helped them very much to accomplish this interpretation. But it was somewhat unclear theoretically why one should be able to abstract the result that wasn't even true in the model field theory that we were throwing away, but was true only in the limit of very weak coupling. What was it that made the coupling weak in this deep inelastic limit?

Dick Feynman constructed a popularization of Bjorken's ideas that he called partons; ugly word with a Latin head and a Greek ending and… what it meant was quarks, basically—he didn't want to say quarks—quarks plus anti-quarks and gluons. The gluon is this neutral vector boson that we've been talking about all along. The name was invented, I think, by Teller… Teller, Eddie, for something else, for some neutral vector meson, strongly interacting meson.
[Q] The word gluon was invented.
The word gluon, yeah. Yes. But I used it to mean this vector, this vector boson that would hold the quarks together. And… and now in ’66 Nambu had suggested an octet of them, very close to the correct story. Anyway, what Feynman meant by partons—that ugly word—was quarks, anti-quarks and gluons. And it annoyed me that he didn't ever say that—well didn't say it until later, I should say; later on he did say it. But Feynman emphasized that… that what he was talking about, and it was basically Bjorken's idea; was that at high momentum transfers, these particles acted very much as if they were free, and  corrections to free behavior would be perturbative. But then at small momentum transfers, this was not the case. In small momentum transfers you would get the production of lots of soft pairs and so on and so on. And that's how you got the Pomeranchuk singularity and all of those things. And it's a very good idea. I commented on it a little bit writing about the light cone interpretation of it and with Fritzsch—Feynman developed it still further. Feynman of course, as usual, put it in a form so that the common people could use it, and experimentalists all over the world now thought they understood things because Feynman had put it in such simple language for them. And they were able to do these free particle… essentially free particle calculations, of form factors and all sorts of things. What it really accomplished then was the confirmation of the… of the quark picture, along with this new idea–basically Bjorken's idea, Feynman's idea– that at high momentum transfers, all of these particles, quarks, anti-quarks and gluons, were behaving nearly as if they were free. Obeying relations which could be abstracted not from quantum field theory, like the regular current algebra relations, but abstracted from the… from the first term of a perturbation expansion in the… in the coupling.

[Q] In terms of your previous thinking about confinement and so on, what was your thinking about the fact that in these models, the parton model, Bjorken's thinking and so on, the calculation proceeded, as you say, as if they were free; therefore as if quarks of course, could become asymptotic states and be seen. That is the way the calculation took place…
No! No, no, no, no, no! That's not true! They were free in the limit of very high momentum transfers, short distances, so they were free deep inside the hadrons. They did not… they did not have to act free when the momentum transfers were small. In other words at big distances, so they were not at all free far away. So there was no problem…
[Q] So you… what I'm asking…
In fact, later on it turned out that they were extremely unfree…Yes… At large distances, they were confined.
[Q] But at that time, you saw..?
Yeah.
[Q] You were… you saw no conflict and you were quite..?
No, I didn't see any conflict. No, I didn't see any conflict but I did not grasp the opportunity. It was the second opportunity that I didn't grasp, to say, well, if these ideas are right then that's perfectly compatible with confinement because the… the particles get less and less free as the momentum transfer gets smaller and smaller and very big distances, maybe they're completely confined. But I didn't seize hold of that. I was worried about a lot of other things at that time, and I didn't… I didn't seize hold of that.

Fritzsch and I wrote about these things a little bit, but I… I don't think we contributed very much, just another point of view—pointing out that what these ideas meant was that somehow free field theory was the model for what was going on deep inside. But that was already clear really from the work of Bjorken and… and Feynman, and others. Then in 1971 I went to Europe to spend the year at CERN, and Fritzsch was there with me, and so was Bill Bardeen and the three of us began to talk about this whole set of issues. First thing we did was to look at parastatistics and color. By this time I had appreciated that a color variable would work. I'm not sure if I was aware even then of Nambu's paper of 1966, but in any case I now understood the point: that we would get the right statistics if we had another variable, a three-valued variable, and that variable were totally anti-symmetric; then we would get a totally symmetric state in the spin and… and SU(3) variable and that would be exactly compatible with observations of baryons. Then… however there were other states of this variable, and what Nambu had shown was that they would lie higher if you had a vector boson exchange between quarks. But what I suggested now was that they would lie infinitely higher, in other words that you would have restriction to the singlet in this new variable, a totally anti-symmetric state in this new variable. Nothing else would be possible. So we would have color, but color non-singlets would be prohibited. We called the colors red, white and blue at first, but then we decided maybe that was inappropriate so somebody—maybe it was Feynman, I forget who—somebody suggested that I use red, blue and green, which were the so-called primary colors in some very approximate theory of human color vision. But anyway, the idea of three so-called colors, and the restriction, absolute restriction to the singlet, so that no color non-singlets could be… could come out to be seen, that was something that we emphasized right away.

Then we looked up parastatistics, and did it correctly this time, we didn't use the Umezawa paper or whatever it was that Yuval and I had used eight years before, that had a mistake in it; we… we used the correct calculation and we found that parastatistics with the prohibition of real paraparticles was exactly the same thing, precisely the same thing. If we had parastatistics and we said there was no such thing in that… that no particle could come out and be seen singly that had parastatistics—only the constituents—then it was exactly the same as saying that we had color and nothing colored could come out. And so that was our starting point.

Then we looked at the idea of calculating the pi-naught into two gamma, approximately. That had been done many, many different ways, always with the same answer. It was done back in something like 1950 by Jack Steinberger, who spent a year at the Institute for Advanced Study, and he did a calculation of pi-naught in two gamma, based on perturbation theory with a neutron and proton, and he got the answer approximately right. No, how did he do it? It wasn't exactly perturbation theory, I've forgotten what the argument was, but anyway he made a clever argument to get the answer essentially right.
Then, with the discovery of anomalies and using pole dominance, Stephen Adler and various other people, I forget exactly who they were, but various theorists showed that you would get this as a real theorem in the limit of light… light pion, and that it represented a very important quantity because it was a sum over the product of the axial charges and the… the fundamental axial charges and the fundamental electric charges squared… multiplied by the fundamental electric charges squared of the elementary objects in the theory, because those would give the... the anomaly. So Bardeen and Fritzsch and I looked into this and we saw that with color the quarks would give the right answer, and that was really... that was really beautiful.
Around this time I went to Munich—München—and gave a talk there, which Heisenberg attended, and Heisenberg had been hostile to all of the good ideas in this area. He hadn't believed in strangeness; he hadn't believed in SU(3), approximate SU(3), he said it was like approximating a cube by a sphere or something like that; and… and now he didn't believe in the quarks and he didn't believe in this calculation. He thought the correct calculation was one with neutron and proton and no color. But of course, quarks and color give the same answer as neutrons and protons and no color. We made some sort of a bet, but it was never clear enough that anyone could collect. The… then we worked further with these… with these ideas in the fall of ’71 and the spring of ’72. I gave some lectures in the winter at Schladming where I described our results a little bit.

We began to think, Harald and I, about Yang-Mills theory and a Yang-Mills theory based on color, and we started to prepare a talk for the International Conference that summer, summer of ’72 in Chicago. And for a while what we were talking about was essentially quantum chromodynamics: Yang-Mills theory of color coupled to... with a color octet of gluons, coupled to quarks with color. But by the time we... I actually gave the talk with David Gross in the chair, that summer of ’72 in Chicago, we had gotten cold feet on various issues, and I describe all that in this little historical reminiscence, called Quarks, Color and QCD, which I gave at two meetings. I presented it personally at the Stanford meeting in the summer of ’92. It was just a couple of days after Marcia and I were married. We were married on a Sunday in Aspen by the mayor, John Bennett, our friend; the next day we left for Oxford where I got an honorary degree and I marched in the procession; the next day after that we left for Stanford where I gave this talk on quarks, color and QCD and then on to SLAC, and a meeting on recent history of particle physics; and then we left for Las Vegas, Nevada, for a meeting of the American Academy of Achievement, where the first few people we ran into were Colin Powell, Barbara Streisand and so on. It was all very weird. We also had two earthquakes in Las Vegas–Marcia's first earthquakes–and then by the Sunday after we were married we were back in Aspen. It was quite a week. We had told ourselves that we weren't really going on a honeymoon, it was just a business trip and that some day we would have to have a real honeymoon. But this week was a pretty exciting week. Anyway, to return from 1992 back to 1971 and ’72; so we backed off for various reasons. One reason was this: that string theory was becoming very important and we were hesitant as to whether the correct theory of hadrons would be a Yang-Mills theory or a string theory that resembled a Yang-Mills theory. And in my talk at Chicago I actually mentioned both of these possibilities, but in the written version I sort of glossed over the Yang-Mills and talked more about strings.

I think the best thing I can do, now that we've found this paper is to read from it. There I explained what the… what the problems that we were worried about were:
Although enthusiastic about the beauty of this theory we hesitated a bit in endorsing it in print for three reasons. One: we were worried about how to generate a non-zero trace of the stress energy momentum tensor in the limit of zero-quark masses. We knew that such a non-zero trace was needed. The mass of a nucleon, unlike the masses of the lower pseudo-scalar mesons had to be non-vanishing in that limit, and scalar invariants had to be broken. Somewhere there was a source of mass that would hold up as quark masses vanished. Even without the explicit dimensional transmutation later demonstrated by Coleman and Erick Weinberg, it was easy to show that in such a theory the trace could be non-vanishing in the limit. John Ellis had been a visitor at Caltech during 1969 to ’70 and he had lectured there on the possible generation of an anomalous trace, yielding what he called—appropriately for that era--'Pot': P - 0 - T, partially zero trace. If I had remembered his work I would not have troubled myself about the generation of mass from no mass. Two: we understood that some form of string theory in terms of which the Veneziano model had just been reformulated and was the embodiment of the bootstrap. And in those days of course the bootstrap idea was thought to apply to hadrons alone, rather than to all the elementary particles. Thus we thought at times that perhaps the Yang-Mills field theory of colored quarks and gluons ought to be replaced by some kind of related string theory. Of course it does turn out that QCD structures, like bags and--when they are elongated--strings, do occur, but they're approximate and they're derived features of the theory, not fundamental ones. Three: (this was what I was discussing a moment ago) we didn't understand what was causing the suppression of color non-singlets, the confinement of color or the mathematical character of quarks and gluons. We didn't know that it would follow from the color SU(3) Yang-Mills theory itself. No, that, sorry, that's not what I was discussing a moment ago, no. What I was discussing a moment ago comes later. I… I was mistaken about that. These were the three, these were the three reasons. The fourth problem was something we took up a bit later.

In the talk that I gave in Chicago with David Gross in the chair, I mentioned both the Yang-Mills theory—essentially quantum chromodynamics—and the string version of it, a possible string version of it, we didn't know exactly what that would look like. But I didn't emphasize it very much and in the written version we just sort of glossed over it, because we were worried about these three points. But later on Fritzsch and Leutwyler and I took up this matter in a… a letter that we wrote in 1973, from Aspen. We were all in Aspen, Colorado together, and there we took up what I referred to out of… or… out of its proper place a moment ago, which was the problem of the ninth axial vector current and the corresponding pseudo-scalar boson. And this–since it's a bit complicated–let me read again from what I wrote in that paper:
We discussed in the limit of vanishing quark masses, conservation of the flavor singlet axial vector current which threatens to yield four light pseudo-scalar mesons instead of three in the case of SU(2) of flavor, and nine instead of eight for SU(3) of flavor, contrary to fact. That was an old preoccupation of mine. Does the divergence of the axial vector current, the ninth axial vector current or the fourth axial vector current, actually go to zero as the masses go to zero? Theory seemed to have that difficulty. But there's an anomaly in the theory proportional to a term bilinear in the gluon fields. But the anomaly term itself is the divergence of another current, so if we add that current to the axial vector current, we still have the divergence of a current going to zero as mass going to zero, which seems to give the difficulty back in another form. But there were two more ‘buts’, fortunately an even number that we didn't cover in our letter. The charge integral J naught five b cubed  x does appear to be gauge invariant and the time derivative of the total charge seems to go to zero as the masses go to zero, and that's apparently gauge invariant. But, as was shown by Polyakov and company and by 't Hooft in connection with instantons, this charge is only locally but not globally gauge invariant. So in fact, there's no problem of a fourth or a ninth light pseudo-scalar boson.

Gross and Wilczek had been discussing this from a very different point of view. They were interested in asymptotic freedom in field theory for its own sake. They thought that an asymptotically free theory would be superior and, as we… as we discussed a long time ago in these... in this interview, there is always the possibility in fact that a field theory that’s not asymptotically free is actually self-inconsistent. So they were interested in that, and when it turned out that the renormalization group effect on the propagator in Yang-Mills theory is the opposite to what it is in quantum electrodynamics, that was a very important point. It was found by 't Hooft, but 't Hooft didn't do anything with it.
[Q] You didn’t mention Politzer either.
It was found... no, I'm going to in a moment... it was found by Politzer and also around the same time by Gross and Wilczek. But they used it... Gross and Wilczek used that fact to point out that therefore a Yang-Mills theory, if you didn't have too many fermions in it, would be asymptotically free. Furthermore, not only was the asymptotic freedom something that they had been looking at for a long time because they liked it; it was also the explanation for the Bjorken, Feynman and so on and so on perception that the quarks, anti-quarks and gluons were almost free at very small distances in very high... high momentum transfers.

When Fritzsch and Bardeen and I were talking about the color picture with confined color, we applied it to the total cross-section for the production of hadrons by a colliding positron and electron, which was being measured at SLAC and we predicted essentially the correct value. We didn't get exactly the right value for the total ratio to electron positron, because we didn't know about the third lepton, the tau, which was in there also; but we did get the correct value for the hadron cross-section, that is e plus eminus goes into hadrons. It was expressed in terms of this ratio—capital R–and we got the value of capital R right when we had color. Without color it was wrong.

As I mentioned in that little paper that I gave at SLAC in 1992, I was appalled that people were referring to the quarks without color as Gell-Mann and Zweig quarks, as opposed to these weird things with color, which many of the SLAC people referred to as ugly. But it did give the right answer and we didn't think it was ugly at all, we thought it was terrific. But Burt Richter, who was later the director of SLAC, gave a lot of talks in which he presented a huge number of different predictions by different theorists, as if to show that the situation was completely chaotic; but it wasn't. Our prediction was unique, provided we included color, and it was correct. Whereas he himself actually thought that the cross-section kept increasing so that R would be infinite. So it was not only the pi-naught into two gamma that came out okay with color, but also the total production of hadrons and e plus e minus collisions. I was quite impressed with the work of Politzer, which was the same as part of the work of Gross and Wilczek, and… and I invited him to Caltech, our department invited him to Caltech, where he is still a professor I believe.

The ideas took hold gradually with many people that this theory, this Yang-Mills theory with asymptotic freedom, that is to say with the renormalization group having the fixed point at the opposite end from quantum electrodynamics so that it was at short distances that particles became nearly free, rather than at long distances; this idea took hold. It… it would explain the Bjorken, Feynman and so on idea, that it would explain the experiments which agreed with that idea and it might also at the other end, at the short… at the long distance, small momentum transfer end, where apparently the interaction was strong, might explain the confinement; there might be a potential that grew bigger and bigger and bigger at large distances and would confine all colored objects, just the way we wanted them confined. So that whole point of view seemed very nice and, as I mentioned, with the work of Polyakov and company and 't Hooft on instantons, the problem of the fourth or the ninth pseudo-scalar meson was fixed up, and objections to this theory then would…  gradually melted away. In 1976 I christened it quantum chromodynamics, using the Greek word for color, because the color variable was what gave rise to the forces, and that name has stuck: QCD, in addition to QED.

Feynman resisted believing in QCD for quite a few years. He thought that somehow the gluon propagator would be fundamentally one over K to the fourth, so that—for small k--so that one would get fundamentally, not as a result of radiative corrections but fundamentally, a confining potential. It's not really possible and I don't why he believed that but he… that's what he said for a long time. Finally at a meeting in Irvine in the winter of, what was it? ’75, ’76 I think, he finally caved in and said, all this stuff I've been doing is just an approximation to QCD. But it took quite a while.

Strings. Why were Harald and I hesitating between QCD itself and a string... a string-like version of it, which is what we endorsed in the written version of the… of the talk? Well, as I mentioned, at that time hadrons were thought to be the domain in which bootstrap ideas would apply. Now, as I mentioned, I had been a little annoyed that so many people at Berkeley and elsewhere who were doing model bootstrap calculations, were beating to death one or two states, instead of treating crudely a large number of states, say an infinite number of states. And I proposed that, some time or other in the ’60s, that one should really have a bootstrap calculation with an infinite number of meson states, say. Say you leave out the baryons for simplicity, but you would have an infinite number of meson states as colliding particles; you'd have the same infinite set of meson states as exchange particles giving the forces; and you'd have the same set of meson states as bound states coming out. This would be the self-consistent bootstrap idea but applied to an infinite number of meson states, initially taken to be of zero width, then as a result of corrections they would acquire width through their decays into other mesons.
And at Caltech at that time three of our post-docs were David Horn, Christoph Schmidt and Richard Dolen. And Dolen, Horn and Schmidt wrote a paper which referred to, usually referred to as the duality paper, in which they carried this suggestion out much further; talking about how one would carry... how… how one would construct such a bootstrap calculation. Then Veneziano produced his famous Veneziano model... when was that? About ’68? Something like ’68, in which this all happened. It was a zero approximation which you had infinitely narrow states in the S channel, the T channel and U channel, and they were all the same, and there were an infinite number of them. It was beautiful.
[Q] And you had lineally rising trajectories.
Lineally rising Regge trajectories, which was also beautiful. It was a really splendid inspiring model. It had a flaw, however, which was that there was a scalar particle with negative mass squared. That wasn't so good.

At CERN the people in the office next door, Goddard and Olive and, who were the others? I forget. Anyway there was a group of very skilled theoretical physicists right next door who were showing that Veneziano's theory was equivalent to a string theory, and string theory and a bootstrap theory carried out in the spirit that I favored, namely with an infinite number of states and not just a restriction to one or two states. These turned out to be very similar ideas and… and actually equivalent in the case of the Veneziano model. Because of that, and because of the fact that the bootstrap, and therefore the strings, were thought to apply to hadrons, Fritzsch and I hesitated between quantum chromodynamics itself and some kind of stringy version of it. As I mentioned, and as I read off a little while ago, it’s true that there are strings in quantum chromodynamics, but they're only in certain limits and they're approximate and they're an artefact, they're… they're a consequence of a theory and not fundamental.

In 1971 John Schwarz and André Neveu, working I think in Princeton, proposed superstring theory which included both bosons and fermions, unlike the Veneziano-type string theory. And also didn't have the negative mass squared particle, scalar particle. It did however have a mass-less spin two particle, which was certainly not anything like what was observed for the hadrons. But I was impressed with that theory. I thought there was something really splendid about it. I was also impressed with Pierre Ramond's work, which had in part paved the way for this superstring proposal, and I invited both of them to Caltech. And Ramond stayed there for a number of years until he left to head a theory group at the University of Florida, in Gainesville, and John is still there with a… a chair in physics.

It took a while for the importance, for the nature of the importance of the superstring theory to become clear. Two important developments happened in the middle ’70s. One was that Gliozzi, Scherk and Olive showed that any weird properties of the theory could be separated off. In other words, you could consistently separate out any negative mass squared, negative probability and so on and so on effects from the superstring theory, leaving a clean superstring theory with no weirdness. This had not been true of the Veneziano model. The Veneziano model not only lacked hadrons, it also had this negative mass squared particle in it. But the superstring theory could be cleared of all these things. The second point was to deal with the zero mass particle of spin two. Again Scherk, that brilliant but erratic young Frenchman, played a role. He came to Caltech and he and John Schwarz changed completely the interpretation of superstring theory in the mid ’70s by suggesting that it applied to all the particles, all the elementary particles, not the hadrons. They changed the slope of the Regge trajectories by a factor of ten to the thiry-eighth in mass squared, and then they could attribute the spin two mass-less boson to gravitation, it was the graviton. And in an appropriate limit they were able to show that the graviton obeyed Einstein's general relativistic theory of gravitation. So the… from then on superstring theory was a candidate–in fact the candidate—for a unified quantum field theory of all the particles and all the interactions.
[Q] You didn't talk about dimensionality.
Perhaps fulfilling Einstein's dream. Oh, the dimensionality, yes. Veneziano's model held in twenty-six dimensions, if you took the whole thing literally, and the superstring theory in ten dimensions. Nowadays superstring theory has been found to be a little bit more complicated, there seems also to be an eleven dimensional sector. But ten dimensions, and the question was what to do with that. Well, one idea was to keep looking and try to find a similar theory in four dimensions. Another idea… a different idea, was to take seriously the extra dimensions and let them curl up into a little tiny ball of some kind so that they wouldn't be a nuisance. And then the question was, would they spontaneously curl up in the actual theory? Would you have to impose it in some ugly fashion? And so on. Well those things are still being discussed.

In 1969, during the Nobel, Halloween season—this season—we got a call at three thirty in the morning from somebody or other, some news person, saying that I had won the... the Nobel Prize in physics. And I asked, 'With whom?' and they said, 'You got it all by yourself'. And I said, 'Well, in that case I have to pay tribute to all these other people who have worked on elementary particle physics, and clarified along with me some, many of the issues that we've clarified'. And I listed a whole bunch of people, but I don't believe the list ever appeared anywhere, on radio or in print.
[Q] Do you want to say here any of the names that you thought might have got the Nobel Prize with you, let's put it that way?
I forget whom I thought of at the time. Yuval of course was an obvious one because I assumed they were thinking in part of the Eightfold Way and the prediction... successful prediction of the omega minus. But there were a number of others that I would have... that I would have mentioned. I imagine Yuval was fairly disappointed actually, but of course, I suppose... I… I suppose what they were thinking was that I had worked on a great number of these issues and he had worked on relatively fewer.
 Anyway, more and more calls came and pretty soon Margaret said, 'I think we'd better get up and make some coffee and stop pretending to sleep'. My son, Nick, was then six; he was very excited about all this attention from news media and so on and so forth. My daughter, Lisa, was a good deal shyer,just buried herself under the bedclothes and would have nothing to do with the whole matter. After a while, in addition to the phone calls, a photographer showed up from the Los Angeles Times and Nick was all ready for the photographer. And so the photograph that they took was of Margaret and me and Nick wearing his Halloween costume. It was October 30th, I think, and Halloween was the next day. Well, the following day the picture appeared on the front page, right at the top of the front page of the Los Angeles times, with Nick in his pirate costume, and he received a terrible ribbing in school. He knew that we got the Los Angeles Times but it didn't... he didn't quite take into account the fact that everyone got it. I still have a… a number of copies of that issue, with Nick with his pirate costume.

We made plans to… to go to Stockholm. Gweneth Feynman lent Margaret her mink coat and... the...  we… we went over there together. My brother Ben appeared. It turned out a group of his friends in Southern Illinois took up a collection to… to pay for his trip, and one of the people was the president of the... of Southern Illinois University, about whom he had written some articles that the president didn't like too much. Something about the money spent on the presidential house or something of that kind. So he insisted that the ad that they put... that they put in various places to try to raise money for the trip would have a picture of Ben and the slogan: Get this man out of the country! Of course, when he showed up, he's so much more distinguished-looking; everybody assumed that he was the scientist receiving the prize. And we all went out to the country together with our handler, from the Swedish diplomatic service. They always supply a relatively young member of the diplomatic service to take care of each honoree. This was a marvelous young man with a splendid wife, and the two of them were really nice to us, we had a great time with them. And one thing they did was to take us out to his parents' place in the country where there were... there was an old Viking tomb and some runestones and... and we saw a Black Woodpecker, which for Ben and me was really a marvelous... a marvelous thing. But I skipped Uppsala in order to do that, so I didn't see Uppsala and I didn't see the Codex Argenteus until many, many years later–1991 when the Nobel people held the first Nobel reunion ever, the ninetieth anniversary of the first prize—and Marcia and I were engaged and we went over there together. It was just six months before we were married and we went over there together and it was a splendid occasion, and then I got to go finally to Uppsala and I got to see the Codex Argenteus.

I was very excited about the mixing in a... some sort of generalized Yang-Mills theory, the weak and the electromagnetic interactions. I always wanted to do it. After 1957 when the weak interaction was, when it appeared that the weak interaction was vector and axial vector - confirmed later in ’58, ’59 - it became much more… much easier than when we had to cope with the scalar and tensor nonsense. So I worked on that and I endorsed Shelley’s model of how to do it... gave the speech about it in Rochester, which I think was the only intelligible presentation of… of his model. And that’s persisted to this day, that's the same model we use now: SU(2) x U(1). Then Stephen Weinberg, around 1967, added to that the soft mass mechanism that I had been advertising for... for some years using the sigma model, actually, and using the mechanism of Phil Anderson, and Higgs and Kibble and all these other people. That was a beautiful piece of work. It didn't completely clear up though all the issues. We still needed charm, and although Bjorken and Glashow had suggested charm—when was that? 1964 I believe—as an idea—they didn't propose it immediately as a solution to all the various problems of the strangeness changing neutral current. Because the charm current cancels out a lot of the problems caused by the strangeness changing… the ordinary strangeness changing neutral current. When was that? 1970 I think that..? Which, the..?  That Bjorken and… and Glashow returned to… to that issue, or somebody did.  Well there was the Glashow..? When was charm reasserted as the solution to the various problems? Glashow, Illiopolos and Maiani... Oh, that's what it is: Glashow, Illiopolos and Maiani. Right. Right. In '60, well...? ’70, I think. ’69. ’69 or ’70. Yeah, I was at… mid Harvard at the same time. Right, anyway that cleared up a lot of things. And all these hesitations that I had had over whether to make an analogy between three leptons and three quarks, or four leptons and four quarks and so on and so on, all of that was settled then. We definitely had four leptons, electron and its neutrino muon and its nutrino. With the charm we had four quarks and the various problems with the weak interaction theory were… were pretty much laid to rest.

Why did I resist the idea of a fourth quark? Why didn't I immediately embrace it? You remember that back in 1954 in Glasgow, we had presented something very like strangeness and charm. The reason was the following: if the charges of the fundamental objects were two-thirds minus a third and minus a third then they summed to zero, and then the charge could be part of a simple group–one wouldn't need a—or product of simple groups--one wouldn't need a U(1) factor. If the charges average to something non-zero, as would be the case with two-thirds minus a third and two-thirds minus a third, then I was worried about the character of the whole theory. They… you would be having a charge operator with a… with a non-zero average value. What I didn't realize was that the… it was only in the context of quarks and leptons together that we would have this situation, and indeed with charm, two-thirds and minus a third, two-thirds and minus a third times three. That gives you two, which just balances minus one for the electron and minus one for the muon. And of course when we add in the top and bottom quarks and the tau lepton, the… the situation is unchanged. So these families of quarks and leptons, with the charges adding up to zero for each family was something I hadn't considered seriously. Maybe I thought about it for a moment at some time, but I didn't take it seriously. And otherwise I probably would have embraced this idea of… of a fourth flavor because it did solve so many problems. In any case, by around 1970 the electroweak theory, the original proposal of Glashow 1959-- ’60, plus the Weinberg suggestion of the soft mass mechanism, that… you… of Anderson, Higgs, Kibble and so on, plus the charm had pretty much taken care of all the problems. But there was still the question of whether the theory was fully renormalizable. And around 1970 or ’71 I believe, 't Hooft, as a student of Tini Veltman, showed that that was the case. And that was plausible because we knew that the Yang-Mills theory without symmetry breaking was renormalizable, and here the soft mass mechanism had been supplied and so it was a plausible supposition that the whole thing would be renormalizable, but it was nice to have it shown.

Salam and Ward together made very many important contributions, and Salam alone made very many important contributions to particle physics. And for either Abdus Salam or Salam and Ward to receive the… the Nobel Prize would be, I thought, a very good idea. But in connection especially with the electroweak theory I didn't think that Abdus without John had played such an enormous role, and I did think that Shelley had played a tremendously important role. And I argued a little bit—that's the only time I've ever done that–I argued a little bit with the authorities, on behalf of Shelley, not of course against Abdus. Although if I had been doing it myself I would have given him a prize for a set of things, including the weak interaction rather than just for that alone, and I might also have coupled him with John because he and John did so many wonderful things together. But... so I didn't make any negative arguments whatsoever, but I did argue positively for including Shelley, and that may have had some effect, I don't know.

It's a pity that Shelley has gone on to be such an enemy of superstring theory. I can't understand why he does that… why he has taken that position. He's also helped to spread the entirely wrong idea that superstring theory can never be tested. And of course what one could say is that the real unification that occurs in superstring theory does not occur until you reach very, very, very high energies around the Planck mass or…  and that that energy could not be achieved in laboratories or even in cosmic ray experiments in the centre of mass system, and therefore a direct test of the unified regime will not be possible. But that doesn't mean you can't test the theory. And what's curious is that Shelley participated in this move to discuss unified Yang-Mills theory with a higher group, SU(5) or something bigger that would unify the SU(2) x U(1) of the electro weak interaction and SU(3) of the strong interaction… SU(3) of color of the strong interaction, put them all together. And that theory, if it happens to have a significant degree of truth in it would also take effect only at very, very high energies, maybe 10 to the 15th, or 10 to the 14th, or 10 to the 16th GeV--also beyond the range of possible experiments. So this is a clear case of the person who lives in a wooden house not throwing termites. Why should he do that? I… I just cannot understand his position on this issue.

The most obvious test is to see if the supergap is relatively small and the superpartners of the non-particles appear in experiments. I wouldn't be at all surprised if they do. It's a pity that we lost the accelerator in Texas. Terrible pity. But if the one at CERN is built it will have, well, less energy and probably less intensity, but might be sufficient, depending on the supergap, to find a superpart... at least... at least one superpartner of a known particle.
[Q] Do… do you see… when… when you think of supersymmetry do you think of it as intimately connected to string theory? That is...
Well, you could argue, as some people do, that even if you found supersymmetry—broken supersymmetry to be correct--it would still not prove superstring theory. That's certainly true. You could conceivably, logically have supersymmetry without superstring theory.

Superstring theory seems to have the right properties to be the long-desired unified quantum field theory of all the particles and all the forces. Of course it's not a theory of everything because to describe reality you need not only the theory of the particles and forces; you also need the initial condition of the universe near the beginning of its expansion.  And also the results of an unimaginably long sequence of chance events that also determine the history of the universe… co-determine the history of the universe along with the… along with the two fundamental laws. Hopefully we can discuss that… later. Surely. But… but as the fundamental theory of the particles and forces it seems quite a… it is the only candidate and it seems very promising. Recent developments in theory have removed some of the apparent ugliness that was there because there were several forms of superstring theory: type 2A, type 2B and different groups and so on and so forth. But it seems plausible now, as a result of the duality demonstrations… the recent demonstrations of duality,  it seems plausible that all the different theories, as they were called, are just different phases of a single theory. And the many solutions that people seem to have found, at least approximate solutions, if they are genuinely exact solutions, they would also most likely be different phases. So there's really just a single theory, and it would be the only manifestation of the bootstrap idea. Well that's very beautiful, and the bootstrap idea of course can be explained very easily in words, which is something that many people wanted as a characteristic of the... of the unified theory. The… the fact that in the suitable approximation it predicts Einstein's general relativistic theory of gravitation, it incorporates it into quantum mechanics without encountering any infinities, is wonderful. So I'm very strongly in favor of the possibility that it might be the right fundamental theory, or at least would develop into the right one. We've seen with these latest researches and the change of name from superstring theory to M-theory, that one can discover more properties in the theory and it then assumes a somewhat different shape from what one had previously assumed, but it should be… should be regarded still as the same theory. It seems to have other sectors: the latest fashion, they say, is to describe the so-called base space as a one-dimensional space with just the tau variable, not sigma and tau, then in that base space one can have supersymmetry all the way up to M = 16. And that would be the chosen one, the maximum… maximum number of supersymmetries that one can have with one base space dimension. It all sounds very exciting to me. Of course, I'm not following it in detail; I'm following it like a reporter.

[Q] Are you concerned in any way, given your... the way you practiced physics which was very closely tied in with experimental results, are you in any way disturbed by the fact that it seems unlikely that there can be a... an acid test of superstring theory, in the usual sense of that...?
 Well, I don't know what you mean by 'the usual sense.' It has already got some successes in predicting the Einsteinian theory; it predicts supersymmetry, which could play a very important role in preserving the big ratios that we observe among masses in the presence of radiative corrections; and curing the singular properties of the scalar particles. The… so supersymmetry is desirable in itself and it's predicted by superstring theory. Super… supersymmetry can also be verified by observation, and I hope that the LHC is sufficiently energetic to permit that. We don't know exactly what the supergap is, how high you have to go to encounter the superpartners of the known elementary particles, but if it's too high it sort of defeats the purpose—the one we just discussed—of maintaining the big ratios in the face of radiative corrections and so on, so I don't the supergap can be so very high. Moreover some people speculate that the superpartner of the top quark, the top squark, so to speak, might be lighter than the top quark. Could be discovered perhaps even without the LHC. All of those things are encouraging. Now I suppose there could be some naysayers who, even if supersymmetry is confirmed, will say, well, that doesn't prove superstring theory. But one can make a great many post-dictions as well as predictions: one can explain, perhaps, a large number of the facts about the standard model that are now known or will be known in the future. And I'm sure there are also corrections to the standard model and those could be verified; there may even be astrophysical or cosmological consequences that can be… that can be checked. I don't see any… anything wrong with the idea of comparing superstring theory with observation.
[Q] Some of the practitioners of M-theory have been making provocative statements that there is really no need any longer for big accelerators and it's… no… along these lines of 'testing' in the traditional sense, hat those are not the sorts of tests, other than...
Well, I don't find that very congenial. I think that's absurd. Of course we should, to the extent possible , carry our experiments to higher energies, try to understand what's going on there and see how it compares with theory. But I do agree that besides accelerator building and accelerator experiments, it's essential to do a lot of theory. We have to extract the predictions from superstring theory.
 

In my book, The Quark and the Jaguar, I mention the possibility that the predictions are probabilistic, that our universe may have one out of a number of possible solutions, and that the probability of such a solution may be calculable. Perhaps it's e to the minus 2 script S, where script S is some kind of loop corrected and Euclideanized action for the situation under discussion. In that case, the lowest S would be… state… the lowest S solution would be the one with the highest probability, or if they degenerate, the lowest S solutions would be the ones with the highest probability. That would greatly reduce the predictive power of the theory, but not necessarily to the point where it would be unsatisfactory as a theory. It might reduce the predictive power. I don't regard it as such a horrible thing if that were to happen because it… we know that the history of the universe is co-determined by the fundamental laws and a very long sequence of chance events or accidents, this would just add an initial accident. It would adjoin an initial accident to the list, which is perhaps unfortunate from the point of view of predictive power, but it wouldn't invalidate the whole idea. I don't know whether it will turn out to be that way or not. Perhaps there's one phase that's selected in some… some clear manner.

[Q] Is it conceivable to talk about boundary conditions in the usual sense? Or make guesses of boundary conditions when we're working in ten or eleven dimensions?
Well, if you start early enough and if there really are extra dimensions that are not collapsed to zero, and you start early enough, your initial condition would have to be specified in this large number of dimensions. That's certainly true. But we'll have to see what happens as a result of considering at the same time the base space and the target space, as they call them in superstring or M-theory, because it looks as if the most fundamental way to look at the theory is in the base space, just one dimension nowadays—formerly two—and the target space is then one of the consequences of the theory, one of the constructs in the theory. So the whole concept of initial condition might somehow change.

It's unfortunate that the cultures of cosmology and astrophysics, on the one hand, and elementary particle physics on the other, are so different. It's made it difficult for people to work simultaneously, theorists to work simultaneously on both… in both domains. The reason Stephen Hawking was able to discover the Hawking radiation was that he was one of the few cosmologists who knew a little bit about particle physics. Nowadays of course there's more inter-penetration, but still it's not adequate. I think it's very important that there be much more inter-penetration and that people really work simultaneously on superstring or M-theory, whatever you want to call it, in elementary particle theory and on cosmology, at the same time and with interlocking agendas.
[Q] But the potential barrier between those two is now become probably even bigger because of the tremendous technicalities that are involved in superstring theory or M-theory. It's much more difficult for people to cross...
Well, maybe it's those people then who have to learn… be concerned with cosmology. Some of them are of course…
[Q] Yes, it may be the other way...
Some of them are concerned with cosmology, but they need to be, I think they need to be more concerned with cosmology. Many of them still have an implicit belief that they can get away in their research by considering the universe to be approximately flat and gravitation as sort of a… gravitational curvature as a kind of perturbation, and that may not be right. But or course, cosmology is undergoing a lot of rapid change now with the observational evidence seeming to indicate that the universe has lots of… will… will go to infinity with lots of juice left over, and more over with a non-zero cosmological constant.
[Q] Yes, do you want to talk about that a little bit, what your reaction is to that..?
Well, maybe. There's no reason not to have a cosmological constant. In fact the challenge in a theory with broken supersymmetry has always been to find a way to break the supersymmetry spontaneously without generating a huge cosmological constant. The big problem is how to make it zero. Well, a semi-plausible argument was developed with the aid of virtual baby universes or virtual black holes and an approach sometimes called third quantization where the value of the cosmological constant came out to be one over the normalization of a probability distribution, and it was an un-normalizable distribution, so you got one over infinity which would be zero. The argument never looked really clean but it was a possible indication of how the thing might come about. Well now if the sighted observations are correct, one is looking for a cosmological constant that's just of the same… that gives a… a stress image momentum tensor of the same order of magnitude as the matter density. And that means in natural units, a value of something like 10to the minus 119th, possibly the largest fudge factor in the history of science. The search for theoretical understanding of such a value then is quite exciting; if it turns out we really need it. Now maybe the argument that gave zero, or some form of an argument like that could be revived but with a cut-off, I mean a natural cut-off, at the real matter density, that would somehow allow the… the cosmological constant to be slightly non-zero. I don't know. I really don't know enough about these things to make a serious educated guess.

In '63…'64 I worked on trying to understand quantum mechanics, and I brought in Felix Villars and for a while some comments... there were some comments by Dick Feynman who was nearby. And we all agreed on a rough understanding of quantum mechanics and the second law of thermodynamics and so on and so on, that was not really very different from what I'd been working on in the last ten or fifteen years. I was not aware, and I don't think Felix was aware either, of the work of Everett when he was a graduate student at Princeton and worked on this, what some people have called 'many worlds' idea, suggested more or less by Wheeler. Apparently Everett was, as we learned at the Massagon [sic] meeting, Everett was an interesting person. He… it wasn't that he was passionately interested in quantum mechanics; he just liked to solve problems, and trying to improve the understanding of quantum mechanics was just one problem that he happened to look at. He spent most of the rest of his life working for the Weapon System Evaluation Group in Washington, WSEG, on military problems. Apparently he didn't care much as long as he could solve some interesting problems! Anyway, I didn't know about Everett's work so we discovered our interpretation independent of Everett. Now maybe Feynman knew about… about Everett's work and when he was commenting maybe he was drawing upon his knowledge of Everett, I have no idea, but… but certainly Felix and I didn't know about it, so we recreated something related to it. Now, as interpreted by some people, Everett's work has two peculiar features: one is that this talk about many worlds and equally… many worlds equally real, which has confused a lot of people, including some very scholarly students of quantum mechanics. What does it mean, 'equally real'? It doesn't really have any useful meaning. What the people mean is that there are many histories of the… many alternative histories of the universe, many alternative course-grained, decoherent histories of the universe, and the theory treats them all on an equal footing, except for their probabilities. Now if that's what you mean by equally real, okay, but that's all it means; that the theory treats them on an equal footing apart from their probabilities. Which one actually happens in our experience, is a different matter and it's determined only probabilistically. Anyway, there's considerable continuity between the thoughts of '63-'64 and the thoughts that, and… and maybe earlier in the ‘60s, and the thoughts that Jim Hartle and I have had more recently, starting around '84-'85.

In the late '80s, Bob Griffiths and Roland Omnes, independently, worked on decoherent histories and they published the idea before Jim and I did. In fact I'd never written anything about quantum mechanics until the very end of the 1980s. But I'd thought a lot about it, and the thoughts, as I say, were sort of continuous. Jim Hartle and I have worked on decoherent histories with a particular point of view. Some people have tried to get the minimum conditions for consistency allowing probabilities to be assigned to course-grained histories, so they get a weaker and weaker form of decoherence. We have been interested in finding a stronger and stronger form of decoherence, trying to appreciate what actually happens in the real world where decoherence is far from minimal. The actual decoherent histories with which one conventionally deals are decoherent in a very strong manner, and it's that strong decoherence that we've tried to describe, approach and so on. But now if you consider a set of decoherent, course-grained, alternative histories of the universe, given the two fundamental principles; the unified theory of all the particles and forces, and the initial condition, initial density matrix or a wave function, then… the… let me see, what was I going to say… if… if you're given all that, there's a question of… of which set of decoherent histories you use. And we like to talk about a realm, which is a set of alternative decoherent histories subject to some condition. Usually it's a kind of maximality condition so that you… if you were to fine-grain further you would start to lose the… the decoherence, something like that; or if you fine-grained further you would start to lose either the decoherence or some other desirable property, and such a system we call a realm.

Quantum mechanics is protean, in the sense that you can keep changing the representation, in fact at every time you can change the representation, and the representation has a huge freedom in change of representation, in change of basis. Besides that, even if you're given the basis at every single time, there's a huge freedom of coarse-graining. So the number of possible realms is gigantic, and yet we seem to use almost always a realm that can be called hydrodynamic. It’s described by ranges of values of operators, which are integrals of conserved or almost conserved densities over small volumes of space, and spaced at small intervals of time. And the volumes of space are chosen to be large enough for some kind of internal equilibrium to occur, but small enough to, well, to allow the realm to be maximal; that would be one way to say it.
Now, what properties this usual quasi-classical realm has, so that everything we know about uses it, is one thing we've tried to understand. Quasi, by quasi-classical we mean that these variables very crudely obey classical equations over considerable intervals of time, interrupted constantly by small fluctuations and occasionally by big branchings, big probabilistic branchings. So we are concerned with what makes a realm quasi-classical; why this particular quasi-classical realm seems to play an important role; is there perhaps some fundamental restriction on the representation of quantum mechanics, or ithe transformation theory is really only approximate? One great virtue of our method is that it allows treating, as Hartle has shown in some papers, it allows treating the general relativistic situation, that is a situation in which gravitation as well as all other fields is… is quantized and there are huge quantum variations in the metric. Under those conditions it's very difficult to define a sequence of time slices so that the usual Schrödinger approach to quantum mechanics can be implemented. But this approach, this sum over histories approach, where the history's coarse-grained enough… coarse-grained enough to be strongly decoherent—that works. And the other one may be impossible actually, may not be possible to formulate quantum mechanics any other way. This may be a slight generalization of quantum mechanics. When I wrote an article for the Feynman memorial issue of Physics Today I mentioned that, that Richard was always upset because he felt he had done mostly mathematical work on theories that had been proposed by other people and he wanted to do a fundamental theory of his own. And maybe it will turn out that the sum over histories work actually is a fundamental generalization of quantum mechanics that's necessary, rather than simply a reformulation of quantum mechanics. And our… our work may tend in that direction.

[Q] Do you think–just on a more practical, pedagogical level—that the traditional way of teaching quantum mechanics, like introducing students to quantum mechanics, should evolve into teaching it more from the sum over histories viewpoint?
Well the… not only the sum over histories viewpoint, but the decoherent histories viewpoint. Well, when the point of view is perfected, which may be very soon, I think that's true. The reason is that although the so-called Copenhagen interpretation is perfectly correct for all laboratory physics, laboratory experiments and so on, it's too special otherwise to be fundamental and it sort of strains credulity. It's… it’s not a convincing fundamental presentation, correct though… though it is, and as far as quantum cosmology is concerned it's hopeless. We were just say ing, we were just quoting that old saw: describe the universe and give three examples. Well, to apply the… the Copenhagen interpretation to quantum cosmology,  you'd need a physicist outside the universe making repeated experiments, preferably on multiple copies of the universe and so on and so on. It's absurd. Clearly there is a definition to things happening independent of human observers. So I think that as this point of view is perfected it should be included in… in teaching fairly early, so that students aren't convinced that in order to understand quantum mechanics deeply they have to swallow some of this…very… some of these things that are very difficult to believe. But in the end of course, one can use the Copenhagen interpretations perfectly okay for experiments.

[Q] Among some of the leading practitioners, Witten, Susskind, and so on, there is this vision that 'a revolution has taken place that is bigger than quantum mechanics', quote…
What is the revolution?
[Q] Whatever M-theory is, is somehow going to be bigger than quantum mechanics. That it’s going to change even the basics of fundamental physics. Have you been involved in, paid any attention to this?
Well, there is some sense in which the co-ordinate operators for the target space are represented by non-commuting quantities, matrices. Now you can still define commuting quantities which also enter, but there are non-commuting quantities that enter, and so on and so forth. So there're many very interesting features which will surely lead to a lot of re-formulations of... and possible interpretations... of fundamental theory, but I don't know what they mean by ‘bigger than quantum mechanics’; I don't understand that. Could be though that when that theory is clarified and… it will help with the clarification of the interpretation of quantum mechanics. That's conceivable. I don't quite see how, but it might happen.

The widespread foolishness associated with the Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen, Bohm effect and its experimental… the experimental confirmation of quantum mechanics; I treat that at some length in my book. It's very strange. It has to do perhaps with the fact that John Bell, although he did very good work and didn't make any mistakes, as far as I know, actually didn't like quantum mechanics and introduced words that are sort of prejudicial like 'non-local', and when people say that the EPRB effect is… shows that quantum mechanics is non-local, what they mean is that a classical interpretation of what's happening would have to be either non-local or involved negative probabilities or both. That's not the same as saying that it actually is non-local, but that's the vocabulary that has been introduced, to say that quantum mechanics is non-local. And sort of—it's… it’s a matter of giving a dog a bad name and hanging him, as far as I can tell. When the quantum mechanical predictions for this experiment were fully verified, I would have thought everybody would say, great and go home. Instead they say, there is something seriously peculiar here. Well the only thing that's seriously peculiar there is quantum mechanics!
Now, as I explained in the book, when you have a situation in which say, two photons are produced in a single event, for example by a spins decay of a spin-zero meson, they move in opposite directions. An observer makes a measurement on one of them and thereby learns some property of the other one even though the other one is far away. That's not any sort of affront to locality or special relativity or anything. The point is that classically this could happen to… to a single kind of measurement and John Bell referred to this as Bertelsmann's socks, talking about a mathematician who I assumed was fictitious but apparently was a real mathematician who wore one pink sock and one green sock, and if you saw the pink sock you would know that the other foot had a green sock. Well, similarly with these two photons: since you know their correlation, if you measure a property of one, you learn the property of the other. There's nothing peculiar about that. As John Bell emphasized, in quantum mechanics the entanglement of the two photons can be deeper than it can be classically, in the sense that you could then, you could instead measure a different property of one of the photons and you would learn that property of the other photon. Well that's peculiar to quantum mechanics, but it still doesn't give rise to any sort of non-locality. People say, loosely, crudely, wrongly, that when you measure one of the photons it does something to the other one; it doesn't. All that happens is, you measure a property of one and you learn the corresponding property of the other one. Now, what these people who try to confuse us will say is, yes, but you choose which property and thereby you choose what state the other one will be in. Well, the point is that the different measurement, say, of linear polarization of one revealing the linear polarization of the other, or circular polarization of one revealing the circular polarization of the other; those measurements are made on different branches of history, decoherent with each other, only one of which occurs. So it's simply not true!  And Einstein's point of view, which was that if some variable could ever be measured with certainty it should have some sort of physical reality and a definite value, that's just wrong, that's just in contradiction to quantum mechanics. When two variables at the same time don't commute, any measurement of both of them would have to be carried out with one measurement on one branch of history and the other measurement on another branch of history and that's all there is to it. I… I presented that in my book, and of course Jim and I have argued for that, and some other people, but it doesn't seem to get across. People are still mesmerized by this confusing language of non-locality. What they do isn't necessarily wrong, lots of people do correct work on this subject, but the vocabulary makes it sound like something very different from what it is.

I was always interested in subjects like natural history, evolutionary biology, psychology, archaeology, linguistics, history and so on, which are very different from elementary particle physics because they involve a huge amount of individuality and a huge amount of complexity and a lot of evolution, and… and so on; whereas elementary particle physics involves things like electrons and photons that are exactly the same everywhere, all identical when they belong to a given species, no evolution, just fixed laws and so on and so forth. It's a very different kind of subject. So I've always wondered about the relation between these two, and… and I've always wanted to be at a place where people were concerned with both—preferably with both at the same time. Caltech was not such a place. Caltech has had very little evolutionary biology, or certainly during the time when I was there. I used to kid people there that if it were Bob Jones University it could scarcely have less evolutionary biology. Now I assume David Baltimore will fix that, the new President. But it had very little psychology, very little linguistics, if any, no archaeology, none of these subjects. No… no ecology, very odd. But in… in my book I summarized all of this by saying that Caltech expressed interest only in mechanism, fundamental mechanism, which is very good. Of course I've worked on fundamental mechanisms most of my life and it's very important, but it's not a, by itself, an adequate strategy for studying the world. You also have to… you mustn't build only from the bottom up, but also look from the top down and look at phenomena, especially complex phenomena, and find some of the rules that apply at the level of the subject involving those phenomena, and then perhaps try to build staircases up and down between the more fundamental and the less fundamental field. But it's not adequate to study only neurobiology and not psychology, and so on and so forth. I think it's just wrong. And it produces a somewhat sterile atmosphere, in my opinion.
[Q] And would you say that, I mean, you talk about Caltech in that regard; would you generalize that?
To universities? No.
[Q] To academic..? No…
No, no. Caltech.
[Q] This is a somewhat unique phenomenon.
Right. Well, in some circles of course, that's the most admired kind of science, which is okay. Certainly science involving detailed mechanism is very important, but as I ask in the book: would Caltech have hired Darwin? Darwin didn't know anything about fundamental mechanism or whatever he thought about fundamental mechanisms was probably wrong; but he discovered a lot of wonderful things, and so did some other great researchers.

In any case, in the early '80s I was a so-called Fellow of the Los Alamos lab, as you know. There were some Fellows who, like me, were consultants, and other Fellows were staff members. And we got into the habit of having lunches for the Fellows, and from the very beginning the lunches were devoted to the idea of founding an institute in Santa Fe, it was the first thing all of us thought of, an institute that would not be run by the government although it would… could certainly accept government research funds; would not be devoted to classified matters; and would be genuinely open, international and so on.

We discussed founding such an institute but there were many questions, of course. What should it be like? What would it study? How would it operate? Some people suggested a relatively narrow focus for it. Nick Metropolis, or Metropolos, I think wanted it to be an institute devoted to computat... parallel computation, and so on. But my point of view, which was supported by some others and eventually, I think, by everybody, was that it ought to be very broad and consider a great number of fields, roughly, in fact, I think the spectrum that it covers now: from mathematics and computer science through physics and chemistry to evolutionary biology, ecology, neurobiology, psychology, immunology, economics, anthropology including archaeology, political science, history, something like that–linguistics, also, that sort of range. And that the computation, while a very important part of the work of the institute would be in great part in the service of science; try to use computation in addition to ordinary analytical theory and to observation as a tool for understanding, and then to use the computers themselves and software on computers also as systems of… to be studied, along with biological systems, social systems and so on. And gradually that idea took hold and I think everybody supported it. But the question was still open as to how the institute would operate and what—in these many fields—what would we do. Well, my feeling and that of some others was that we should make it interdisciplinary in operation, that is people should- it should… it should be a place where people would have the opportunity to co-operate, would be encouraged to co-operate, work together among different fields, something which is largely lacking in our great universities and institutes of technology. And of course, for good reason, because most of the criteria of excellence are within the disciplines. We have systems of degrees and courses and departments and journals and professional societies and sections of granting agencies and so on that are all arranged by field. And we know that mediocre talents like to hide in the crevices among fields. So it's a challenge to figure out how to recognize excellence in interdisciplinary work, but gradually we came to the idea that we would try to recruit people who were really pretty good in what they had done before and were perhaps were still doing to some extent, so we would have experts in all these different subjects working together. That way, if a group of people were working on a problem in linguistics, say, and only one was a linguist, that person would be responsible for making sure that it wasn't phony linguistics, and so on. That principle has held and I think that's more or less the way we… we operate.

We came to the idea that initially the research should be theoretical and—largely at least theoretical—and computer based, rather than observational, but we have never ruled out, not even to the present time, some observational work, and in fact the first observational project was approved recently, something to do with ant colonies in Central America. But it was always understood, especially in the initial phase, there would be mostly theoretical and computer-based work. But what would people study exactly in doing interdisciplinary work on these many different subjects? Well, in the fall of 1984 we held the founding workshops. Doug Schwartz very kindly lent us the board room of the School of American Research [sic],  lovely place, and the weather was magnificent, November and December. We… we held two workshops, each one for one or two days, I think, one in November and one in December, and the proceedings are published in our first volume, the first volume of our Santa Fe Institute series of books on the sciences of complexity. It's called 'Emerging Syntheses in Science', and I think that phrase was mine, if I remember correctly. I… I pointed out that there were a lot of great syntheses in science: biological evolution, the expanding universe, the theory of elementary… the standard model of elementary particles, plate tectonics in geology, nuclear synthesis in the stars and in the early universe, and so on and so forth and that our institute should perhaps have the high ambition of trying to find such a great synthesis. Of course it wouldn't be a… a sure thing, but we should work in some direction that looked as if it promised something in the way of a synthesis, but we didn't know what that would be. We invited a lot of speakers though, to the November and December workshops. I did a number of the phone calls, and… and we got some really splendid people. What was surprising was that it turned out the talks had many things in common, and in particular most of them were about simplicity and complexity and about… and a great many of them were about evolution, learning and adaptation. And around then the Los Alamos Center for Nonlinear Studies held a meeting on evolution, learning and games, and there was a lot of overlap actually. So it became clear then that... that our fate lay in that direction, that we ought to try to encourage people who would think about topics related to that set of questions: simplicity and complexity, and what we came to call complex adaptive systems.

I assumed for a very long time that we would have permanent professors, like the Salk Institute, the Institute for Advanced Study, and so on. Our institute would not resemble those because there most of the work is individual rather than co-operative, but I thought it would resemble those institutions in having a considerable number of senior positions including some permanent positions, and I thought we could raise an endowment of one to two hundred million, since there were so many wealthy people and if we persuaded… if we explained the situation properly they might be willing to give very large sums of money for a new exciting adventure, including very excellent people. Well it didn't work out that way. First of all, up to the present time, we have never tapped large sources of private funds, although we've met many people who've been generous on a smaller scale. And second, our community, our Santa Fe Institute has gradually moved away from the idea of having a number of permanent people and now, in fact, wants to have no senior appointments, no long-term senior appointments whatsoever, let alone permanent ones. So that has gone in a different direction, and I think mostly that's to the good, although this latest decision to get rid of all long-term senior positions I think is a silly one. But I think the movement away from a fixed… a large fixed staff was probably wise. And of course it was necessary; we never raised enough money for it anyway, but I think besides that it was a good thing.
[Q] Why? Do you want to expand on that a little bit, why..?
Well, I think we need to retain some flexibility, some variability, adaptability, and I think it would be harder if we had a lot of people. After all, I mean…But… but the idea of abolishing the senior positions is silly, in my opinion, for several reasons. First of all, you need some continuity for research contracts and that sort of thing. Second, I think you need continuity in order… in order for the research ideas to persist a little bit. And third, I think that it's very hard to get anyone to leave a university, to leave a senior position in a university for a number of years without a reasonable assurance of a fairly long run, even if there's no tenure. Finally, I think that these integrative studies are studies that favor somewhat older people, not… not exclusively of course, we need many young people, but I think that the advantage of youth is not so great in these integrative studies and also in data-rich fields, the advantage is not so great as the advantage of youth in fields that are data poor, idea rich, changing very rapidly, like elementary particle theory or mathematics. So I… I don't agree with that latest decision, but the general idea of abandoning the structure of a… of a regular institute I think was… was a good one.

After we held the founding workshops in the fall if '84, we incorporated. I was the first chairman of the board, I believe and we selected George Cowan to be the President and pretty soon we had rented a convent from the Catholic Church and we began to have some wonderful visitors and everything was off to a very good start. I recruited a number of the people, especially in the early days, for workshops, visits, membership on our various boards and so on, and I was very apprehensive - at first especially - because many of the people I was calling were people who were in very different fields, had never heard of me or had barely heard of me, and I was fairly sure what their response would be in most cases; if they were busy, famous people they would say,’ I'm really... what you propose is very interesting, your institute sounds very nice, but you know I'm awfully busy. I have my research and my students and my consulting and my lecturing and I'm writing a book and I really don't have any time. Please don't call me, I'll call you’. Instead the people whose names we selected, people we had heard were interested in interdisciplinary co-operation, almost always said the opposite, something like, ‘Can't I come sooner? I've been waiting for this all my life’. Something of that kind, it was very heartening.

After some years at the convent several things happened. We outgrew it; the church wanted it back; various compromise arrangements whereby we would enlarge it and then give it back after many years to the church and so on didn't work. So... so we left and we occupied a, what was essentially a dental suite, for some years. That wasn't very satisfactory but the Institute throve anyway. But it was not a very good home. And finally we acquired the Hurley Renfrew mansion overlooking the city, and we have now expanded it. The expansion will be finished in August or so and we won't have six in an office any more. I hope we can get down to two or three in an office. Six in an office may be wonderful for interaction, but it's not very good for thought. We have promised ourselves not to increase the number of resident researchers at any one time beyond 50. We had something like 35 to 45, typically, and now I hope we don't raise the number more than... by more than a very few and keep to our promise to ourselves that it won't be more than 50 because the character of the whole institution would change greatly, I think, if we had more than 50. And we'd be back to crowding, moreover, which would be a shame. So the people come for a day or a week or a month or a year or two years and co-operate across disciplinary lines and form informal research networks, communicating by email and fax and visits and so on, and study all sorts of marvelous problems in all those fields that... that we mentioned.

I think just the existence of the Institute and the habits of work and so on are already a big achievement. But a number of things have been done. You're associated with one of the best. The work that you and Jim Brown and Jim Brown's student, Brian Enquist did on understanding scaling laws in biology that had been known for most of the century, I think was brilliant. You work of course as a theoretical particle physicist at Los Alamos, and Jim Brown as an ecology professor at University of New Mexico in Albuquerque. You met at the Santa Fe Institute, you were introduced to each other by Mike Simmons or someone, and you started working very soon afterwards on explaining this age-old mystery in biology: why is it that for mammals all the way from a shrew to an elephant, the metabolic rate is proportional to the 3/4 power of the mass; the same for birds, the same for vascular plants and so on? And why are there another dozen associated scaling laws with different powers like 5/8ths and so on? And what you did was to form a… a model with a three dimensional space filling fractal to represent the cardiovascular system of an animal, or the respiratory system of an animal, or the vascular system of a higher plant, and to assume in accordance with reality that the smallest tube had the same diameter independent of the mass of the organism, because it was a cell size. And putting those assumptions together you explained the power loss and even... and… and produced all the necessary rational exponents, including 11/12ths in one law which hadn't even been perceived as 11/12ths, although it was known to be around .92. Sure enough it had to be 11/12ths. I thought that was marvelous. Another splendid... some other splendid work has been done by the theoretical immunology group, headed by Alan Perelson, originally trained as a physicist also, and from Los Alamos also, but although some of the people who’ve worked on it have been Santa Fe Institute employees... done a number of things, a number of… made a number of interesting, important theoretical advances in immunology. One, of course, is associated with the work of Dr David Ho and his team. Dave Ho is very famous: he was Time's 'Man of the Year', year before last and what isn't known is that the theoretical work associated with Ho's experimental and medical research was done at the Santa Fe Institute. The theoretical work was, for example, on what happens to HIV infected people during the latency period before AIDS symptoms appear. It had been thought that there was very little HIV, and very little immune system activity. It turned out that there was a lot of HIV and a lot of immune system activity, and a titanic struggle was waged until the immune system lost and AIDS symptoms appeared.  It’s really not acknowledged by most people that the theory was done at the Santa Fe Institute. Our economics researchers who were interdisciplinary too, the original economics program included physicists and biologists as well as economists. It's played some considerable role in helping to push economics away from a preoccupation with perfect equilibrium, perfect markets, perfect information, perfect rationality, perfect nonsense and so on. Of course the Santa Fe Institute wasn't alone in that, but it played a significant role, and so on and so forth. I think there have been many triumphs.

I think we should continue to work on lots of things. There are a number of issues on which I have opinions. I think that we should restore some long-term senior positions. I think we should go after people, very interesting, accomplished senior people or middle-aged people as well as young people, for sabbatical appointments. I think that we should have some work that's data-rich, that involves putting in the results of a large number of historical accidents, rather than dealing with abstractions that might be associated with any planet in the universe, or no planet at all. I think—but of course, there's a trade off there: the more specific you make the model, the more data rich, the more historical accidents you include; while the verisimilitude of the model may increase, the transparency goes down. So what are the very simple ones good for? Do you just make simple models and then compare them with the—simple computer models, for example, then compare them with the facts? Well that's not such a great idea usually because even if they agreed it would be peculiar; since the models are so far from reality, why should they agree with the facts? However, you can sometimes find properties, like scaling properties, but there're probably many others as well, that can be traced continuously from real systems all the way down to very skeletal systems with just a few simple principles. When that's true one might be able to learn from the simple systems, the simple models rather, something about how these mathematical properties occur in the… in the much more complicated cases. And I think that's very helpful and has been done in a number of situations.

We need to have some work that's more realistic and puts in more properties of the real world. Also, complex adaptive systems--in my language, what John Holland calls adaptive agents--usually exist at the bottom of a hierarchy of organization. For example, people, individual people or individual households usually belong to villages and the villages belong to states or nations and so on and so forth. Even people at a lower level of technical development have tribes and so on and so forth. And yet, most of the models that people use that have something to do with human beings have just isolated atomistic—not isolated, but atomistic individuals or households—interacting   by…with simple economic motives, and most of the richness of actual social life is excluded. Community, laws, traditions, institutions, myths, religion and so on, are excluded, and that's not the way it is. The archaeology projects, for example, that deal mostly with the history of the south—with the prehistory of the south-west—started with almost nothing except individual households interacting for… with economic motives—narrow economic motives. Now they've put in a couple of social things like matrilineal clans, but I think a good deal more postulated social organization would be a big help. The main thing is to have schemata, as I call them, what John Holland would call internal models, at more than one level of organization, for the individual or the household, but also for the village, also for a nation, and so on. That's the way real things are. Otherwise you get absurd models. For example, one team of researchers, I remember, came up with a extremely silly model of pollution control, in which there were two cars one of which more polluting … one of which was more polluting than the other but cheaper, and one pollutant, which was very nasty, and as time goes on and there were more cars in the fleet the level of the nasty pollutant increased and people began coughing and sneezing and getting ill and getting headaches and, according to the model, they then started buying the more expensive car. But of course, what real people do under those conditions is say, let the other people buy the more expensive car. It's the free rider problem, and what you need is a government which would say: give a tax break to the more expensive car and make it about the same price as the cheaper one, then people really would buy it. But the essential thing is to have a second layer of organization, not just atomistic individuals. And so for, purely for mathematical convenience, not out of any ideological bias, people are imposing on their work some sort of crazy right wing libertarian ideas which they don't really have, but which they put in only for mathematical convenience. I find it very strange. Now Chris Langton has, partly I think in response to arguments from me, has introduced into the 'Swarm' platform devices which, it is claimed, will permit the introduction of schemata at more than one level of organization. I hope we take advantage of that.

There is some analytic work. The theoretical immunologists do a lot of analytic work, and you do… and you do analytic work and some other people do analytic work. So it's not absent. No, but the dominance is… But we need more… we need more, how shall I say, mobility among analytic and computer models and so on, I think. We need more interaction among people. We haven't developed departments, not at all, but we have to some extent developed groups of people who have different vocabularies and different notation and different leaders and so on, and… and don't interact nearly so much as they should. Next summer's integrative workshop may help a little with that but only if people actually listen to one another rather than just speaking at one another.
[Q] I… I wanted to ask you a little bit about that, about this… this business that one of the… one of the dicta of the Santa Fe Institute had been not to have departments, of course, it was antithetical to the whole idea, and the question of how to avoid precisely…
Well we don't have departments, so that's not an issue. We're not going to have departments.
[Q] Absolutely not, but how to avoid the issue which you've just raised, how do you stop not departments, but the groupings of people who…
Well I don't think we have to stop them but we need more integration and I think that maybe the integrative workshop, if it's handled better than last time, may… may produce that, but it's essential that people really be encouraged to listen to one another and argue with one another and not just talk past one another. I think maybe it will help some.

Well I've been working on three issues. One of them we discussed already, and that is the work with Jim Hartle on trying to understand a reasonable basis for quantum mechanics. A second one, which is not unrelated, is to understand something about issues of simplicity and complexity. I call that whole field 'plectics' from a Greek word for braided, plectos, related to the Latin root, plexus, which originally also meant braided and from which we get complexes—complex; braided together. But it's related distantly also to the Latin verb plecare, they both come from the same Indo-European root, plec. Plecare means to fold, and simplex originally was once folded, and that gives simple or simplicity. So simplicity and complexity are related, once folded and braided together, and it's interesting that the word we're using refers to braiding or folding because entanglement is essential of course to produce anything that has any sort of diversity, complexity, individuality. If we were all just made of independent, of…of quarks and electrons in independent states we wouldn't have much… many properties of interest. So I think plectics is an excellent word, and it's non-committal with respect to whether you're discussing the simple laws or their complex consequences.
Anyway, quantum mechanics is one subject. The second subject is understanding something about simplicity and complexity, logical depth, chaos, trade-offs, trade-offs between logical depth and effective complexity, and so on and so forth. On all of this I've been co-operating with Seth Lloyd who is now an Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering at MIT, although he was trained as a physicist, and he works on a lot on quantum computers, so he says he's a professor of quantum mechanical engineering at MIT, and of course Jim Hartle has played some role in that too. And the third subject, that I've been working on these last years, and especially recently, is the typology of scaling phenomena, and you and Juan Pérez-Mercader and Jim Brown and I are trying to get NASA support for our work on the typology of scaling phenomena. Is it really true that all scaling phenomena in all fields have something to do with one another? Or are there different kinds of scaling and may be some slight mathematical differences among the different kinds of scaling, and so on? It's a very exciting subject, I think. I've been fascinated with Zipf's law for cities and things like that for fifty years now, since I first heard about it from Viki Weisskopf, my thesis adviser, and trying to understand what sorts of relations there are among different scaling phenomena and different explanations for scaling phenomena would be very exciting.

What people usually mean by simplicity and complexity, by… what people usually mean by complexity in ordinary conversation or in most scientific discourse is what I call effective complexity, which in simple lay terms would the be the length of a very compact description of the regularities of the entity under consideration; not the length of a description of the whole entity, but of its regularities. That's effective complexity. You can then make it more technical by introducing the concept of algorithmic information content, the length of the shortest program that would cause a standard universal computer to print out a bit-coded description of the entity and then halt and stop computing. That's what you usually mean when you say that the plot of a novel is complex, or a culture is complex, or a big conglomerate business firm is complex, you mean it would take a long time to describe all the regularities. So that's certainly one kind of complexity. Logical depth as defined by Charlie Bennett is another very important one, and that's for a short program how long would it take the calculation to go before you printed out a description of the… of the entity. And sometimes you can't tell the difference. It's hard to know which you're dealing with. You see something that's apparently complicated, and you don't know whether it's something that's really very simple but with a huge amount of computation to go from the simple program to the description, or whether it actually is complex, effectively complex and has many laws. If you're given the energy levels or nuclei, you might think that the rules for them were very, very complicated, lots and lots and lots of rules in order to explain the energy levels of nuclei, but we believe that quantum chromodynamics and quantum electrodynamics, both very simple theories, if combined together would predict all the energy levels of nuclei, but the computation is so long that it hasn't actually been done yet. But we hope that when it is done it will confirm our conviction that QED and QCD, simple theories, underlie the nuclear energy levels. But without knowing about QED and QCD one could easily imagine that the energy levels were effectively complex. So there's always this trade-off possible. Likewise there's a possible trade-off between randomness and simplicity. Suppose you're given a long, long, long number, it looks random and you would at first assign it no regularity, you'd say it was a random string, maybe you would guess that it was a random string and therefore with very little effective complexity. But then you might learn that it was actually a very simple string, also with very little effective complexity but at the opposite end of the algorithmic information content scale. For instance, suppose you were given the second million bits of pi, you might at first think that was a random sequence, but then after a while you might realize if, especially if somebody hinted to you that that's what it might be, that it was second million bits of pi, in which case of course it's very simple because you can describe that very quickly. So there're all these trade-offs based on knowledge.

Who or what decides what is... what are the regularities of something? Well, presumably a complex adaptive system, or as John Holland would call it, a... an adaptive agent. And that's something, some system that takes in a stream of data about itself and the rest of the world, compresses the observed regularities of those data into a... a compact, simple message... a compact message I should say, not necessarily so simple. A compact message, and then, usually in conjunction with further data from the data stream, makes out of that compact message a description or prediction of what happens in the world or a prescription for behavior of the system in the world. The results of that description, prediction or prescription of behavior in the real world then feed back to exert selection pressures on competition among these possible compressed messages. I call them schemata, John Holland would call them internal models. But whichever way you look at it, the internal model or schema has the chance of mutating or being replaced by another, so there is competition among different schemata. And the selection pressures exerted back by the real world effects on the competition cause the schema to evolve. So in biological evolution the schema would be the genotype, in the... the human scientific enterprise the schema would be a theory, in thought processes the schema would be an idea and so on and so forth. So it's a complex adaptive system really which determines... an observing complex adaptive system that determines what are the regularities and what features are treated as incidental in the description of something. The... the complex adaptive system doesn't have to be living, or even a part of a living thing, nor an aggregation of living things. It could be a computer, it could be a… a complex adaptive system on a computer. For an example, genetic algorithms, or neural nets, would be complex adaptive systems on computers. Living things would be biological evolution itself, organisms, parts of organisms like the immune system or the brain, aggregations of organisms, like a… a market composed of investors and so on and so on.

It occurs to me that as the means of disseminating so-called information have multiplied, through the, especially through the digital revolution, the concern has been mainly with distribution, generation of more bits, distribution of bits, feeling sorry for people that don't get enough bits and so on; rather than concern with quality, and with using so-called information to increase our stock of knowledge and understanding and maybe add a few grains of wisdom. And, I've argued that we need a… a better class of people working as skilled intermediaries to extract knowledge and understanding and maybe a little bit of wisdom from this huge welter of bits that assails us. So many of these… of these bits, so many pieces of information are false or irrelevant or badly organized or otherwise really unsuitable for doing much for us, and the reward system for people who do a really wonderful job of extracting knowledge and understanding or wisdom, the reward system is… is skewed in the wrong way. If left just to the so-called free market, it's mainly skewed toward entertainment or toward something that's narrowly utilitarian for some business firm or set of business firms. But where is the responsibility for actually extracting advances in knowledge and understanding? I think that the reward system needs some other input. Private foundations, for example, could play a big role, in subsidizing quality work of this kind, because we see that a lot of journalistic work, a lot of editorial work, a lot of anthologies and reviews and so on are not really very well done, and the rewards for doing them are not particularly great and the… and the rewards for doing them well are usually no better than for doing them badly—maybe even less good. I think that's something that the whole society needs to be aware of and to… and to work on. What kind of concerns are… are met in this sort of… in the work of such intermediaries? We can't have the sizeable rewards restricted just to entertainment value or to something that a particular person or firm is willing to pay for for narrowly utilitarian reasons. And I think that the interdisciplinary work of the Santa Fe Institute is a very good example of something that's badly needed, we're actually helping, I think, with this job, by taking material from many different sciences and synthesizing it into new insights. But in general I don't believe that's being done very well, or that the reward system exists for doing it very well.

It's not just a matter of interdisciplinary work; it's a matter of subject matter as well. In the policy arena, for example, we have military and diplomatic and political considerations such as are discussed in the journal Foreign Affairs, or discussed by the Council on Foreign Relations; there are also economic matters and social matters which are sometimes discussed in those circles, but less; and then there are environmental, demographic, ideological, informational, institutional issues, and all of these are in strong interaction with one another. And the trouble is they're mostly treated separately. A leader, a CEO or a Prime Minister or a Queen has to integrate these things, perhaps, but it's difficult for a leader…  single leader to do all these things in his or her head when most of the other people are specialists in some realm or other. I think we need to cultivate the habit of synthesizing, of working not only across fields but across different sorts of subject matter, to take a crude look at the whole, and I've tried to encourage that in many different places, including the Santa Fe Institute. But the Santa Fe Institute doesn't do that much work on real situations with lots of historical… historically specific data and so on, but there are other places that do.
Scenario writing is one mode of operation that may be helpful, and if scenario writing identifies tubes of future histories with various different circumstances aligned in one way in one tube and a different way in another tube and so on, there's still the question of the branching of those tubes and how to estimate the probabilities at the… at each nexus where the… where the tubes branch, and for that one could use, perhaps some day, computer modeling and things of that kind. But it's all very, very complex and difficult to… to do. Nevertheless I think we should make a start on it. I helped to inspire Project 2050, which was a collaborative effort among the World Resources Institute, the foreign policy part of Brookings, the Brookings Institution, and to some extent the Santa Fe Institute. But it was very badly under-funded and didn't really go to completion, but a number of worthwhile things were done about trying to understand in a… an integrated holistic way, what might, what the human race might do to achieve greater sustainability in the course of the twenty-first century, which is when it really has to happen because now is the time when we've reached the inflexion point in total human population and the rate of increase is beginning to decrease. It's the time when we've reached the stage where human beings can make changes of order one in the whole globe, whether through unwise economic activity or through destructive war; and this is clearly the time when if a set of transitions to a more sustainable world is to occur, they must occur. So Project 2050 was supposed to think in a way that would integrate across all these different kinds of subject matter about sustainability, where sustainability is defined not just in environmental, demographic and economic terms, but also in political, social, diplomatic, military, ideological, informational, institutional terms. Transitions would have to occur in all these domains and they're all closely linked, strongly interacting with one another. Well now that the project ran out of money some things are beginning to appear, actually. It's paradoxical. A book called Which World? by Alan Hammond of the World Resources Institute is about to appear and it will summarize some of the conclusions of Project 2050 and try to take a crude look at the whole, but I think we need a great deal more of that, and that's part of this necessary revolution in… in the production of skilled intermediaries to extract knowledge and understanding and a little wisdom from all these so-called data, from all this so-called information.

My brother and I were premature conservationists. We were concerned with conservation, with population issues and so on in the 1930s when I was just a little boy and he was nine years older. There were not very many people thinking in those terms back then, but after about 1969 this country began to wake up to environmental, demographic concerns much more than before, and from a tiny band of people with not much influence, the people concerned with these issues became a major force in politics and society and that's, I think, very good. But one needs wise environmentalism; one needs environmentalist… environmental enthusiasm coupled with some policy studies to see what it is that one can really do and what the effects of things really are, because unforeseen side effects are such a major feature of policy in this and other domains. When I first became a director of the MacArthur Foundation just after it was started, a few months after it was started, I became a director in the spring of 1979; just... just 19 years ago, I came with certain ideas of what the foundation might do. We were not restricted in any way by the will of the... of John MacArthur who had created the foundation. He said in effect, 'I made all this money: you guys figure out how to spend it'. So, I thought of research in scientific fields relevant to mental health, and so did many of the other directors, and we set up such a program, which has been, I think, quite successful, although now it's being scaled back unfortunately. I also argued for policy studies, in particular policy studies that might be connected with the possible approach to sustainability, and we did some things along that line, and began to call together people to give us advice on how we could contribute, and finally we created the World Resources Institute, and that was in great part my work. It’s one of the hardest things I've ever done, was to persuade the other directors to try to refine the plans so they made sense, try to get the right people involved and so on and so forth, and it cost the Foundation in the long run something like 40 million dollars. The other foundations wouldn't help, as usual; we had to do it by ourselves.

The World Resources Institute has been valuable, and especially when it's co-operated with other organizations. Because policy studies are essential in this area: if you push in one place you're likely to have effects in some very distant place, and you can't do just one thing, as somebody said, so it's essential to have rather careful, well-designed policy studies covering many different fields, many different areas of… many different kinds of subject matter all interlocking, all interacting to try to see what the effects of actions are likely to be, and even then it's only probabilistic, but it's extremely important, before taking action. Of course one shouldn't be paralyzed and trapped into inaction by the fact that there is uncertainty; one must act in the face of some degree of uncertainty. The arguments about doing something about global climate change, for instance, are many of them very silly. Some people want to wait until there is unmistakable scientific evidence of a particular kind of climate change, like global warming, but that's absurd: by that time it's absolutely certain that this will be happening it'll be too late to do anything about it. It's important to take out insurance. We took out trillions and trillions of dollars of insurance against the unlikely but undesirable event that a… a Soviet invasion of Western Europe would have been. In the same way, if we're monkeying with the fundamental parameters of the atmosphere of the only planet we have to live on, we should be rather conservative, and why someone who calls himself or herself a conservative would be against taking out a lot of insurance in this domain, I can't possibly understand. The conservative… the conservative way to do things is to… is to make a considerable effort to reduce greenhouse gases, and reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases and so on.

The World Environment and Resources program—and I was the chairman of the relevant committee at the MacArthur Foundation, which lasted until 1996 when all such committees were abolished—the World Environment and Resources Committee went on to formulate a program of conservation action, conservation research and sustainable development. We work mainly in tropical countries where there are, at least on land, the greatest diversity of… where there is on… at least on land, the greatest diversity of organisms and where there are also lots and lots or poor people, rapidly growing populations: big threats, in other words. And this mix of help to local conservation organizations, help to people trying to do scientific work on analyzing conservation situations, and help to people trying to start modest-scale sustainable projects that would give economic assistance and especially work to local populations in the areas of where the conservation activities  would take place; all of these have done extremely well, and we've operated in a great many different tropical countries, and with considerable success. Nowadays, big organizations, like the World Bank, are trying to infuse money into this kind of activity, but it's up to us and especially the local conservation organizations that we support to try to direct the activities of these giants, which otherwise might not be positive in… in their effect. I liken it to Mohammed driving an elephant using a hook through its ear: we have to subsidize the… the people who will put a hook through the ear of the World Bank, and that sort of thing. And we're doing that now, so I think that's been, it’s… I'm… I’m very proud of that activity; I think it's been immensely successful.
[Q] Is it still..?
But whether in the long run we will succeed, of course, in protecting a major fraction of the world's biological diversity, that's… that’s another story. But I don't believe in checking every little while to see whether it's likely that ultimate success will be achieved. It's like gardening by pulling up the plants to see how they're growing. I don't think one should do that.

I'm still interested in preserving some of the research relevant… the creation of research networks doing scientific research on topics relevant to mental health. I still think that's important and we should do it. I'm trying to revive some of it. I've been involved very much with the peace and international co-operation program. And now, somewhat in the spirit of the kind of integration that I've been discussing, the Foundation has put together these programs so that the population program in developing countries, the conservation and sustainable development program in tropical countries, and the world peace and international co-operation program have all been merged together in a program called Global… Global something or other and Sustainability… let me see what it's called... Global Security! Global Security and Sustainability. It was a fight for a while to preserve the individual programs within the integrated one, because I didn't think that, several of us didn't think that just a… a fully integrated mass would be the… the best way to do things, but now I think it's structured pretty well. There are the three individual programs and then a lot of cross-cutting initiatives as well, and I think that's pretty good.

It was at the time of the Nixon administration, although at that time the committee was more or less self-perpetuating with the permission of the political authorities. So it didn't imply... my membership didn't imply that I was a Nixon supporter. No, I understand, I understand... No, but I thought that was an interesting point to make because now in the last... in the last couple of administrations... last... yeah, in the last couple of administrations... Clinton and Bush, service on an analogous body has really been for people who more or less supported the administration.
[Q] Ah, I see, Yes. And… and this is PCAST is now what you're serving on?
The present one is called PCAST: the President's Council of Advisers on Science and Technology, and I'm the only human link between it and the old PSAC, the only person who's served on both.
[Q] So maybe, I think it would be very interesting to hear your views on that, having served on both: different eras, different conditions under which you've served. You have some thoughts on that?
Well I don't…
[Q]And in particular scientific involvement with politics?
Yes. I don't think there's anything wrong with the change. I don't think… I think that pretending that such a committee can be really independent is not that worthwhile. I think that one probably does better having a committee that is frankly in some degree of sympathy with the administration, and can therefore help the administration in what it needs. It needs advice on, from scientific and technical people, on what sorts of things to do. So, I'm not upset at all about that change. And it has not been of a… of a nasty kind, that is, there is no… it… it's not a situation where political imperatives caused the scientists to betray their scientific consciences and say things they don't mean.
[Q] It's not… it’s not partisan in any way, in other words? 
It's somewhat partisan, but not in a bad way. I don't see anything particularly wrong with it.

The old PSAC did some very long, thorough investigations. It had lots more money, lots more money for travel, it met much more frequently. If I had been told then that I would be on a similar committee 25 years later and that it wouldn't be able to meet very often because the President didn't have any money for it, I… I would have been quite surprised! That is the situation today, strangely enough. However, again that actually isn't turning out to be so bad, because a… a somewhat less frenetic pace of activity can nevertheless produce material that's quite useful to the President and Vice President. One can study thoroughly the aspects of a problem that are really relevant and not have quite such a... nevertheless, not have quite such a sustained and expensive effort as one would have had in the old committee, and be very useful to the President. What the President and the Vice President need mostly is well-informed, technically-based advice on things that they can actually do, orders that they can actually give to the government. John Holdren has headed a... headed a panel on co-operating with countries of the former Soviet Union, especially Russia, on control of nuclear materials associated with nuclear weapons, or formerly associated with nuclear weapons, and I... that panel did a beautiful job. Many officials in the government, such as the former Secretary of Defense, Bill Perry, had been really excited about that issue before they got into government. Once they got into government they still had a sort of sympathy for it but they were too busy to do anything about it. When the panel talked with the President and the President decided to follow the advice of the panel he simply told his government people to get busy, and I think a number of useful things resulted, even though the problem isn't completely solved, but useful measures of co-operation resulted and I think it's very good. There's been a wonderful panel report on education, on the use of technology–computer technology especially–in education, which duly emphasized the essential features of the educational system, saying that the technology was not the main point. Technology is very important, very desirable, but only if it's embedded in a system that for teaching it makes some sense and especially, the panel recommended, that there be a higher proportion of spending on research, real research. Compare the rate of expenditure on educational research divided by the amount of money per year spent on education; compare that ratio with the corresponding ratio of the drug industry, for example, the pharmaceutical industry: it's… it’s absurd, it's ludicrously low. We don't really know what works in education, in general, with or without computer equipment. So the computers can be immensely useful, but the really important thing is to have a system that is... that functions and to have research on what... what succeeds and to combine the installation of equipment with... with the reform of the system. Of course it's very difficult to do. The MacArthur Foundation is trying to tinker with the Chicago schools. It's very expensive. I'm not sure it's the best use of our resources but it will be interesting to see what the results are like. But I haven't found that our Foundation devotes enough attention to the technical side, I think. If one is trying to reform a school system, making clever use of modern equipment, this is very important.

There are so many scientists whose voices form a kind of cacophony and I think the whole thing is rather... the whole situation of communication with the public is rather sad. I think it's very important to form a politically potent organization. It could be based on the American Association for the Advancement of Science if it took in a lot more members or if it took in associate members, or something, so as to form a bigger group that would include science teachers, people employed in science-based and technically-based industries, and so on and so on. It could be a huge lobby for adequate treatment of science and technology in the country. I think that could be very useful. It would be nice if science and technology were a potent political force, but getting the relevant people to agree on things, of course, would not be very easy, but there might be some issues on which they would agree.

In the old days individual scientists, many of them, presented their work to the public, to the interested lay public themselves. That became much less frequently the case during several decades and the job was left to science reporters and popularizers, some of whom are very clever and very good, but most of the work I think was not very good. And now, fortunately, it's becoming popular for scientists to do their own popularizing. Again, I think that's very good and I've tried to do it a little bit in my book…
[Q] Yes, well then what I'd like to talk about now a little bit is your book. You spent some years recently writing a book...
…and I think we can play something of a role in… as intermediaries in trying to extract some knowledge, understanding, wisdom, or at least to present some for the public… for the interested lay public.

I mention in the first few pages of the book, The Quark and the Jaguar, how on a... a trip to Central America to look at birds and mammals, I had a… I was... I had been looking for birds and trying to record them in an area of Belize full of unexcavated Maya ruins and thick forest and lots of birds and mammals, and it was the middle of the day and I hadn't encountered any new birds for a while and I was in sort of a... I was not paying too much attention to my surroundings, in... kind of a half-trance state as I walked through the forest, when suddenly I notice a jaguarundi standing crosswise across the trail not very far ahead. I was delighted to see this beautiful animal so close. I had seen jaguarundis before, but never had I had an encounter like this–a close encounter like this–all by myself as a lone person with a lone jaguarundi in the middle of a forest. With a jaguar it would have been even more exciting of course, but the jaguarundi is a splendid creature. Anyway, at that moment it suddenly occurred to me that my interest in diversity and evolution and individuality and so on and so on, and my other interest in elementary particles and the fundamental laws of the universe, that these did have a relationship to each other which I had begun dimly to understand, and I would like to discuss it with the public. And I decided right then I would write a book and Marcia, my wife, who's a poet, pointed out a… a verse by our friend Arthur Sze who is a local poet here, Chinese American poet, that included the line: 'The world of the quark has everything to do with a jaguar circling in the night'. That immediately gave me the title for the book, The Quark and the Jaguar, the quark symbolizing the simple laws, underlying laws of nature with identical particles and so on, and the jaguar representing complexity, diversity, evolution and so on. And Arthur perceived that these have everything to do with each other, so the book is about the relation between them: how complexity arises from simple laws, a simple initial condition, and the operation, the relentless operation over and over again of chance.

I found a… a very effective agent, John Brockman, who got me some wonderful contracts, very lucrative contracts all over the world, and… but I didn't make much progress in the actual writing. I wrote a number of essays but stringing together essays on different subjects doesn't make the kind of book that the publishers want for this purpose. They want something that's more integrated, that has a message and so on and I was very slow about producing, and in fact I hadn't done much when the deadline arrived for the American publisher, and the American publisher was looking for an excuse to cancel the contract, and did so… Since it was so lucrative… which created some serious problems. Well, the whole project ended up being very lucrative anyway. For some reason the press has stated the opposite, but it's not true. I did very well out of the book, not quite as well as if I'd finished it on time, but it… it worked out very well. But then, in great part through Marcia's efforts, I began to work on it and to be efficient about actually accomplishing things. She helped me to write properly in a decent, reasonable style. I mean I… I know how to construct sentences and all that, but there's more to it than that; and she helped me with my style; she advised me to use a computer, which was excellent advice; and she went over large parts of the manuscript and helped me a lot with individual bits. The writer… the novelist Cormac McCarthy helped me also, he copy-read the whole thing and made some wonderful suggestions. Unfortunately, in both cases, I didn't have enough time to take many of Marcia's excellent suggestions, although I did take a lot of them, and the same with Cormac, because the publisher… American publisher supplied me with a very unfortunate copy-editor, and somehow they arranged it so I had to deal with her modifications of the book, rather than for her to suggest modifications. I had somehow to work with her modified manuscript and it was a disaster, it was a terrible struggle, very time-consuming, very frustrating, and meant that in many cases I didn't have a chance to use some of the excellent suggestions of Marcia and of Cormac McCarthy, but I did use a good many of them and I really learned to write moderately well. I'm fairly proud of the book actually. Some people have trouble with it because it has middle chapters that are on physics, on quantum… elementary particles and on quantum mechanics. They're not written in mathematical jargon but for people who are unfamiliar with physics sometimes it's difficult. In the preface I ask people if they do have such a trouble… difficulty, to skim chapters eleven through thirteen because the rest of the book is very easy for anybody to read, and so is the first part. But many people don't do that and they get put off and discouraged by the middle chapters. It's too bad, really. But it sold quite well in this country and elsewhere, not as much as I'd hoped. I don't think my second publisher, the one I got after the first one cancelled really understands how to sell a trade book, and I think they could have done much, much better in this country if they'd been more skilled at… at selling.

In the book I take up many of the themes that we've discussed here, but I don't try to present a summary of my work in elementary particle physics. I do try to present a… a summary of the situation in elementary particle physics, as a very small part of the book and also our views on the modern interpretation of quantum mechanics, but that's part of a long argument that starts with what simplicity and complexity mean; what a complex adaptive system is like, examples of complex adaptive systems; theory, the role of theory, the role of different levels of theory in science from the most fundamental all the way up to very phenomenological; the fact that one needs to approach problems both from the bottom up, from the top down and build staircases from the bottom up and the top down, but also study each subject at its own level; the difference between fundamental mechanism and semi-empirical rules like scaling rules, for example, which I mention. And then I go on to the fundamental description, talking about elementary particles; about the hope for unification, for example, with superstring theory; talking about the interpretation of quantum mechanics and the probabilistic character of theory and how that's exacerbated by not knowing a lot of the accidents that have already occurred because they occurred in places where no observer could know about them and exacerbated by the phenomenon of chaos, which even in the classical limit produces an extraordinary sensitivity of the outcome to the input so that even the slightest coarse-graining in the input leads to a coarse-grained future that's only probabilistically determined by the coarse-grained past. And then I go into discussion of various complex adaptive systems: learning and thinking, creative thinking in human beings, biological evolution, and finally ending up with material on the preservation of biological diversity and of human cultural diversity, and some of the paradoxes associated with the… with the preservation of human cultural diversity, because in many cases the cultures that you may be trying to preserve are hostile to biological… the preservation of biological diversity, hostile to the modern, secular, universalizing, scientific culture that is most concerned about the preservation of cultures, but may be terribly despised by the representatives of a particular culture that one is trying to preserve. All of these paradoxes I mention, and then I discuss the idea behind Project 2050, trying to think about measures that the human race might take to approach closer to sustainability in all these different domains in the course of the coming century, how one might study such things. So it's a… an argument that runs through most of the interests that I have had in my life, and through most of the subjects we've discussed.

I very much want to write a follow-up that would go into less detail on elementary particle physics and quantum mechanics, and would discuss much more issues of emergence, issues of evolution, cultural evolution as well as biological, but primarily would go into regularity versus randomness, and complex adaptive systems and the… the identification by complex adaptive systems of what to them is regularity and what is randomness. Because it does depend on what complex adaptive system is observing the entity under consideration, what is regularity and what is randomness. I like to use the example of neckties; of course we don't wear them here, but four-in-hand neckties. A necktie may have a very simple pattern, just a few stripeswhich are very easily… with the regularities of that necktie very easy to describe; or you may have a very complex necktie, such as the ones that were fashionable a few years ago where it would take a very long time to describe the regularities in the pattern. But how do you know we're concerned with a pattern? How… why is the pattern where the regularities reside? I mean we would say that the soup stains don't matter, it's just the pattern. The little irregularities in the weave don't matter, it's just the pattern. But if you're a dry cleaner, it's only the stains that matter, are they soup stains, ink stains, blood stains, and so on; dry cleaners are notoriously insensitive to the pattern, they care only about the stains. So it depends on the complex adaptive system that's observing, what is treated as irregularity and what is treated as randomness and so on. I think that's a very deep set of issues and I'd love to write about them, but getting the leisure to do so is not so easy.

I probably am not very good at making predictions about such things, but I'm sure that in, at the… at least the early decades of the coming century, these problems of simplicity and complexity will be very important. Molecular biologists have found this very simple genetic code, the theory that they've had to use they could generate themselves. They've pretty much looked down on theory as a separate activity, but now when one comes to questions of the stretches of DNA that are not so far interpreted and don't seem to code for proteins, when one comes especially to ideas about genes turning one another on and off in a regulatory network, I think everyone will have to admit that theory is quite important and we can see this in so many other domains, in so many different subjects and in topics that transcend a subject, that transcend fields, interdisciplinary topics, that the interaction between simplicity and complexity is really important, requires a lot of deep theoretical work, along with computer modeling and simulation, and of course experiment and observation. But I think these subjects are going to be very important. At the same time, fundamental physics I think will be important for quite a while. We're making huge strides right now in cosmology and in M theory and if the large hadron collider is built at CERN there will be high energy experiments that will be very exciting and may very well verify some of the ideas of supersymmetry, superstrings, M-theory. I think it's going to be a very exciting time. I just hope I live to see some of it.

Physicists are remarkably flexible, actually, as people. Physicists end up doing all kinds of things. People trained in physics show up in remarkable places. For example W Edwards Deming was trained as a physicist, he had a PhD in physics from Yale; then he became a New Deal statistician; then he was sent over to Japan at the end of the war to try to help rebuild Japanese industry, and he made all these wonderful suggestions about how to do that, he's a saint in Japan; and finally by the time he was 90 or so, he even acquired a reputation in his own country. He died at the age of 93 or something like that–just before my book came out. Remark… all sorts of people started as physicists, now whether the departments make these adjustments, the same adjustments as their members, that's another story, but some of them do, I think. I think physics departments have been rather generous about spawning other subjects within their bosoms. Bragg at Cambridge pretty much destroyed the old tradition of fundamental physics, but he built up solid-state physics and he built up radio astronomy and molecular biology, giving them an initial home in the physics lab, in the Cavendish. I think that was quite remarkable, even though I deplored what he did with elementary particle physics, I think he's greatly to be admired for hosting radio astronomy and molecular biology. So I think it's not improbable at all, various departments will… will adapt. But as to predicting the general course of science, I don't think… I don’t think I'd be very good at doing that.

[Q] What do you see as the major issues, major problems that we are facing now and in the near future?
You mean in fundamental physics?
[Q] In... in… let's talk about fundamental physics we've talked about—but in science in general. I mean can one see… you've talked about simplicity, complexity, but are there specific problems?
Oh, there are many, many other things. Many of them concerned with building these bridges, bridge between neurobiology and psychology is very important. People have got some conjectures now about the binding problem, because human beings and other organisms see different facets of reality… perceive different facets of reality with different parts of the brain and yet they build up this notion of an object, even though there's a… a whole mechanism for appreciating color, another mechanism for appreciating motion, another mechanism for appreciating shape, and so on, still they… all these things are bound together to make the impression of an object, and they have some ideas now on how that might be done through common rhythm. I don't know if those ideas will turn out to be right, but they're an example of a very interesting problem, certainly. Well there are many such examples in many different fields, these problems of building these staircases.

I've known a number of prominent, physicists especially, quite well.
[Q] But who have you been most impressed with?
Enrico Fermi, Robert Oppenheimer, Szilárd... Leó, Wolfgang Pauli, and I knew Niels Bohr slightly and I knew Heisenberg.  I didn't think much of Heisenberg as a researcher after the war although I understand he was a really great researcher and great person before the war. I don't know, many of these people I knew, and a certain number of stories about them, but...
[Q] I was trying to elicit...
... I don't think, I… I don’t think I can give a very good appreciation of their roles. I just gave the Oppenheimer Lecture, the first one, at Berkeley, a couple of days ago, and there I gave some impressions of Robert, whom I liked very much despite the fact that he could occasionally be difficult. And I was so sad that he was a victim of such injustice as a result of adopting the army position on nuclear weapons instead of the air force position on nuclear weapons, even though the air force position wasn't that bad, I didn't think that people should be persecuted for taking a different position. Enrico was extremely funny, and...  We had a great time at Chicago, I must say. There was quite a lunch table we had almost every day with Fermi, Yuri, and other people who were quite good like Mullican, and sometimes Szilárd. The conversation wasn't quite as fascinating as one would expect from listing these people, but it was sometimes quite amusing. Enrico was much taken with the funny papers, especially Li'l Abner. He spent a lot of time quoting Li'l Abner, of which he was inordinately fond. His friend, Gian Carlo Wick, whose mother was a novelist and who was very literary in his tastes, I think got him a subscription once to something like the Virginia Quarterly [sic] or the Sewanee Review, but Enrico much preferred L'il Abner.
[Q] How about people in more recent times?
Well Dick Feynman and I, of course, had offices just about next door to each other for 33 years, so I knew him pretty well. A great clown who was also a good scientist, although not quite the giant that some people make out, he was a very good scientist, and… and we had a lot of fun together, at least in the early years.

I've had some very successful students. Jim Hartle is my student, Sid Coleman was my student, Ken Wilson was my student—he certainly did pretty well. He didn't learn a great deal from me, but a very smart fellow. Don Dubois at Los Alamos was a very good student who had an excellent career. Oh, there've been quite a number. I don't think they mostly owed a tremendous amount to me. I was not, I think, a great, effective teacher, say like Robert, Robert Oppenheimer who brought quantum mechanics to this… one of the few people who brought quantum mechanics to this country, who taught it, who… so that the next generation of theorists were basically all his students, that sort of thing. I… I didn't have that kind of role, but… but I certainly had some wonderful people as students.

I'm so happy to be here in New Mexico, I love it here and I love the Santa Fe Institute, it's a wonderful institution and I'm so terribly proud to be associated with it and to have helped start it, and I enjoy being a consultant at Los Alamos and I enjoy teaching part time at the University of New Mexico, and Marcia teaches there too and we go down Tuesdays and Thursdays in the fall. We drive down together, we separate and teach in separate buildings and then we drive back together and it's a lot of fun. I've really never enjoyed teaching so much. Some day we're going to exchange classes and see if anybody notices. I'll teach a class on how to write poetry and she'll teach one on simplicity and complexity and we'll see if anybody notices the difference.

I'm interested in so many other things. I haven't spoken much about birds; we haven't spoken about coins; we haven't spoken about pots; we haven't spoken about so many things that I'm interested in. But I'm very spread very thin, I'm spread in a mono-molecular layer, and probably I ought to do something about it before it's too late and concentrate a little bit. I feel 29, but I'm probably actually older than that! I should… I should actually concentrate more on a few things and get them done.
