norman.greenwood

Norman Greenwood (1925-2012) was born in Australia and graduated from Melbourne University before going to Cambridge.  His wide-ranging research in inorganic and structural chemistry made major advances in the chemistry of boron hydrides and other main-group element compounds. He also pioneered the application of Mössbauer spectroscopy to problems in chemistry.  He was a prolific writer and inspirational lecturer on chemical and educational themes, and held numerous visiting professorships throughout the world.

[Q] Well, Norman, it's a pleasure to be with you today and I'm looking forward to hearing the story of your life.
That's a long story, Brian, but maybe I'll start by explaining that I was born in Australia and, interestingly, I'm the only Australian member of our family. The reason I was born in Australia was that my mother and father had met as undergraduate students at Manchester and... they had subsequently married after the war – this was before the First World War – and after the war they got married and at a young age, I think of about 29, he was appointed as the first Professor of Metallurgy in Australia. So they went out with my elder sister, who was by then born, and in Melbourne, where they had the chair, was where I was born. So that's how I came to be born in Australia, and I grew up and spent all my early life there. Unfortunately, the marriage of my parents broke up pretty soon afterwards. My brother was born 15 months after me, Eric, and then after that the marriage crumbled, which we obviously needn't go into, but it meant that I was brought up by my mother and her sister who'd come out from England to help her.

So, I then went to school, first at Mont Albert, but after the divorce we had to move to a neighbouring suburb, both in the east of Melbourne, about seven miles to the east of Melbourne, and I went to Canterbury School which had its centenary not so long ago. After that, I went to Auburn Central High where after a bit of hard work I became "Dux", that was my first big prize I suppose, and then went on to University High School. At that stage it was interesting in Melbourne that there were virtually no secondary schools run by the state. All of the secondary schools in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne were, I think it's fair to say, religious foundations, Church of England, Methodist, Presbyterian, both for boys and girls but of course we couldn't afford the fees for that so I went to the nearest state school, which was in central Melbourne, and it was called University High School.
But this was a stroke of good luck because it was a superb school, still is, in fact today I got an email with their latest report – they had a centenary last year – but they're doing extraordinarily well both in the academic subjects, but also I would say in music and in sport. They had this wonderful ability to bring out the best, if I could put it that way, in the students. But, perhaps you'd like me to say a little bit about...?
[Q] Didn't you revisit the school quite recently, Norman?
Yes, I did. Kirsten and I went out last October for their centenary and I was absolutely astonished at the change. Of course, you have to remember that I went to University High School from 1939 to 1942, so it's the first years of the war, that's a long time ago now and clearly there have been many changes but I think probably all for the better, and they still have this... great love of music. I was in the school orchestra whilst I was there, I played second flute – I wasn't much good I have to say but I did enjoy it!
[Q] Better than second fiddle, Norman.
Better than... Absolutely right! But we played, I mean, we were good enough to play on the radio, for example, the Australian State Radio, and to give concerts twice a year and so forth at which parents came and were very proud of their youngsters. But, no, it was a good time at the University [High School].

I should say one other thing because this is... very unusual in schools. University High School was started in 2000... sorry, 1910, so 101 years ago now, and it was to be a practice school for teachers. So many of our teachers were aspiring teachers, they were taught the method of teaching and we were unique at that stage, I think, perhaps in Australia, in not having to sit external exams because the people who were setting the exams were the people that were teaching us and teaching the teachers. So it was... it seems incestuous, but it seemed to work, they kept a very high standard, but we had tests, what you would call, I suppose, continuous assessment these days, but you did have the option. If you felt, 'Well I messed about last term, I'd like to take the state exam we could sit the exam', but by and large people were satisfied with the grades they got.

Now, at that time in Melbourne there was a sixth form which was the top two years, it was called Pass Sixth and then Honours Sixth. And because of our financial situation I had to leave at the end of Pass Sixth, whereas those students who were thinking of going to university normally went on to do Honours Sixth, and I got a cadetship, as it was called, in the University of Melbourne. Now, that was a real stroke of luck, it meant that I could go to the university, attend the chemistry classes as what they call day release, but I was a technician in the Chemistry Department so I didn't have to walk far, and then in the evening I would study the other subjects one by one, in the evening. It was a long day.
[Q] Sounds it, Norman, I have to say.
I have to say because it was by now in the war and as part of the war effort the university donated some of its technicians to CSIR [The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research], the Government research organisation, now called CSIRO [The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation], and... I was one of the youngsters who was transferred into this. So I joined a group which was studying the shock initiation of nitroglycerine. Nitroglycerine, as you well know, is a very temperamental liquid explosive, the slightest tap will set it off.

I want to emphasise perhaps a little bit about the degree structure at Melbourne University because it's quite different from what it now is and what is, I think... Well, it's a little bit like the Scotch system, but not like the one in England. The system was that you took four subjects in the first year, three subjects in the second year and two subjects in final year, but the two subjects could be A and B parts of the same subject. So you could do double chemistry or chemistry and metallurgy, chemistry and geology, and so forth. That was the technical part, but also in Melbourne in those days you had to do two years of French and two years of German. These were translation exercises; if you'd done Pass Sixth, as I had in French, you were excused the first year. If you'd done Honours Sixth, which I hadn't done, you had to do the second year of French, and in German... I had no German – I'd done Latin at school as a second foreign language – then you had to do that from scratch. So that was added on to the course.

Well, let me get back now to CSIR. Shall I spend just a little bit of time saying about what they were doing? There were several groups. It was a laboratory which was set up by Philip Bowden, whom I think you will know from Cambridge?
[Q] Yes, of course, yes.
He had come over to England on an 1851 Scholarship, which I'll mention again later, but he had stayed in Cambridge and was making a name for himself in friction and in electrochemistry. But when the... just before the war started, when things were looking a bit dodgy in Europe, he came back home with his then young family and his wife to Hobart in Tasmania, where he came from, and whilst he was there war was declared and, as you'll know, Australia declared war at the same time, and so he was there. He was what I would call an entrepreneur: a charming man, hardworking, but he got what he wanted and he certainly knew what he wanted, which was to help the war effort by setting up a laboratory. He worked tirelessly on the professors at Melbourne: my father who was Professor of Metallurgy, Hartung who was Professor of Physics [sic- should be Chemistry], the Professor of Physics, Laby. He then went up to Canberra, sweet-talked the people up there, finally got this laboratory founded, which was Laboratory of Lubricants and Bearings, which, purposely was a pretty gruff and rough sounding thing, 'lubricants and bearings', because he wanted to be taken seriously and he wanted the help of Australian industry.
Now, there were very... several groups. One was the rubbing of surfaces, what is friction, how do you measure friction, how do you reduce friction? This was obviously related to bearings in aero engines, for example. And he brought out someone, whom again you'll know, David Tabor from Cambridge, he set up that part of it. Another part, which was the one that I was on, was on explosive sensitivity of nitroglycerine. That was set up by Abe Yoffe, whom you will know, a lot of them came to Cambridge again after the war, Maurice Mulcahy, and I was their personal research assistant.

I had an enormous advantage because although I'd missed the final year of school, I was already doing research, and I couldn't have been more fortunate in my, well... they weren't supervisors, I was a technician just out of school. But Abe and Maurice treated me as one of their group. If I had a suggestion to make it wasn't laughed at, it was either mildly said, 'Yes, we'll think about it' or, 'That might be a good idea let's try it'. So I was a junior research assistant essentially, though I hadn't really begun even to study at the university. The other thing, and I want to put this in because if there's one thing that comes out of these memories that we're talking about Brian, it's this; that I would not be where I am today if it had not been for Abe Yoffe. Let me tell you the story.

So, Abe Yoffe. It so happened in the practical classes that Abe Yoffe was the member of staff who was supervising the lab class that I took. And at the end of the year each student had to fill in a form for the exams that he was going to enter. I was filling out a form, a pink form as I recall, and Abe came up in the lab and said, 'You're filling out the wrong form, Norm'. So I said, 'No, this was the Pass form'. He said, 'No, you should be filling out a blue form for Honours'. I said, 'You're having me on, Abe, I am nowhere near Honours standard, I've missed my last year of school, I'm working full-time, I'm only doing this course as a part-time student'. And he just looked at me and he said, 'Norm, I demonstrate in this class, I know all the students, let me tell you you're one of the best. Don't be a bloody fool, put in for Honours'. So I did, with some trepidation, but out of a class of 200 – because a first year chemistry class was big – out of a class of 200 I came second. So I thought right, if I work hard I might do better. So that, I think, was an enormous advantage.

You might be amused at a little anecdote that came to mind talking of Abe, and nitroglycerine. My job was to prepare the bullets, the things that we'd bang together, and then we would fit these into drop hammers and they would drop down and you'd get an explosion. And the device, a very smart idea for following the explosion, which I needn't go into now, but my job was to electroplate the brass bullets with lead so that you get a soft surface, and then to clear it off afterwards, decontaminate them by degreasing them and prepare for the next experiment. So I became, actually, an expert in photography because I had to photograph the results of the explosions and the blast patterns with side lighting and things like that. So another part of my job was, when we ran out of nitroglycerine, to go to the Munitions SupplyLlaboratory at Maribyrnong, which I suppose was about three miles away, and the way we transported... Do you know what gutta-percha is?
[Q] Yes, I do.
It's a sort of hardened rubber, before plastics came in. This had the advantage... nitroglycerine, as I said, is very explosive. If you have it in a glass or a metal bottle and you turn it it'll explode, but with gutta-percha it was soft enough not to explode. So my instruction was take this 200ml flask, go to Maribrynong, get it filled up with nitroglycerine and you sit in the back of the car cradling it in your lap. Now I don't have to tell you, if there'd been a traffic accident or if they'd stopped and I'd dropped it, quite a hole in the North Melbourne would have been formed, but that was safety during the war I suppose. But, fortunately, nothing like that ever happened.
[Q] You're a lucky man Norman because, you know...
Science wouldn't have been the same.

I think another interesting thing about the coursework was the people that were teaching me. I've, of course, singled out Abe Yoffe because I was doing research with him, but I think it would be fair to say that in Melbourne, although it was a smallish department, it had an extremely high standard and was a world class chemistry department.
One of the first main Professors of Chemistry was Sir David Orme Masson who in fact started chemistry, virtually, in Australia and in physics there was Sir Thomas Laby, both of whom became Fellows of the Royal Society. But in my day there was, in charge of chemistry, Ernst Johannes Hartung who, despite his name, was born in Melbourne and was a strict disciplinarian, but he was renowned for the elegance and the beauty of his experimentation. He had devised – before, of course, television and videos and so forth – he had devised a series of miniature experiments which he could do on a lantern slide projector and project the results of this to the class on a screen. And the experiments that he did were colourful, visually beautiful and sometimes, of course, quite explosive, making colours, making bangs in big tubes, you know, the classical explosions of gasses and so forth. He had us enthralled, and he was a showman and a past master at this.
I can recall one incident when we had, in the Masson Lecture Theatre – it was a raked lecture theatre that held about 250 students – and it was packed for first year lectures. On one occasion, when Hartung turned to write something on the board, some wag in the back, or near the back, took a marble out of his pocket and rolled it down the steps, pop, pop, pop, pop, and Hartung kept on writing on the board as though nothing was happening and then, when it got to the bottom, he turned around and said, ‘Leave the lecture theatre now'. And the lad who'd done it was so stunned that he got up and sheepishly walked out. And, of course, what Hartung had been doing was counting the steps and just pointed in the general area towards the top and the lad was shamed into leaving.

For physical chemistry we had Erich Heymann. He was from Germany; he was a Jew who had obviously left Germany in the mid-30s, luckily for Melbourne came to us, and from him I learnt thermodynamics and had long discussions with him. I must have been... precocious I suppose might have been the word there, but I got so enthralled that I wrote to quite a few thermodynamic people around the world, well I was only a first year student. And one I remember, I wrote to Brønsted in... who'd been talking about the thermodynamics of electrolyte solutions, and wrote to him and the letter came back undelivered,' in enemy alien territory', because he'd been occupied in Denmark by the Germans. So Heymann taught me thermodynamics, but physical chemistry in general.

For inorganic chemistry we had JS Anderson, who again, you're one of Anderson's... one of Emeléus' successors. Emeléus and Anderson was the big name in inorganic chemistry before the war and during the war, and I was with the Anderson part of it for inorganic chemistry.

For organic chemistry we had Bill Davies, who was an amazing character. He had, coincidentally, been in the same year at Manchester University as my mother and father, reading chemistry so they knew him of course. He'd then gone to Oxford, blown off a couple of fingers in an experiment in, I suppose, Robert Robinson's laboratory and he also – because of a childhood ailment – had a limp. So he was a character, but ebullient, talked with a very rough Lancashire accent but was totally encyclopaedic. He never had a note; he came in, he filled the board over and over again, would wipe it off with his hand, imperfectly, write something else over it, do a ring closure reaction without... so it was impossible to take notes from him, but he was inspiring because he was so encyclopaedic in his knowledge and we, I think, enjoyed it very much.

And finally, for analytical chemistry, we had Gussy Ampt, Gustav Adolphus Ampt, who is, I think, generally recognised as the greatest analytical chemist in Australia at the time and was, of course, very important in forensic medicine with doing chemical analyses for police and crime detection. His famous remark, I recall, was, 'Near enough is not good enough'. In those days, number one exercise was to calibrate a box of weights. You actually had to take your box of weights you couldn't assume that it was accurate, you had to calibrate it. You weighed by swings, which was probably, I think before your...
[Q] I was still doing it when I worked with him, Norman, so yes.
Okay, weighing by swings so that each weight took between quarter of an hour and 20 minutes,but you got it to a tenth of a milligram. And then, of course, you had to calibrate your burettes and your pipettes; you mustn't blow down a pipette, you must put your thumb on top and squeeze it, heat it up and that blows the last drip out. You had to measure the temperature of the water, look up tables of density; it took us weeks before we even started chemistry, doing all this wretched calibration. I don't think the students nowadays would tolerate this. They put it on a balance, in fact it's simple, a single-pan balance so it's not a bilanx which is two pan, it's a single pan balance these days, but... then the answer is printed out and if it appears on the printout it must be right, so that's it, that's just a difference.

So, I was very fortunate in my undergraduate classes but, as I said, I had to work hard because it was war, CSIR was working a 50 hour week, I had chemistry during the day but then I had to read physics and mathematics in the evening plus French, so it was a pretty full day. We did physics practical work until, I think, nine o'clock at night, that was another good thing about Melbourne, that you could work as an evening student, and I've always had great admiration for people that go through the university part-time because that was exactly what I was doing. So, we had long days but we enjoyed it and that was what it was.

You ask if there were anecdotes about university. Well, let's flip from first year. It took me, of course, one year longer than normal because I was taking things part-time, but in final year we had to choose a preferred option. We still had to take all branches of chemistry, but we could concentrate, to some extent, on a particular branch. I chose inorganic, partly because I like making compounds, and partly because JS Anderson, whom I mentioned, was there. But there was one other lecturer who came after my first year, called Norman Lahey he came down from Queensland, an organic chemist who was a breath of fresh air after Bill Davies because he was excellent at giving lectures that you could take notes from. But he was also younger than some of the others, though they were probably only in their mid-30s I suppose, and 40s, but he came across as an approachable bloke. He was called The Doc, and if there was any problem we always asked The Doc.

In final year we had a hockey match, girls against boys. The boys got dressed up as girls, I borrowed my sister’s gym slip, and we had a great time with... the girls thrashed us completely, I have to say.

My main memory of final year, apart from the hard work and the chemistry, was the final Honours practical exam. In those days we had practical examinations which consisted of, in organic chemistry, a preparation which we had to make a derivative of and a spot test, you had to identify a compound.
Well, the preparation went all right. The organic spot tests could be difficult, but fortunately for me, and a stroke of luck, because I was interested in inorganic chemistry, the first thing I did was a flame test. I did a flame test and, as you well know, if barium's in a compound you get a bright green persistent flame. It was barium. So I thought, 'Barium? Organic compound?' There was only one organic compound that I'd heard that had barium: barium hippurate, which is made from horse's urine, as the name suggests, and so I thought, 'Ah, maybe barium hippurate'. And so I did all the tests that would confirm this, got the answer done in half the time and said, 'It's barium hippurate', and Norm said, 'You bugger!' he said, 'we never thought of a flame test'.

But fortunately again for us in the final year, as I told you, you could take two parts, that was the first part of organic. The second part of organic was much bigger and more difficult but fortunately, to use a euphemism, because of the unsettled times, which was dropping a bomb on Hiroshima, the war came to an end. And because the war... well the war hadn’t actually come to an end, it was before the armistice was signed with the Japanese and the war was ended, but the place was in a turmoil. And so the lecturers in chemistry decided that they would not run the practical exam, it was too unsettling for everyone, so they just cancelled it. So as a result of these two bits of luck, and working hard, I was able to come top in the final year, as indeed I had done in second year, so Abe’s prediction was correct, he’d spotted that one well, and I got one or two prizes that were going for the top student at that stage. But it also meant, of course, that of the final graduating class I would have the first choice of Research Supervisor, if he would have me.
So, a couple of the lecturers had, in fact, approached me to ask would I be interested and I said well I hadn’t made up my mind. But then I approached Stuart Anderson, JS as we always called him, and he said yes, he’d take me on. And, as it so happened, Ray Martin, my great friend and later collaborator when we came to Cambridge, and Judge Bevan, who later landed up in Perth and then in Adelaide as Head of Chemistry, they also worked with Stuart Anderson.

Now, Anderson was a world authority in non-stoichiometric compounds. I don't have to tell you, Brian, but perhaps I'll say for some other people that one of the cardinal things about chemistry is that compounds have a defined composition, and the answer is: unless. That rule of Dalton's law of fixed proportions was true for organic compounds, so-called molecular compounds; molecules have their atoms combined in strict, regular proportions and you can work out the composition, and that is what analytical chemistry does, amongst other things.
But, supposing you have a solid... that rule does not hold. Instead of stoichiometric compounds, that's to say compounds with fixed composition, you can have non-stoichiometric compounds. And some of the most important properties of solids stem from their non-stoichiometry. Why are they catalysts? Why are many of them coloured? Not all of them, some are coloured for a particular reason. Why do they conduct electricity? What about a transistor? What about silicon chips? All of these properties depend on non-stoichiometry. That was just beginning to be understood. It was a heresy in most places that chemical compounds could vary in composition, but Anderson was one of the first and certainly one of the most important in trying to put this on a firm basis.
And it is, of course, obvious if you think about it that if a solid is in equilibrium with a gas, one of its components, oxygen for example, and you alter the pressure of oxygen you should, in principle, alter the composition; it should take up or lose some oxygen, perhaps only minutely, but that is the effect which influences the property of the solid. Now, one of the solids which is very non-stoichiometric is copper oxide, in old-fashioned nomenclature cuprous oxide or copper (I) oxide: two atoms of copper, one of oxygen, Cu2O, but the proportion varies. The most common one, I suppose, is magnetite, magnetic oxygen... oxide of iron, which, as its name implies, is magnetic, it's a basis of compasses and so forth. There is no compound FeO, iron oxide, one atom of iron, one of oxygen; that is unstable under all conditions, although the crystal lattice has a sodium chloride-like structure, some of the metal places are vacant, they are vacant and so some of the ferrous iron (II) atoms have to be oxidised to iron (III). So the process of oxidation is altering the amount of oxygen in the lattice and therefore altering the oxidation of iron.
That happens in copper oxide as well, and my job was to study this and to study the composition. It wasn't a new problem, it was one which had been studied, there was a lot of controversy about the properties, but Anderson said, ‘The only thing to do, Norm, is to do it properly', to make the compound under defined conditions, hold it in a controlled atmosphere, alter the composition and follow the electrical conductivity and follow the thermoelectric effect, the thing that makes thermocouples work.
So my first job was to make an apparatus and before that I had to learn glassblowing, so I actually became quite a reasonable glassblower in the end, after a few bad mistakes. But I built a very complicated vacuum line with a large glass tube surrounded by a heating element, which I had to wind non-inductively, and then have leads on to a sample which would be current leads and voltage probes to measure the resistance.
So, that was, in fact, quite an elegant and difficult job to do because first of all I had to make the copper oxide, then had to make joints on to this, then assemble it, be able to heat one end of the rod whilst keeping the other end cold, measure the temperature at both ends, and take all of these electrical leads out through a pinch seal with 10 metal to glass seals on it. Now, that did defeat me, I couldn't do that, but JS Anderson, who is a master glassblower, was able to do it. And he had an interesting technique. He took electric light globes, which already have exactly that seal in it, and he used those, put them together, fused them in and that was the glass seal that I needed. So I measured those things and did a... it took two years, wrote a thesis which was accepted, and I got a good degree on that as well, and as a result of these things I was able to get a scholarship to come to England to study.

Well, I have to say, Brian, it wasn't all hard work. There were long hours, worked Saturday mornings and also Wednesday evenings I had to work and then did my degree course part-time as well, but there was time on Saturday afternoons, and I played quite a bit of tennis in those days. We attended the local Congregational church – I think there's no Congregational churches now, it's fused with the Presbyterians to be the United Reform Church, but certainly in the 30s and 40s there was a Congregational church about a mile away which we went to for Sunday school and then later on I joined the tennis club, actually was Captain for a year just before I came over, and we used to have a good knock about with other teams in the area.

The two other sports that I enjoyed very much were bushwalking, which is perhaps a bit unfamiliar to people in Europe but in Australia you must remember that although Sydney and Melbourne and now some of the other capitals are very large, one, two million people in those days, outside the edge of the city there is bush. And that is marvellous walking country, almost in virgin bush in many cases, many places to see and in winter on eucalyptus skis, which I still have in the garage, we went skiing. Skiing became a very important sport in Australia, in the Australian Alps, after the war and I was amongst the early ones who went up there and did skiing in pretty rough conditions, I have to say, but it was thoroughly enjoyable.

During my Masters degree I did, amongst other things, become a tutor in Trinity College, which was one of the main colleges of Melbourne University. I should perhaps backtrack a little bit by saying that Melbourne University is completely secular. The first thing they used to ask a professor is that you are not in holy orders. You then have to be upstanding because you're influencing young people and there was a complete separation between religion, which was a matter of faith, and the University, which was a matter of scholarship and learning and science and so forth. But the churches, of course, were a little concerned about this and turn by turn, starting with the Anglicans and Trinity College, they set up colleges for out-of-Melbourne students to come, and also some Melbourne students, where they could reside, get extra tuition; they were in the University grounds, on campus.
So, that was again another fortunate happenstance for me because I could take my readings on the apparatus that I'd just been describing, walk across, in fact what I used to do was I used to go to chapel in the morning, at I think it was seven o'clock, then have breakfast, come in take some readings, in the evenings I'd go to Compline at nine o'clock and then come back and take another reading and so to bed.

Now, the other big thing, apart from being very handy for commuting, was that Trinity had squash courts and there I learnt to play squash, again not particularly well, not like Ray Martin, for example, who was Tennis Blue when he was at Cambridge. I was at a much lowlier standard but had a good game.
In fact one of the people I used to play was a former colleague of yours that you'll know, Bob Honeycombe, who was one of my father's students, one of the first students in metallurgy at research level in Melbourne University and he came over to England as well, to Cambridge and, as you know, became Treasurer of the Royal Society and Goldsmiths' Professor at Cambridge. Well, he and I used to have quite a good knockabout in squash, so it wasn't all work but certainly bushwalking, tennis, skiing and squash were the main sports that I had.

I wouldn't want you to think that I stayed in Melbourne all the time however. Australia's a big place and my brother and I used to bike a lot down to Geelong, the Otway Ranges, up to the Dandenongs, there were many places to go and visit. And on one of those visits I remember we went into Belgrave Forest. It is, interestingly enough, just up from Ferntree Gully where one Shane Warne was born. We went up into Sherwood Forest and we were hunting the lyrebird. The lyrebird is a superb animal about the size of a small peacock with a beautiful frond that it puts up, but it has the amazing ability to copy any sound that it hears. And we spotted lyrebirds, we saw them dancing, we saw them making their sounds. The only way that you could tell the difference between a lyrebird and a kookaburra or a bellbird or a butcherbird or any of the other birds was that the lyrebird was so much better. It had a long broad loud voice that you could hear.
So, we saw the lyrebird. Interestingly enough it is has picked up human habitation, it's picked up car horns, saw mills, train engines, it can imitate all of these things.

Another occasion, quite differently, in fact it was when I was at school still, I was 14, just coming up to 15, and as I told you I was in the school orchestra, I played the flute. But independently of that I joined a thing called the Young Australia League which was to help young Australians, boys and girls, to travel around and the way they could do that was by giving concerts. So I joined a concert troupe, it was called a Minstrel Show – fortunately not a black and white minstrel show – but there was a band of, I think, eight or 10 pieces, of which I was a flute, and the other obvious instruments and a drum, and there were about another 15 or 20 boys that did song and dance acts, jokes and so forth.
And what we would do was we would drive along in a bus, we had a nurse with us and a couple of chaps to keep us out of harm's way, we would drive to the next town, we would be met by the mayor, have a mayoral luncheon and then shown a local site, like a silo, a wheat mill, a hospital, a brewery, an engine factory, all of these sorts of things which were of great interest to young boys. We learnt a lot about Western Australia [sic – should be Australia]. After the lunch and the mayoral reception we'd do the trip in the afternoon or go swimming in one of the rivers, and then in the evening we would give our show which was actually very well received.
When I came to write my memoirs many, many years later I decided to see if I could get in touch with these people and so I'd ring to... the Shire Council and say to their archivist have you got anything, and they would shunt me off to the local history people or to the film... to the local... newspaper, and I was touched at the amount of interest that it had generated. And out of the 30 places that we stopped in a month – and you can do the arithmetic – so we were doing a show a night and moving on, we had a write-up, sometimes, you know, 20 or 30 column inches which was amazing in wartime when paper was restricted. In fact, to my shame, I have to tell you that on one occasion I was written up, or the show was written up, on the same page as the cricket scores and one name, Don Bradman, had been bowled by a duck, so that was the news when South Australia were playing Brisbane in the Sheffield Shield match, and this is the one and only occasion that my name has been on the same page as Don Bradman, but for different reasons.
But amongst these people one lady wrote back and said, 'I'm so glad you have written. We hold meetings of our local history society, and when I showed them your letter two of our elderly members remembered seeing your show'. It was in 1941 and they were 12-year-old girls at that stage and they still remembered. So that was... but that was very interesting.

One other anecdote from that, I think is perhaps relevant to the theme of these things. At one place we went to a school that had newly been built. There was a headmaster there and he'd been asked why is it that when you come into class you lift your cap to the boys and you say, 'Good morning, boys', and they say, 'Good morning, sir'? And he said, 'I do that because for all I know there might be a future Prime Minister amongst these boys'. And that's actually not so far fetched as it seems because some of these towns were very small but Robert Menzies, who was perhaps one of the best known of Australian Prime Ministers and the Prime Minister during the war, he was from just such a school in Jeparit, where we stopped for a day, near Warracknabeal. And it shows that one should treat all these people with respect; they might just be people of importance, and even so of course, whether they're Prime Minister or not, they're going to be doing valuable things.

Yes. You have to remember it's not so long after all the separate States, which were separate Colonies, formed a Commonwealth through federation and Australia was formed. That was on 1st January 1901, and we're only talking 20 years... Then there was Gallipoli, which was a defining moment in Australia's history, and then, of course, the war. But one of the features of Australian schools there was that every Monday morning we had school assembly, which was outside, which says something for the weather. And we would line up, girls and boys, and we'd put our hand on our heart and we would repeat, 'I love God and my country, I will honour the King, I will serve the flag and cheerfully obey my parents, teachers and the law'. That's what we did.
Now, the interesting thing is that when I went back to my primary school last year and they had a special assembly – it was a celebration for their centenary the year before actually –but it was the anniversary of that, they had a school assembly but they don't say that now, they say something different. And it starts, hand on hearts still, but, 'I love my country, Australia'. And there's a subtle difference; the King is not mentioned, the flag is not mentioned, so it's incipient republicanism coming in, I think, and very understandably. But it then goes on and instead of serving and obedience, which was the objective being instilled in children at an earlier stage, they're talking about being careful – sorry – caring to our neighbours and our fellow students, to be helpful and kind and so forth, and to look after the environment. So it's a complete change in the oath, but they still say the oath.

So, talking about Australia, outside Melbourne – though not all Melbournites would agree that there was anything outside – let me tell you a little bit about a trip that I took at the end of my MSc. The thesis was finally handed in, it had to be assessed along with the others who had written, and that process was going to take about a month, so I decided I would go on a hitchhike. I already knew that I was going to go to England, and so I thought I'd better find out something about Australia outside Victoria, and certainly outside Melbourne, so I decided to hitchhike with one of my fellow students, Jim Banfield, who unfortunately didn't join me in the end, so I had to set off alone; he joined me up in Brisbane, which was about 2000 miles further north. But what I did was to set off from Trinity College, where I was a resident tutor as I've explained, and I went to the end of the tram line up on the Sydney Road, and then waited, and within about 10 minutes the first car came and I got a lift, and then another lift, and it was all going very fine. And in fact some people had said they'd been able to hitchhike to Sydney, which is nearly 500 miles, about 800 kilometres, in one day, 24 hours. I didn't manage that, but I did do it in two days.
But on one occasion, I got in with an air force type who was driving an air force truck back to Tocumwal, which was where the Air Force base was, and I'd already noticed, crossing the Murray River, and into the Riverina and towards the Murrumbidgee, that there were guards, soldiers, posted at particular points, and this, I think, was an aftermath of the war. But he had the habit of stopping at each little township – 'Let's stop for a swift snort' – and a swift snort would be two or three pints of beer, and then he'd drive off again – different, again, from today.

On the first night, I camped on the Riverina. It's very rich country, partly irrigated, partly sheep-farming. And then I came to a town called Gundagai, which may not mean a lot to you, but Gundagai is the town in Australia which has had more songs and stories written about it than any other.
And there was a whole series, Dad and Dave it was called, like The Archers in England, that is based in that sort of area. And it is about the dog who was faithful, The Dog Sat On The Tuckerbox, and there's actually a... I get broken up just thinking of this, the dog sitting on the tuckerbox, guarding it. Because what had happened was that the drover, a bullock drover, was crossing the Five Mile Creek, five miles from Gundagai, and he broke an axle, or a wheel, something happened. He had to go into Gundagai to get some help and to get a wheel, and he told the box... the dog, to sit on the tuckerbox and guard it, that's where his food and goods were, and to go into the town. Well, the drover went into town, I think must've got into a drive [sic] – it's a made-up story of course – but he never came back, got into a brawl, and got killed, I think, in a brawl. But the dog sat on the tuckerbox and died there, because he wouldn't leave it when his master had asked him to look for it. So that's a bit of Australian folklore, which... I, of course, took a photo of that.

Then I went through some beautiful country, down from the ranges behind Sydney, and down into the Nepean Valley, and then into Sydney. The change is dramatic, from burnt-out, dried bushland to lush, coastal scenery, and in fact it was these mountains just a bit further up – they're called the Blue Mountains – which were a bar on development from Sydney in the first place, because the settlers couldn't get through these mountains and into the rich grazing lands beyond. Anyway, I got to Sydney, and I was blown by Sydney, I thought that was terrific. I mean, even as in Melbourne there, we had a beach, and we had Port Phillip Bay and the Rip, and things like that, but Sydney was something else again. I don't think that there's another piece of coastal Sydney from 50 miles south in, say Wollongong, up to the Hawkesbury Valley, which is 50 miles north... that scenery, that 100 miles of coastal scenery, is superb. On the beaches there are coves, they're not large beaches, but they're sandy and they're good surf. Inland, there are beautiful mountain sceneries, thick forests, the Hawkesbury River itself is a lovely place, and so I went through all of this, getting a lift. Well, I called in at Sydney University, of course, and saw things there, but I didn't pay any scientific visits. This was just sightseeing places in Sydney, and I learnt a lot about Australia.
And going further north I went to Byron Point, which is the most easterly part of Australia and this, of course, was where Captain Cook would be sailing up to Mount Warning where he nearly wrecked the Endeavour, because he was getting near the coral reef, and that was a real hazard in those days, for sailors.

And so I went up to Brisbane. My friend, Jim Banfield, who was supposed to be coming with me, didn’t make it but joined me later. And I then went to the Lamington Forest which, again, is not well-known here, but that is an extraordinary forest. The border at that place, between New South Wales and Queensland is a cliff, and on the top of this cliff is the forest, and it is impenetrable rainforest, and in amongst that is the Antarctic beech forest. As you may know, Antarctica was once in the tropics, if we can put it that way, there are huge beech forests which are now coal seams in Antarctic, but the living trees, beech trees, are in the Lamington Park, in the Lamington forest.
And that is the place to go if you want to walk, it just abounds in little waterfalls, pools, little lakelets, you know, just an acre or so, surrounded by woods, parakeets, galahs, all sorts of coloured birds flying around. Abounding in snakes, I have to say, I killed 13 tiger snakes, just in one afternoon’s walk, by just dropping stones on them; by and large, they just get away from you. But that was real hiking, and we went from one place to another, from O’Reilly’s, which was an iconic name in Australia also, because he had found, through sheer bush craft, a plane which had come down and crashed, and some of the people had perished. It was a small plane, but the pilot and two others were found, and he found them by going through the bush and following signs, he’d seen a bit of smoke go up. So, I stayed at O’Reilly’s, well, they called it a guesthouse, but it was really their farmhouse. Then coming back, I saw other things, and hitchhiked again, stayed with various people, picked up with my friend. It was a good way to learn about Australia in those days.

The next big thing in my life was going to England, and that is an awe-inspiring experience. In the late 1940s it was the thing that people who’d been out in Australia or who wanted to study further, would go back home, as England was called then or to Scotland or Wales, or to Europe, because there were many Europeans, of course, in Australia as well, particularly Italy and Greece and Germans and Austrians. So there was a big connection with Europe, but there were hardly... essentially, no airlines. The centenary of Melbourne was 1935, the centenary – or ‘36 – the centenary air race was... won by KLM. I don’t know how many weeks it took them, but they were the winners of coming from England – from Croydon, I think, they started – to Darwin, and then to Sydney. But it was a long trip, if you went to England you went by ship, either round the Cape, or through the Suez Canal.
Now, the Suez Canal of course cut quite a bit off the journey, but even so, from Melbourne it was four and a half weeks, it was five weeks from Sydney, so it was a major undertaking. But particularly from Melbourne, when these liners left – and I went on the Orontes, JS Anderson, when he left, was a P&O, Ray Martin went on a P&O liner – they were about 20 to 25,000 tonnes, they would take perhaps up to 700 or 800, perhaps 1000 passengers. But saying farewell to a ship pulling out of Port Melbourne was just an incredible experience, everyone... well, the ship was always free on the afternoon, it was there, so that anyone that was coming to see someone off, the family, friends, and so forth, would come. I think on the day that I left, which happened to be a Saturday and happened to be a fine day, there were over 30,000 people came to see us off. Can you imagine that? Even on a fairly large liner, for the probably 600 or 700 people that joined in Melbourne, there were some on from Sydney, one or two others got on in Adelaide and Perth, but then you threw streamers down to them, and the bands were playing, it was an incredible sight, and one that, actually, that one would never forget. 

So I came through the Suez Canal, but that was also, as it happens, an experience, because – and we give a couple of dates here – I came in August... beginning of August 1948, and in the beginning of May in 1948, the State of Israel was created and recognised, first by Britain and the United States, and then by other countries. But, as you know, when it was created it also created a state of war with the neighbouring Arab cases... Arab countries, so there was a state of war, and that had an impact on the Suez Canal because it was a military zone. It didn’t close the canal, but it meant that you had to stay onboard ship. But fortunately for us, we were – and this is three months afterwards – the traders in Port Said, which is the northern end of Suez Canal, revolted, went on strike, whatever word they use, and they said, ‘We have no livelihood, we live off these liners coming and spending a day, with the tourists coming onshore’, and so they threatened some action. As a result, it was agreed that we could spend the afternoon onshore, so I was actually on the first ship that was allowed to put down passengers after the war started in May of 1948. Then we went through the Mediterranean, we saw the Straits of Gibraltar, and all of these things for an Australian were a great experience.

So then I came to Southampton, as it happened. I called, on the way, at two ports of interest, I think – well, they’re all of interest, but of particular interest – one was Colombo in, Ceylon as it then was, Sri Lanka. Now, of course, there’s been a war there, too, but not when I was there. And we had some friends who’d been to Melbourne University, they met us, they were of three religions, one was a Muslim, one was a Buddhist, I think, and their daughter, little daughter, Nirmula, she was a Christian, so they were relaxed about religion. But they took me to a place called Kelaniya Vihara, and Kelaniya Vihara is a Buddhist temple which is reputed to be many thousands of years old, but in its present existence I think probably at least 1300 years old. And of course, coming from Australia I had never seen anything permanently constructed by human beings that was anything like that old – we thought 100 years was very old – because that was our history of the white occupation of Australia. But I was spellbound, Brian, I have to say. I went into this place and there was a Buddha there, about life-size I would say, seated, and the calmness of that statue was just awe-inspiring. And then I looked at the walls, and it said something in their own script, and then underneath, for people like us, it said, ‘Let your eyes touch these walls, but let your fingers see them not’, and on the walls were fantastic paintings, it brings... an unbelievable experience. And outside there was a sage, I don’t know what religion he was, and he was surrounded by some women in traditional garb for that country, and he was talking to them; I suppose it was like a religious meeting they were having.

The other notable experience was at Aden, which is of course now in the news again through Yemen, and the like. But then, Aden was a British protectorate, British port, and I hadn’t actually realised that you have to go through the side of a crater to get into Aden. They’ve got a tunnel for the cameleers to go through, because the camels don’t like climbing up and going down again, but cars go through a cliff that is, or canyon, that is cut. And that was my first experience of bargaining with people, and seeing people earning money by taking it off the tourists, but that was also a great experience.

So you’re not surprised to learn that when I got to England I was again pretty speechless. I admit it, I was overwhelmed by London. But of course I hadn’t come to be a tourist.
What I did first – I was met by my uncle, and he lived, he and his wife, who was my mother’s sister, they lived in London, but they’d lived in Mecklenburgh Square, and they were bombed out, through, during the Battle of Britain. And they had a house near –a cottage really – near Boxmoor, he was a chemical engineer, so he worked from there. And in fact, my mother’s family came to meet me at this place, some of them still lived in Manchester, my grandmother, and another aunt, my mother’s eldest sister, came down to meet me, so it was a family reunion. But that was only for a day, to say hello, and bring some presents that I’d brought over, and some pictures particularly, that they wanted to see of the house where we lived and so forth. But then I went to Cambridge which was where I had been accepted, because I think we mentioned earlier, the team, Emeléus and Anderson, from pre-war Imperial College, they had written the definitive book on modern aspects of inorganic chemistry, and that was our bible. I’d got my Masters degree with JS Anderson, and I’d sought his advice, and he mentioned various places, though in his own inimitable way, with his little toothbrush moustache twitching, he said he’d been at Harwell for about eight months, at that stage. I forgot to mention that during my MSc he left, so we had to correspond, so I’d half-written my thesis by writing letters to JS Anderson and discussing the work. But anyway, he was at Harwell, and he said, ‘Norman, in my experience, pre-war inorganic chemistry, in the best German sense, is dead in England, except for Cambridge and Bristol’, and at Bristol was Garner, who was doing solid-state chemistry. Now, I think that of course was some exaggeration, but I chose, and I’ve certainly never regretted it, choosing Harry Emeléus, and Cambridge.

So, just like my luck with Abe Yoffe, taking First Class, and then working hard through my thing, and being initiated into research, and his research group, I again hit the jackpot with Harry Emeléus, because a more distinguished inorganic chemist you wouldn't meet, a more gentle and lovely man, if I can put it that way, he really was a beautiful person. He had a sharp side, one knew if one had broken things, and so forth. But, by and large, he was very generous, very helpful, and what is of course always the sign of a good research director, he left you alone to do your own thing, if you could do your own thing. If you got into trouble and said, 'Gosh, what about this?' and he'd just sort of say, well, have you thought of this, or what about that, and well, I think something, somewhere, had something to say about that, and you'd go and look it up. But, by and large, you just went in and did the work.

I then went to Cambridge, because that's why I'd come to England. I hadn't yet been assigned a college, and it was not even term or half-term or full-term, or any of these strange names that they have in Cambridge. It was a week, no, it was a month before term ended [sic – should be began], it was the... well, it was mid-August, I guess. No, it was the first week in September actually, the first week in September, so of course the undergraduates certainly weren't back, there were some graduate students around. So I went into Emeléus' room... I'd just come off the ship, I had two big hand luggage, the rest had been put into storage, and I had a big, long overcoat, trench coat, on. Unbeknown to me, it was an unprecedented heatwave in Cambridge, it was... I think it was actually 89 degrees, or something like that, it was really, well into the mid-30s. And Emeléus' first remark was... to me, was, ‘Good God, man, take your coat off, you must be boiling!' And I said, yes it is rather warm, isn't it? So perhaps I was picking up English understatement, already, but anyhow, I was glad to take my coat off.
But he said, ‘Well, there's no point in coming to work at the moment, no-one's here, they've gone to conferences, or on holidays, and so forth, and I haven't got you into college yet, why don't you look around England for a month, and come back in the first week of October, and we'll settle things then, but you're definitely in, I've got a place for you in my laboratory'. He then took me to the Red Lion, which I don't think is a pub anymore, I think... Lion's Yard, it's in Petty Cury.
[Q] Yes, it's disappeared, Norman, sadly.
I think it has.
[Q] The Lion's still there, but the pub's gone.
Okay. Well, the... it was the Lion in Petty Cury, and again in his own inimicable way, he said, ‘Norman, I'll leave you to the pleasures of finding out about Cambridge on yourself... on your own', and so I bought a guide book and decided to walk around Cambridge.

I'd also met people on the ship coming over, I thought I'd see them, and go down to London, see a bit, and also there was my father's family, whom I wasn't so close to for obvious reasons, but they lived in Brighton. My father and mother, interestingly, were both the youngest of large families of five children, and both their mothers, that's to say, my father's mother and my mother's mother, were widowed when they were 35, so they had a big job bringing up large families in the, essentially, the late '90s, about 100 years ago now. And my father's eldest sister was... she was a matron at Coventry Hospital on the night that it was bombed, so she... well, she was now retired, it was from 1948 I'm now talking about, and she was living with her elderly sister who'd been in Brighton, so I went down to see them. And the first thing I heard them say was, 'Isn't he like John, isn't he like his father?' So I spent a wonderful time with them, and with my cousins whom I'd not met before, and got very well-acquainted with them, and they showed me the sights of Brighton, the Pavilion, and so forth. And I went walking around the Surrey Hills, I'd come from Surrey Hills in Australia, but it's south of London, the hilly countryside there.
Guildford Cathedral, Brian, you'll be interested to hear, was being built. It was the first cathedral that'd been built since, I suppose, Wren's London, since the Great Fire of London. I don't think there'd been a cathedral built since then. Of course, Liverpool's come later again, but it had been started in Guildford, I think, in 1933, something like that, but was still being built when I was down there.

So, I went around London, there were big exhibitions on, I was very... I went to the 1851 people. That... perhaps I should explain for people who aren't so familiar with it. One of the most distinguished scholarships that someone from the Colonies could have is an 1851. It is the surplus money from the 1851 exhibition, the Great Exhibition which was organised by Prince Albert. It was the world's first exhibition. It was, I think, the only one that's ever made substantial profits, such profits indeed, that they built up what is called the South Kensington site. The Albert Hall is built with that money, Imperial College, the College of Science, the Biological Museum... the Natural History Museum, I think it's called, and the British Science Museum, the Victoria and Albert obviously, again. In fact I might just digress and say that I come from the State of Victoria, the Prime Minister at the time was Melbourne, I lived first in Mont Albert; there was a big British presence in Australia at that time.
But I went to the 1851, because despite all these foundations that were made with the money there was still money to bring people from the Colonies, as they were to start with, and then overseas, the Commonwealth. So that Ernest Rutherford, for example, came over, famously, from New Zealand on that. Harrie Massey came to University College from, in fact, my school, in Melbourne University High School, a lot of people came over on those... and Ray Martin, the following year, from the... came over on one, as well. So that's what I was looking around.

Okay. So, after that, I came back to Cambridge. By this stage, Harry Emeléus – Emmy, we must call him, because everyone called him Emmy – Emmy had got me into his college as a graduate student. That was Sidney Sussex College which was founded in 1596, so it's one of the younger ones of the older foundations. And I think it's worthwhile just noting one or two things about Cambridge, because it is an exceptional place. One of the things which interested me was how a place which was so steeped in tradition and arcane rules and regulations, could at the same time be at the forefront of so many branches of science and literature and other branches of knowledge. And I suppose in the end, and perhaps at the end of my story, one will have a better feeling for how this trick is managed, but let's start at the rookie end, of an Australian undergraduate coming off the ship, being in England for a month, wandering round, looking at the sights, coming to Cambridge. What things does one notice?
Well, I soon learnt that there were 21 colleges. They were what we would call single-sex colleges now, in other words, there was no co-habitation, there was no co-education. There were 21 colleges, of which two were women: Girton, and Newton... Newnham College. The rules were quite strict. I've already mentioned I was a resident tutor and lecturer at Trinity College in Melbourne, so I was responsible for discipline in the college there, along with other tutors. When I came, I was given BA status grudgingly, because I didn't have a Cambridge degree of course, but I was a graduate student and therefore I had to be in by 10.30, and if I wasn't, there was a gate fine. If I was out in the town, in the evening, I had to wear a gown. On one evening, I was hastening back to college, having seen a friend to the bus stop, got caught by the Bulldogs, and said, 'Are you a member of this college, sir?' 'Yes'. 'Would you have a word with the Proctor?' And the Proctor read me a lesson, and I said why I was late. And he said, 'Normally, the fine is six and eightpence' – that's a third of a pound in modern coinage – 'but,' he said, 'as you're a graduate already, a BA status, the fine would be twice that: 13 and fourpence. However, as you seem to understand the nature of your transgression, sir, I'll let you off with a caution'. So that was Cambridge.
But there were some sensible rules as well. You certainly weren't allowed to have any hire purchase agreement, you couldn't have a motorcycle or a car, you had to have a bike with the college name and number put on it, S25 I think was my number, but they were rules.

Now, I said that there was Girton and Newnham, the women's colleges. They were started towards the end of the 19th century, but one of the rules was that only men, male students, could get degrees; women could not get degrees, they weren't full members of the university. But it was argued that as they did as well as the men, essentially, in the Tripos examinations, and often did better, there was no reason not to award them the status of a degree. So, they had the status of the degree without getting the degree, it was therefore a BA (titular), which certain dons, of course, inevitably abbreviated to BA (tit), but that was typical, I think, of those days when it was very easy to disregard women despite their achievements.
Now, that all changed, happily, and fortunately I was there whilst it was changing. It was in November of 1948, it had been decided, finally, that women should get full degrees, that if they had been given the BA titular degree, they could then get the substantive degree, and many of them took that. But they had to have a first woman, if you like, a token important first woman, to get the first degree, and that, in those days, was obviously Queen Elizabeth. And to make it quite clear, that's Queen Elizabeth, the wife of King George, the Queen Consort, who later became the Queen Mother, who later lived to be 101. But she was the first woman to graduate. She was given the first substantive, I think it was an LLD degree, and after that, women could take a degree. So that is one example of growing up fast, I think, from a situation which, frankly, was there because it was there. There's no point in getting upset about things which happened a long time ago, the important thing is to learn, politically, how to alter them, and that is what was done on that occasion.

It does remind me, speaking of royalty, however, that on 14th November 1948, I was returning from the laboratory, in time on this occasion, before 10.30 that is to say, and the gate was already shut, but it was opened by the head porter, and he doffed his bowler hat and said, 'Good evening, sir, it's a boy'. And so I said, 'What's a boy?' And he said, 'The young princess, sir, she's had a baby son'. 'Oh', I said, 'I didn't even know she was pregnant', and for a moment, a slight disrespect for... horror came over the chief porter's face, the head porter's face, and then he said, 'Yes indeed, sir, a boy'. So that was Prince Charles being born.
But, as I said, I think they are, withal, able to do first rate... well, science is really all I can judge, but the science that was being done at that time was top rate, and is obviously still the same.

Now, in the laboratory I had a talk with Emmy, about what to do, he said, 'Well, you can carry on doing your Master's work, if you like', and I said, 'Well, I was very interested in that, but I think I'd get more out of it if I did something closer to your own interest'. So he told me the sorts of things he was doing, gave me a couple of theses to read, introduced me to Alf Woolf, who was in the lab, and in short, I started to look at the electrical conductivity and properties of iodine monochloride.
He put me in a lab with Gordon Stone, there were two of us in this lab, Gordon was also a very bright student, he seemed to have enormous respect for me, to begin with, because I had this 1851 scholarship, but we, throughout our careers, have had a very good working relationship, and I've certainly admired the wonderful work he's been doing. But I have to say, that during the first term, which was called Michaelmas rather than first term, Gordon, who was working on boron hydrides, had repeated explosions which blew up his vacuum line, and were really quite scary. And so, in the end, I said to Emmy, 'Well, you know, much though I admire Gordon, and get on with him as a person, I think I'd be safer in another part of the lab'. So I came out into the main lab, and assembled my vacuum line there. Others in the lab were Mimi Newing, who was in my final year in Melbourne, she then joined CSIRO, came over, got a Cambridge Blue in tennis, and got a very good PhD with Harry Emeléus, working in silicon chemistry with, I think, Alfie Maddock as her main tutor. And there was Alf Woolf, Bob Haszeldine was there, he'd just got his PhD from Cambridge, and Alan Sharpe, of course, and Alf Maddock, whom I've mentioned, were the two members of staff.

Well, I'd perhaps better explain the story about the iodine halides. One of the main themes in Harry Emeléus' lab was the ionising effect of certain solvents, everyone knows that things dissolve in water and water gives ionic solutions, you can conduct electricity through them, and crystallise salts from them. And there are other solutions, notably liquid ammonia, liquid sulphur dioxide, would be two examples, which do the same thing. Now, at that stage in the late 40s, there was great debate about whether there were any other liquids which could do this, and there were some other liquids but they were very reactive, they were called interhalogen compounds. As you know, Brian, halogens are the seventh – or 17th depending on your nomenclature – group of the periodic table.

So, he was dealing with halogens, as you know, that's chlorine, bromine and iodine are the common ones, but at the top of the table is fluorine and at the bottom is astatine. Now, Emmy was an expert in fluorine chemistry, and he was, and his students, were studying some very reactive compounds, particularly bromine trifluoride, and other fluorides of the halogens, they are the interhalogen compounds where more than one halogen is involved. So, a rather easier one, and I suspect that Harry was leading me in gently, we decided on iodine monochloride, which has exactly the same atomic weight as bromine because it's in between the two of them, but iodine monochloride is a most beautiful compound. I had to make it and crystallise it, and then measure its properties. And to do that, I had to pass chlorine over iodine, that was easy enough to do, and then I got these beautiful, ruby-coloured crystals.
And to make sure that they were pure, and not contaminated with any solvent, I had to purify them in an all-glass apparatus which I'd constructed, and fortunately they melted when pure, at 27.2 degrees Celsius, roughly. And that meant that they melted just above room temperature, it was an easy temperature to handle in a thermostat, and then you could freeze it. And you froze it slowly, only the pure material would freeze out, and the impure would remain in the solution; it's really just a bit like zone refining of silicon crystals. And so, you could pour the impure liquid off, and keep the crystals out of the way, and then you re-freeze it again partially, and pour it off, and after successive recrystallisations, you could grow crystals which were, oh, perhaps 2in long, 5cm long; thin, transparent, needle-like crystals. And you could see right through them, it really was like shining a light through a ruby, they were beautiful. But the trick, of course, was you couldn't then take them out, because they'd be contaminated, you had to do all the measurements there.
So I had to design an apparatus, which was not too difficult. I did... with the crystallisation balls, and then underneath that, the conductivity apparatus. And when it was completely pure, I'd fuse, melt, the compound that was pure, pour it by upending it into the conductivity cell, and then just seal off. And by this time of course I was a good glass blower, so it would all be done, untouched by human hands. So I did that, and got an interesting result, actually, first experiment. I did it as a function of temperature, so I was doing it between room temperature, say 15 to 20 degrees, because I could super-cool it a little bit, up to about 80 degrees. The conductivity increased, and that wasn't unexpected, because I thought, well, if it's slightly higher... it was highly conducting, which was the first surprise, and the conductivity increased. And... but as you heated it, and I did this several times, it went through a maximum, at about 45 degrees, and then diminished again, so that was a peculiar thing.
Two other technical things; it had no decomposition potential when I used direct current, and there was no electrolysis with... passage of electric current. So this was really a very interesting result, Emmy got very excited about it, JS Anderson, who was at Harwell at the time, had come over to give a lecture, he was excited about it. NV Sidgwick, who was the Oxford professor, and a venerable old man at this stage who'd written another enormous book which was published post-war, The Chemical Elements, he was actually an authority on interhalogens, and he just loved this, he was perched on a lab stool, I can still see him, talking about this. So this was all very interesting.

Before pride, comes a fall. At the end of term I had a whole slew of results, they were inexplicable at this stage, I'd got them reproduced, the highest melting point that had ever been obtained for iodine monochloride, therefore it was very pure. I said, okay, Norm, take a break, go skiing.
So I went skiing and, to Sestriere, with a girlfriend whom I'd met through my cousin. She was at Newnham College, and we went to Sestriere with the Oxford and Cambridge Ski Club, which was an interesting story I might come to later. But we had this skiing holiday, I came back, and the first thing in those days that any budding chemist did when he'd been away for an hour... for a month, on vacation, is to go to Chemical Abstracts and see what had happened in the month. And there amongst the first papers I saw, with Fialkov in the Neorganicheskoi Khimii, the Russian Journal of Inorganic Chemistry, Fialkov and Shor: The Conductivity of Iodine Monochloride. So I quickly got a copy of this paper and I didn't need Russian to see a graph with a maximum... and the wretched guy had got there just before me.
So that wasn't good news, and so I naturally, of course, told Emmy about this straightaway, and we decided that the best thing to do was to continue, because from the results in Fialkov's paper, it was quite clear, and I have to say it, ours were much better results: the melting point was better, the conductivity was lower which meant it was purer material, and so forth. So I was very confident that those results were good, but the saviour – bit of good luck – iodine, as you know, has another chloride, iodine trichloride, ICl3. That's nowhere near as easy to work with. First point, it doesn't melt until 100 degrees, so that's a higher temperature. Second, it doesn't melt at all unless it's under pressure. If you just heat it, it loses chlorine, goes back to iodine monochloride, and evolves chlorine. So, you have to heat it under a sealed condition, and you would normally use something like a Carius tube for that, which is reinforced glass, a special Pyrex, so that would withstand the pressure. Well, I calculated the pressure that it would be under, and I worked out it would be about 15 atmospheres, that's 15 times atmospheric pressure, so I had to make a conductivity cell which would withstand that, and remember that we've got glass-to-metal seals in this.
Well, I did the first experiment with platinum electrodes which are the standard electrodes, and that was the first bit of chemistry I learnt: iodine monochloride dissolves platinum when it's liquid. So Emmy wasn't particularly pleased that a big sheet of platinum had dissolved in Norm's iodine trichloride. However, I found out, we tried molybdenum and that didn't work, tried tungsten. That was okay. But the trouble with tungsten is twofold. Firstly, it doesn't seal readily into glass when it's thick so you have to get a thin wire of it, and if you have a thin wire, you can't weld it on to a flat sheet of tungsten, it's too brittle. So the way around that, that I devised, was to get a rod of tungsten about 5mm thick, and then to turn it down on a lathe so it was only 1mm diameter at one end, so it was just like a thin rod, and a thick rod on top of it, and then to seal that into glass. But of course you had to clean that first, and the way to clean tungsten, Brian, if you don't know, is to treat it with molten sodium nitrite. That takes the oxygen layer off, and then you have to swill it with freshly-distilled water, de-gas it, and then of course dry it under vacuum, and so forth, and then you can seal it into the cell. So I got some results on iodine trichloride at high pressure, which certainly no one had ever done before, tied that in with the iodine monochloride paper, and we published that, and that was the first paper that I got from the Emeléus lab.

Well, meanwhile of course, other things were going on in the lab, and I clearly had to think of a theme which would be big enough to allow me to use this first month's results, but which would not interfere with other work that was going on in the lab, on interhalogen compounds. And I chanced on the idea that a catalytic agent that was well known was boron trifluoride, like aluminium chloride, it is good at what was called Friedel-Crafts catalysts. And there were some fashionable theories at the time which said that was due to ionic intermediates, and I thought, well, if there are ions there I should be able to find them with my techniques of working under vacuum, high resistivity, but if there is a conductivity, I can measure it, and study it. So I thought that was a good thing, and Emmy approved of that, and typically with Emmy, he said, 'Do you know how to make boron trifluoride?' And so I said, 'Well, not off the top of my head', and he said, 'Well, look it up'. And so... he didn't say it quite so bluntly, but I looked it up, and it was not a difficult prep, but would mean making a bit of apparatus, and handling fluorine, but that was off because I didn't want to handle fluorine; that is a very aggressive thing. So there were other things, of using chlorides and calcium fluoride and things like fluoroborates, which would give the required product.
And so I built this apparatus, and made some of it, and... that is a gas, I might say, at room temperature, is boron trifluoride. And when I'd done this, he said, 'Well done, that didn't take you long. Here's a cylinder of the stuff'. And I wasn't best pleased, I have to say, but looking back on it, of course, it was Emmy's way; if you're going to use a compound, know how to make it. And if you've made it well, okay, don't waste time on it, you're not going to learn anything by making litres and litres of this gas, I have some here. Because he was a consultant with a particular firm which was making fluorine and was making boron trifluoride also, down at Avonmouth near Bristol, and he gave me that. So that was let off the hook, and we can continue the boron trifluoride story later.

Being in Cambridge, the opportunity was far too great to miss, of going to the lectures of people one had only read about in Australia, but had never met and never seen. Now, I'll reel off a few names, and then I'll tell you about the lectures that I was going to. One of these, of course, was Emeléus himself, whom I had a great respect for, and was getting to know, and he was giving a course of lectures on 'the non-metals' he called it, as I remember. I turned... I asked him if I could turn up to them, out of courtesy, and he said, 'Yes of course, but don't feel you've got to turn up, you'll know it all'. And I said, 'No, I'd like to see how you approach it'. And I'm glad I did because, though of course having graduated in chemistry, I knew a lot of it, and having read Emeléus and Anderson, it was very interesting to see how Emeléus put it across, so I was on a good learning curve there as well, to see how he did it. And he was enormously impressive, with his lecturing style, and his anecdotes, and how he made it interesting, and actually did experiments as well, in some of the, some of the lectures. He was one.

A second one was Sir John Lennard-Jones who had come from Bristol. He was the first theoretical professor of chemistry in the world or the professor of theoretical chemistry. He was in the same department as Emeléus, and the head of that department was Alexander Todd, Sir Alex Todd, later Lord Todd. And the reason for that was that there were two camps of chemistry at this time in Cambridge, now happily not the case. But in those days there was both an intellectual, and a metaphorical, and a substantial, brick wall between physical chemistry, on the one hand, with Ronald Norrish, and organic chemistry, inorganic, and theoretical chemistry, on the other.

Lennard-Jones was a theoretical chemist, and he was at that stage doing some world-shattering work on what is called molecular orbital theory. We needn't go in to that now, but I was interested in it because in fact theoretical chemistry did interest me. What I hadn't said earlier was that in my spare time I was doing... an MSc degree in Melbourne and being a tutor in Trinity College, I also attended some extra lectures and some of those were in pure mathematics; I actually got up, with Ray Martin, up to final – third-year – pure mathematics, so we did know a bit of mathematics; and I thought it would be useful to see if I could go to Lennard-Jones' lectures, and I learnt a lot from those. Later, as it transpired, I did a post-doctoral year with Lennard-Jones, and in the seminar then at the time was John Pople, whom you will recognise later. He went to America, got a Nobel Prize for his superb work not only in NMR but in theoretical chemistry.

Not only in chemistry. Being in Cambridge, there are all sorts of notables, and one of the most notable of the notables was Bertrand Russell. He was 77 years old. He had just a year or so earlier been in an air crash; if I remember rightly, when the plane came to land in Copenhagen and landed in the Baltic Sea, he came out and swam half a mile or more to shore in his 70s! But Bertrand Russell was again something, quite a phenomenon. I’d read several of his books as a youngster and admired him, of course, for his non-conventional views.
But he came in, and I can see him now: silver-haired old gent, 77 years old... the lecture hall was the examinations hall, which holds 500 people. It was bursting with people. At five o’clock on the dot he came in. Silver hair, he stood at the lectern and he said in a rasping voice which was very characteristic of him, ‘I hope no one will be misled by the title of my lectures. I have called these lectures Introduction to Philosophy. Perhaps I should have called it Introduction to My Philosophy. I’m not concerned with what used to be called philosophy up till now, but I think that...’
And so he continued. It was just a masterly performance. It was read, of course, and he knew all the tricks of the trade, but he was an amazing person to listen to, and the amount he got through in that hour... he spoke rapidly from notes he’d prepared, and it just flowed off and was very impressive. Now, I went to that with a friend, and I have to say that probably about half of the lecture theatre had disappeared by the end of term, but it was a two-term course, and I and the others that stayed had probably dwindled to about 150 at the end, but that’s still a sizeable lecture theatre and a sizeable number of people. I’m always glad that I went to hear him before he went, dare I say it, into his cranky phase, but he was certainly on the ball then.

The other thing about Cambridge was the quality of the place – I mean, you couldn’t help being impressed by this. In the Chemical Society, which held weekly meetings, Fridays at five o’clock, if I remember rightly, the people that came in were people I had been reading papers of in Melbourne, there were people that I knew, or I knew of – I had never met them before – and some of them were awful, some of them not.

The only lecture, I think, that I didn’t understand a word of was given by Wolfgang Pauli – as you know, the discoverer of electron spin and the exclusion principle, and he was talking... and there was a thing called the Kronecker delta, which came in, which is an easy enough idea if you understand it, but I’d never heard of it, so the rest was lost on me. But it turns out it’s a function which has the value of either one or zero, but it’s called the Kronecker delta function for a particular reason. But that was electrodynamics - I really didn’t understand any of that.
But he was a fluent lecturer. It was a physics named lecture, as I remember, and I can remember he had a good use of English. And there was one where he had said, or the story was told, that someone had asked him a question – that wasn’t in the lecture that I was at – and Pauli, who was Herr Professor in Switzerland, I think he was at the time, in Zurich; he said, ‘That question is impertinent, young man, but in the present context, it is also pertinent’. And he answered it!

Bragg, of course, was there, and he was also an excellent lecturer, and whilst I was in Cambridge had instituted a science – sorry, arts for science students, and he gave up one of the physics lecture hours – actually, I think it was a practical hour, to have a course... ‘have culture’, as the scientists called it, for the scientists, and that was a very popular course.

Well, I think what I should tell you something about now is the second vacation that I had. The first was skiing in the Italian Alps. This one was to go on a trip of Southern Scandinavia. My sister in 1946 had married a Swedish man in the merchant... the Swedish Merchant Navy, who got caught in the war and couldn't get back to Sweden, so was plying the Pacific Ocean, and that's how he met my sister. But she had then married and gone to live in the south of Sweden. And I was anxious, obviously, to see her because we hadn't been together for quite a while, but also, being an Australian, and thinking at that stage that I might well be going back to Australia, I thought I had better see Norway and Denmark as well as Sweden.
So I planned out a trip, and in brief, it was to go up to Newcastle, catch the ferry to Bergen, go across to Oslo and then to Stockholm on the east coast of Sweden, down to the south near Karlskrona where my sister lived, and then back via Copenhagen and so back to Cambridge.

So we start on the train going up to Newcastle – the boat train – leaving from King's Cross, and my wretched travel agent hadn't told me that it would be wise to book a seat, and the net result was that the train was crowded. I had a big rucksack, as you could imagine, and I walked the length of the train and couldn't find an empty seat anywhere. In those days, the seating compartments to one side – there was a corridor down the length of one side of the train, and then there were doors leading into little compartments that seated six people, and I walked up and down – no luck.
So in the end I was walking back and I thought, well, I might as well enjoy my trip, so I sat – or I didn't sit, I actually stood outside, where there was a gorgeous-looking blonde young lady. And I thought she looked terrific, so I was just taking in this apparition when the conductor came along. ‘You can't stand there, sir', he said. And I said, ‘Well, there are no seats'. ‘Oh, we'll soon fix that', he said. And he opened the door and pulled up the arm-rests, thus converting three seats per side to four seats per side.
So I sat down next to this person, but of course said nothing; this is 1949 now we're talking about. So after a little while the conductor came along and said, ‘Coffee.' And a chap who hadn't said a word to anyone from the far corner leant over to Kirsten and said, ‘Shall we go for coffee?' And she said, ‘Yes, all right'. And I thought, gosh, I've missed my chance there. But, it turned out later, much later, that she knew this chap, who was married to her best friend, but she didn't particularly like him, though he's a well-known architect. So when lunchtime came – there were two sittings – and this chap opted for first sitting, and Kirsten said second sitting. So I thought, ah, well that didn't work out, I will say second sitting. So I did, and when the time came to go to second sitting I said to Kirsten, as her name was, ‘Shall we go to lunch?' And she looked absolutely stunned, because we'd hardly said a word before, and she very sensibly leant over to a chap who'd also said nothing, a fine-looking African man, who turned out – to cut a long story short – to be called Endalkachew Makonnen, who was of the royal family of Haile Selassie in Ethiopia, or Abyssinia as it then was, and he became the United Nations representative for Abyssinia and took control of his turn of the Security Council when it came round, and he was a student at Oriel College in Oxford. And we formed a good group of three people. We had a marvellous trip over, Endalkachew was a wonderful companion, though I have to say sadly that with the coup, the communist coup that happened... that killed Haile Selassie, it also – he was by that time Prime Minister, Endalkachew was – and they killed him as well. So he didn't survive for very long, which was sad, but he was a student, as I say, from Oriel College.

We had a good crossing, and we danced and talked and smoked, as we did in those days. And when we got to Bergen I had a place booked, and Kirsten of course joined her family. She'd been spending a year as an au pair girl in England to perfect her English, which seemed to be pretty good to me anyway. And I went to see a name that I had been given by Barry Dawson, another Australian student who had visited Scandinavia, and he had got to know a Danish [sic] student, and said, look them up. So I did, and this family were very accommodating and pleasant, and insisted that I stay for dinner. And they'd arranged – they knew I was coming, because I had let them know I was coming – and they said, ‘We must go for a party up to Fløyen', which as you probably know is the mountain just above Bergen, served by a cable car, and has this wonderful view over the harbour of Bergen and the fjord. So we went, and they said, you can bring a friend, if you like. The only friend I knew, of course, was Kirsten, so I phoned her and she said, yes, she should come, which I think was a bit hard on her parents but anyway we had a marvellous time dancing and eating up at Fløyen. So that was in fact a romance which was to blossom over the years until we finally got married in 1951, but that's ahead of the story.

On this first Scandinavian trip I stopped first at Voss, and then I was planning to go to Sognefjord and then over the Jotunheimen, which is a high range of mountains. But again my travel agent hadn’t told me that the ferries weren’t running in winter – well, it was Easter, actually – and the roads would not open until July. I had tickets, but they weren’t much use. So I had to spend the weekend, as it turned out, in Voss, but enjoyed meeting people at the pensionnat that I was at, and then took a mail boat around the fjord, a narrow fjord into Flåm, which is at the foot of an incredible railway that goes up to the main Bergen line. The Bergen-Oslo railway, which was started at the beginning of the 20th century and is one of the railways of the world, has a side arm down to one of the fjords, so I went around these incredible fjords and then up through a tunnel which goes a complete 360 turn in the mountain under one river and over another one, waterfalls everywhere, and up to the snowbound, as it still was, Myrdal, where I caught the main train.

And as luck would have it, the wife of the lad that I was staying with – sorry, the mother of the lad that I was staying with, the wife of the man – she was the sister of the professor of organic chemistry at Oslo University, Endre Berner. And she rang her brother and said, ‘We’ve got this student – can he stay with you? He’s got nowhere to stay in Oslo’. ‘Certainly’, said Berner. So I went and found my way with their instructions to Professor Berner’s house. And he, again to cut a long story short, introduced me to Odd Hassel, who was a Nobel Prize-winning – well, he got the Nobel Prize later – worker in electron-diffraction, and it was he that worked out the conformations around a benzene [sic, should be cyclohexane] ring with the chlorobenzenes [sic, should be chlorocyclohexanes], and was able to tell which of the conformations there were, and you will recall that the Nobel Prize was shared between Odd Hassel and Derek Barton at Imperial College, because he was using conformational analysis in structuring his organic syntheses.
So I had this wonderful day in Odd Hassel’s laboratory talking with Bastiansen, his assistant, and seeing how they work, and then getting on to all sorts of other things, so that was a very wonderful day in Bergen [sic]. And then the next day, Hassel was busy, so I went to see the Vigeland exhibition, a sculpture exhibition in Oslo, and then on to Sweden, where I went to Stockholm.

And in Stockholm again – I seemed to be blessed with good fortune – but I got to Stockholm and I'd found that it was very interesting in Oslo to go to the Town Hall and to see around the Town Hall, and so I went to the Town Hall in Stockholm. And there the place... No entry, it was forbidden to go in because there was an air raid practice going on, and a chap came along and said, 'You can't come here'. And I said, 'Oh, unfortunately I've come all the way from Australia to see your famous Town Hall', and, of course, Stockholm Town Hall is, as you know, architecturally very well known. So he said, 'Oh, well, if you've come that far, you must see it'. He said, 'I'm in charge of this air raid thing, and I'm empowered to let anyone in if I think it's important'. 'So', he said, 'I'll take you on a guided tour. They can get on well without me, I'm just supposed to be running it, so they can run by themselves, without me'. And so, in truth, he took me round, explained the whole thing, and then he said, 'Well, it will... I will now have to join my colleagues with the air raid practice. It will take me about an hour. Can you find something to do around... and then we'll meet back here and I'll take you to a place which you are never likely to find by yourself'.
So I readily agreed, and he came back within the hour and took me to The Golden Hind, it was called, or The Golden Stag, perhaps, and it was down in the old part of Stockholm, a superb eating-house unknown to many tourists, apparently. And he was well known because he was, turned out to be... he wasn't the Foreign Secretary, but he was in charge of the Foreign Ministry or something like that. And we had this wonderful lunch, and at about 3.30 he looked at his watch and he said, 'Well, you'll have to excuse me, because I'm catching the evening plane to Washington for an official delegation, and my wife says I have to come home to do the packing'. And he'd taken all this time to show a complete stranger from Australia around! So of course Sweden was a favourite place for me.

I then took the train down to Karlskrona, and that is the main naval base of Sweden, so I had to get permission because my sister lived on an island in the little archipelago off Karlskrona, a lovely part of the world in the Baltic. And so I had this special request to go and stay with her, and I stayed there with her and her husband and saw how she was living. And they had built a house there, and we saw the boats where they used to go fishing. He was a civil engineer in concrete, putting up a lighthouse somewhere, I think.
After that I went to Copenhagen, and again I had a contact whom I met, and was shown over Copenhagen by these people. They took me to the Glyptotek, the sculpture museum, all the castles, Amalienborg, which is a beautiful castle where the royal family live, and then of course we went up to Helsingør, which is the famous castle where Hamlet is set – Shakespeare’s Hamlet – and we just in all had a wonderful time. This was three young Danish people that I’d been put in contact with, and so that was in fact a lovely trip. And then on the fast train back, which ran on to the ferries and across Jutland to Ostend, and so back. So that was an exciting three or four weeks that I had finding out about Scandinavia.

The next vacation was the summer vacation of 1949, the so-called long vacation. And I’d heard that there was an opportunity to go as an exchange student to Germany, and this interested me for two reasons. The first was that, as I explained earlier, I had done two years of essentially schoolboy German to... as part of the degree scheme in Melbourne, but that was translation more from German into English. I could speak a little bit of German, and actually both my mother and my aunts are fluent in both German and French, as well as English, but that of course didn’t rub off on a teenage schoolboy. So I wanted to improve my German. But the other thing of course was that it was just three or four years after the end of the war, and I wanted to see what the conditions were like in Germany, and I must say it was a total revelation to me.

We crossed over from Newhaven to Dieppe. Dieppe looked totally miserable. It had been of course occupied at least twice, probably three times, first by the Germans, then by the British and Allied forces, and all through the northern parts of France it did look very poor and battered around. But that was as nothing compared to Germany.
My station was at Darmstadt, at the Technische Hochschule in Darmstadt, which is between Frankfurt and Heidelberg, towards the south of Germany. And to be frank about it, the place was totally devastated. Darmstadt is quite a large city, and for one-and-a-half or two kilometres from the centre in all directions there wasn’t a single building that was unaffected. Most were totally bombed – craters, just shells – or badly damaged, and it was really a very sobering experience to go there. And what was even more sobering was that the German student club that I’d been put in touch with, called the Wildenburgers, made me and a fellow Cambridge student members, and looked after us well. They were generous to a point, they saw that we had everything that we needed. And I then went into the lab, of course, and actually learnt X-ray crystal diffraction work there; I was taught that as a useful way of learning German in a scientific environment.

There was a lot of tennis and swimming, and I stayed with a German couple who again couldn’t have been kinder. And we also were in contact – well, it was a strange system: Darmstadt was in the German... sorry, it was in the American zone, but Frankfurt, where food was coming from, was in the British zone, so we had to go up and change zones. We got picked up by a jeep, and we got given all sorts of vouchers for getting things, and so in the event we got a lot of things which weren’t available in Germany, like coffee and tobacco and liquor at knock-down prices and so forth, which we got our total rations for, and then took them back and of course shared them as we could with our friends. But it was a wonderful experience seeing how they coped.
And you mentioned about opera. They had opera there: it seemed to me that every city, no matter how bombed, had an opera. This was not their opera house, which was hopeless, but they had it in a large hall and they put... I went to a couple of operas and I also went, I think, yes, to A Midsummer Night’s Dream in German, which was an interesting experience, and they really put... I mean, the quality of the production was good, the scenery of course was makeshift, obviously, but it was really a heart-warming experience.

Whilst we were there I decided that I would like to see a little place called Rothenburg ob der Tauber, which is a part of medieval Germany on the Romantische Strasse near Würzburg, or down south of Würzburg, further to the east from where I was. So Tony Nicholson and I thought we would try and hitchhike, but that proved very difficult because of the conditions: there were all sorts of people moving around and the troops weren’t allowed to pick up and there wasn’t much petrol, so it was difficult. But we did manage to get there and saw this old place which I’d seen an etching of in my aunt’s room and decided I would get there. And I won’t go into the details because many people have themselves been there, but it was a typical old fortified medieval German town that had preserved its character.
And the other thing perhaps I remember was a trip to Heidelberg where the Heidelberg student Ausschuss had invited us down. We went to another play down there, saw the castle and Goethe’s Romantische Strasse, the Philosopher’s Way, and so forth, and trips up the Neckar River, but it was really... we were well looked after and had a wonderful time there learning about Germans and the problems they had, and I found them to be thoroughly admirable people.

So back in Cambridge again after the long vacation, the first change was my roommate, because I'd spent the first year in college sharing with Owen Singleton, who was a geology graduate from Melbourne University. In my second year, I was to share with Ray Martin, who's my great friend and colleague from Melbourne whom I'd done a Masters degree with under JS Anderson. But again, he'd come early, and there was a month to spare, or almost a month, and so we went walking with a couple of other Australian friends in the Lake District. I doubt there was a peak or a fell or a lake or a water, as they call them, that we didn't go to. We had a marvellous time there staying at youth hostels. I was pleased to realise that my Australian Youth Hostel [sic] could be stamped there and used. And we walked around the whole place, climbed all the notable peaks, stayed at youth hostels, had a wonderful time talking with other people and, again, getting to know more about England.

Back in Cambridge the going was a bit harder, because as I’ve explained earlier, I had to alter my planned course of action because it was already pre-empted to some extent by some Russian work. But I’d devised a new scheme of boron trifluoride coordination compounds: these are compounds which are formed between two molecules which themselves are stable. You have one molecule that can accept electrons and another which can donate electrons, and they stick together in that way, so it’s making and breaking of one bond. And this is a big branch of inorganic chemistry, particularly in transition metal chemistry where ligands as they’re called, donors like ammonia, can donate four or even six loan pairs into a central metal atom which is short of electrons.
I was not interested in the transition metals so much as the organic compounds, because I had in the back of my mind that this would be relevant to Friedel-Crafts catalysis. And so I thought of things like ether, diethyl ether which is two ethyl radicals joined on to an oxygen, and the oxygen has two pairs of electrons, in fact, but it can donate one to boron trifluoride which has only six electrons, and it would like to have eight in a simple octet approach to bonding.

So certainly boron trifluoride ether was a well-known organic reagent, was used in catalysis, so I thought: I'll make some, purify it, and see if it conducts electricity. And this was the stage that I'd got to when Ray came. And he surveyed the various possibilities. Emeléus had said, ‘Find out what's going on, see what you like', and I think Bob Haszeldine made a pitch for him. But Ray didn't particularly like that branch of the work, so he said, ‘Well, frankly, I think this has got great potential. I think, you know, if you don't mind my coming in with you, there's plenty of room for more than one person'. And I was delighted because it was true – there was room for several people who had been working there. And so we formed what turned out to be a very productive team. I think we both got PhDs in record time... because we already had a Master's degree from Melbourne the rules enabled us to get a PhD, which is normally three years – we could get it in two years. And because I was maximising – and Ray did the same – holidays by being elsewhere, I calculated that I'd spent rather less than 12 months in actual time in the lab. And the reason was because as we shared a room, or a set of rooms with a double bedroom, we used to go to bed at night and talk chemistry, and we'd talk until one of us fell asleep, which was usually about three o'clock, and so we could plan how to do an experiment, how to approach it, what we would need. The big advice that was important, that Emeléus gave us, was: if you're working in the same general area, make sure that you keep the parts separate so that each of you has a separate part of work that you have done for your thesis. So we bore that in mind and carved up the field – Ray did some, I did another – but it was cognate to each other's work, and we could appreciate each other's problems and discuss the work.

So we did that, we made apparatus and did experiments. Having talked about an experiment we’d go in, do the experiment, go home, work up the results, have another conference, go in and do it... and people were amazed at the apparently short time we spent in the lab getting results of experiments which always seemed to work, and piling up huge amounts of results. But it was an interesting time, and we actually had to do some quite serious thinking about it and also some experimental design, because when you think about conductivity you have to find out how to change the electrical conduction which you are measuring into the amount that the compound is ionising. When the two compounds come together they don’t stay as covalent – there’s a redistribution of the electric charge, and that sometimes means that an ion splits off a charged particle, and that’s of course the interesting part for organic chemistry.
And so we had to find out to what extent this would happen. And it happened, we found out, anywhere between about one part in 10,000 and 100%. So it was... the 100% was with water, actually, but that was a large range. But when you get down to the detailed theory, which I won’t attempt to describe here, you find that as well as the conductivity you need the density of the liquid, and the viscosity, and with these you can do a temperature plot, you can get activation energies out, you can work out with theories that we developed what the percentage of ionisation was to see if it might be useful. And, moreover, you could electrolyse the compound and have an anode and a cathode department, and analyse what was in them to see what the ions were. So it was really quite an important advance in things.
Now, two points in this. The first is that people were very surprised that these compounds actually conducted electricity, though they shouldn’t have been, and the second was that in the ones that were highly ionised, some very interesting new experiments could be done.

It comes really as little surprise that if you put two compounds together and they start sharing electrons to form a new bond, that the electric balance within the molecule is altered. And I say it should come as no surprise because a very famous experiment which was done here in Leeds, actually, by Joseph Priestley when he was minister in City Centre at Mill Hill chapel there, he was doing experiments all the while and apart from some that are very well known, one that is perhaps less well known is that he succeeded in isolating several – I think about half a dozen – completely new gases which had not been isolable before because people were working in aqueous water-like solutions, and these compounds decompose in water.
And Priestley said, 'I wonder if they would decompose in mercury?' Mercury, as you know, is a liquid from thermometers and so forth – we know this – it is a liquid down to -40 degrees, and I don't have to say Celsius or Fahrenheit because -40 happens to be the same number in both Celsius and Fahrenheit. But anyway, that is a liquid at room temperature, and so he collected the liquids that he was... the gases that he was making, not under water but over mercury, and then he could handle these gases. And two of the gases that he made in that way were ammonia, NH3, and hydrogen chloride gas, HCl, another molecule.
And what Faraday did... sorry, Priestley did was, when he mixed these he just expected they would float around, perhaps, or perhaps interact to give a new compound. What happened totally astounded him. The pressure dropped to zero, and there was a white cloud, and just some crystals formed on the outside... on the side of the glass. And what had happened of course is, he'd made ammonium chloride, because NH3, covalent molecule, HCl, put them together, the hydrogen gets transferred to the nitrogen, ammonium with a positive charge, chlorine – they are ionic, they form a crystalline solid, and it's there. So that he discovered that by working under mercury you could do many experiments that you couldn't possibly do in aqueous solutions.
So people shouldn't perhaps have been surprised that this would go on to a greater or lesser extent, and water, which in many ways is very similar to ammonia, is a good case in point. What happens there is, I found, because this was part of my experiment – I'm keeping off the parts that Ray did – but if you put hydrogen, dihydrogen oxide, that is to say water, with boron trifluoride, you form a very unstable liquid, but if you put two molecules of water you form a very stable liquid. That seemed very strange: why should the two-to-one complex be more stable? But when you think of ionisation it becomes obvious: what happens in the first place is, you've got H2O coming onto BF3, you've got a molecule which then tries to split apart. If it tries to do the ammonia trick it gives H3O+, and BF3OH-. Well, I'm sorry – I must backtrack on that, because I'm making a mistake. It would give H+ and BF3OH- and the H+ by itself is very unstable; it can take up another water molecule to form H3O+. So that's then two molecules of water, and that is the stable one. But the interesting thing about it is that both of those compounds, both very reactive, in the liquid phase are ionised, and the two-to-one is the stable compound. Interestingly, when you crystallise this compound... later experiments have shown – experiments done by groups in Oxford – that in fact it is a molecular compound in the solid state.

Well, of course I have to mention that as well as the research work that I’ve just been talking about, Ray and I decided to go to some other lectures. And the one that stands out pre-eminently in my mind, and I’m sure in Ray’s, was... we attended a course on quantum mechanics by Dirac, Paul Dirac, an eminent theoretical physicist, an other-worldly character in many ways but a superb lecturer.
And our technique was the following: Dirac gave two or three lectures a week for two terms so it was a long lecture course, and he lectured sticking very closely to his famous textbook Quantum Mechanics. So we bought a copy of the textbook and listened to what Dirac had to say. He was masterly at putting his ideas across; everything that he said sounded eminently right. And it was of course couched in fairly difficult mathematics – at least, difficult for us. We had both been through pure mathematics third year at Melbourne whilst we were doing a Master’s degree, so we did have quite a good mathematical background, but Dirac was definitely the next stage as far as we were concerned. And we, I think, calculated at one stage that for every one hour of Paul Dirac’s lectures we spent three hours back in our rooms in college going through what he actually meant, and what it meant, and whether we understood it.
So it was a big intellectual effort on our part, but it also taught me, I think, that whilst I learnt a lot from it, that would not be a direction that I would want to go in my research. At one stage I had thought maybe I’d do theoretical chemistry rather than practical chemistry – I realised that it would be better for me to be a practical chemist who had a good theoretical background rather than to attempt to try and advance the theory. So it was a very stimulating and productive course of lectures from that point of view.

Now, at the end of each term we went on vacation. In the Easter vacation we went to Norway, skiing; I’ve mentioned that I had met Kirsten, a Norwegian lass, and she and her cousin and Ray and I went up to a little village, I suppose one could call it, called Reimegrend, up in the mountains between Bergen and Oslo. Snow conditions were superb, and we had a wonderful time up there. They were staying at a different pensionnat about a kilometre away, but we skied together each day and had meals together.

The other holiday was, I think, what one could reasonably call the trip of a lifetime. I had arranged with Barry Dawson to buy an old Alvis car, a 1935 Alvis – I think it was called a Speed 20 – of which they only built about 1000 in Coventry, and this was a 1935 Alvis, an open-top tourer – a very snazzy little car.
Barry couldn’t come on the trip, but Ray and I joined up with two of our other Australian friends Dal and Don Swaine from Melbourne, and my former roommate Owen Singleton, so the five of us piled into this car and toured Europe. We’d worked out a general plan that we were going down through France pretty fast, because that was accessible at other times, then down into Italy, heading for Rome. It was 1950, which is Holy Year, a factor of ten, and Dal and Don were both sincere practising Roman Catholics. Ray and I were not really very active religiously at this stage, nor was Owen, but for Dal and Don it was really a pilgrimage, which was one good thing because on the way down we stayed at a succession of convents which were all geared up for pilgrims going down to Rome for the Holy Year, which is one where the great door of St Peter’s is open and the Pope comes in audience. And that was one of the great high points, of course, of the trip for us.
But there were many escapades we had on the way – we saw a lot of Europe, both the art galleries around Florence, Pisa, of course, Rome itself, and to us Rome was a magical city; it had... this was the first time that it occurred for me... it really has every age of history in it: there are the Roman Forum and the remains, the Colosseum and so forth, which... all the oldest remains were several hundred BC, through the Roman Empire period, and then of course there was the Mediaeval part with Michelangelo and the statues and then St Peter’s Cathedral, the incredible paintings, Sistine Chapel... you know, one could talk for hours about Rome by itself...
And then in the modern age, though the architecture might be seen as a little Brutalistic now in the Mussolini phase, the clean lines of the Italian architecture in the modern city were really very elegant. So we had a great time there.
Then we crossed over... no, then we went down to Vesuvius, and being Australians used to bush-walking and so forth, Vesuvius was a challenge. So we went to the top of Vesuvius with a guide, looked down into the crater, which itself was an amazing experience to see this smouldering thing, and we could pick out the sulphur crystals around the rim and the various types of basalt and lava which had been coming out. And of course when we came down again we went to Pompeii and saw the ruins which were being excavated at that time.
Then across the Apennines, up quickly through some of the old cities which I won’t mention in detail, but we were heading for Via... for Venice. We had to park the car, of course, because there were no cars in Venice, but again, an incomparable place that one could talk for hours about. But we had a great time for three or four days really seeing the churches and the art galleries and the canals, and we walked miles along the canal edges and trips in the gondolas and the ferries and so forth. Then back through Milan and up into the Italian Alps. An incredible thunderstorm in the Alps, I remember, which completely drenched us because we were camping when we couldn’t get into a youth hostel.
Then into Switzerland, and again as Australians, the mountains there were magnificent for us. The highest mountain in Australia is 7000-odd feet, Mount Kosciuszko. These were 14,000, 15,000 feet, and they looked it – they were impressive. So we went to the Matterhorn and saw that, and then down the valley of the Inn, up Ötztal, then to Innsbruck, which we certainly didn’t do justice to. There was a festival, the Innsbruck Festival, the Mozart Festival was on, and my mouth watered as I looked at the programmes of things that we couldn’t attend, but we had a good time there. I could add parenthetically here that although the Alvis was a smart-looking car, it wasn’t in particularly good shape. It had a propensity for breaking down quite badly, so we got quite expert at doing car mechanics and mending on the way. But the worst thing that happened was that as it had been built for speed, it didn’t have a fan-belt on it that was geared to the engine revs; it relied on the speed of motion to have the radiator cooled, and so in the hot Mediterranean climate, particularly in traffic jams and in cities, it would boil. And so we had a great problem with trying to start the car again, trying to push it, and wherever we stopped we gathered crowds because it was this extraordinary car, we were growing beards at this stage... so it was a pretty wild expedition altogether.
Anyway, from Innsbruck we went across into Germany to Berchtesgaden, to the so-called Eagle’s Nest that Hitler – well, actually it was Himmler had built as a 50th birthday present, I think, for Hitler – he didn’t often stay there, but it’s an iconic building and fortress built in the mountain, and you have to get into it through security places, but that was a good place to see and a marvellous view over the lake from the top. And then through Munich and up through Germany and home through Belgium. So that was a five-week trip which we really had a marvellous time on.

Back in Cambridge it was the third year for me and I had, at the end of the last term, got my PhD by examination. Fred Fairbrother from Manchester came over and he seemed quite pleased with the work and Emeléus, took us all out for a beer afterwards so I took it that I had passed. In the third year I decided – I was a post-doctoral Fellow now – to join Lennard-Jones’ group. I’d had several conversations with Sir John, he was like Emeléus, a charming man, a brilliant theoretician and he seemed very interested in the work that I’d been doing. And he was anxious to build up contacts between the theoretical side and the practical side, and particularly with the interhalogens – he thought that was a good place to begin work.
And he explained to me, I think very reasonably, that as I only wanted to be there for a year, it might well be that I wouldn’t get any publishable work out of it, but I said that was all right by me. I just wanted to get a flavour of working in his seminar and finding out a little bit about theoretical chemistry from his perspective. And I would probably then go on to do practical work.
And it turned out to be a very useful experience for me. I went to some more lectures by Lennard-Jones, but in the seminar there were about eight of us, I suppose, mostly they were mathematicians and theoretical physicists. John Pople was in the group and he would help me out if I got into difficulties from time to time. But I gradually got the hang of things and it was at a time when Lennard-Jones and then followed by Longuet-Higgins, who came after he had left to take over a vice-chancellorship – they were working on molecular orbital theory and that melded nicely into the concept of multi-centred bonding. I’ll be talking more about that when I talk about my later work, but the theoretical basis for my practical work was laid by that year as a post-doc in Lennard-Jones’ seminar.

I’ve already talked about a couple of big long vacations in Germany and the European car trip. The third long vacation whilst I was in Cambridge involved an extraordinary trip that I was able to make to the north of Norway in Lappland and to sketch the background I can tell you first of all of who was involved in this and then what happened. Ray Martin and I, who were sharing rooms in Cambridge, had already been to Norway more than once for skiing and so forth. I, as you know, had a fiancée there. She had a sister. The sister had a fiancé so that was the nucleus of the group and one of Kirsten’s friends was a companion for Ray as well, Karen Peach. She joined us. It was a group of six people.
To put the trip in perspective, I have to say that as far as I was concerned it counted as a real expedition. Lappland in the very north of Norway is a very isolated place. To emphasise that let me remind you that Norway is a long thin country. Up the coastline it is as far from the south of Norway to the north, which is the Russian border, as it is from London down to the south of Nigeria. It’s a big country. The second thing is that it crosses right over the top of Europe. It doesn’t go north south. It goes north east right over the top of Sweden, right over the top of Finland to the Russian border and at the Russian border if you look at the longitude it is on the same longitude as Kiev and Alexandria or Cairo in Europe. So it goes the whole way. The other thing obviously about the Norwegian coastline is the superb scenery of fjords, big glaciated gashes into the country which sometimes go so far in that they’re only 10 or 15 miles from the Swedish border.
So how do you get up there and how do you cross when you get there? In those days – and it’s very different nowadays of course – there were a few mountain huts and there were a few telegraph line workers’ huts but by and large there was just a very rough broken track across a land called Finnmarksvidda which was traditionally populated by the Lapps, the Sami people with their reindeer herds and they wandered over these vast uplands. A vidda means an upland plateau.

There was a lot of marshy country and importantly huge mosquitoes. I said to Kirsten, 'Don't worry about mosquitoes, I know all about them'. You don't know about north Norway's mosquitoes because what happens is of course that with the reindeer moss being covered by snow for several months of the year, then the sun comes out and it's way past the Arctic Circle so it just stews in the sunlight for 24 hours a day. The mosquitoes love it and they grow accordingly. They are looking for food and what better than half a dozen idiotic travellers. So we had nets. We had to use mosquito oil and we found that when we had to trade with the Lapps they weren't interested in money. They could get their own food. What they wanted was mosquito oil because they were plagued by this as well, and what we used was called DIMP, it's dimethyl phthalate was the mosquito repellent of the day.

It was, as I indicated, above the Arctic Circle. The north of Norway is north of Greenland, clear north of the north of Alaska. It really is far north, and the North Cape is of course the most northerly part of Europe, and the ship had to go around that and on further east. So we travelled up. We had to take our tents with us. Odd, Kirsten’s sister’s fiancé, took a fishing rod because he fancied trying to fish up there in the wonderful rivers that they had, and we had to take food for the journey. So it was quite an expedition and we had pretty heavy packs to go on.

We went up on the coastal steamer and that took, I think, about five days to get up and then we saw the North Cape which is a wonderful... escarpment or cliff at the north of Europe. We saw huge glaciers on the way up, vast mountains, these deep fjords. It was beautiful scenery. Then we went down Porsanger Fjord down into the heart of Finnmarksvidda, took a bus to Kautokeino [sic] and that was the end of civilisation. Kautokeino [sic] was in those days a Lapp village. There was a Christian church there. I think it was an Orthodox Russian church actually, but it was a small white church. There was, interestingly enough, a folk museum of Lapp culture and their colourful garments and so forth and our first job was to negotiate with people in Kautokeino [sic] to have a Lapp with a canoe and an outboard motor to drive us up the river so that we didn’t have to walk the first part of the trip to a place where he could put us down and then we were on our own and we would have to walk across Lappland.
So we found a Lapp and we got boated up there and started off on our trip. The trip, as I say, was on a rough track. Occasionally it would cross a river but there was no bridge. The rivers were not large, at least the first ones that we came to were not large, but they were active streams. It was of course light for 24 hours in the day. The mosquitoes were true to form and I have to say, if I can be indelicate, that going to the loo out in the open with mosquitoes buzzing round your bottom was a tricky thing. It was a two-man or two-girl affair with one waving the mosquitoes away whilst the other one performed. So it was an interesting experience to be there to say the least.

One of the first things that we noticed on the little track that we were following was that every couple of hundred metres there was a post exactly one meter high cut off at that level and I said, 'What on earth's that?' and Odd said, 'That's the Germans'. At the end of the war they were retreating from Norway, which was occupied. They were concerned of course about the Russians who were advancing through Finland and Northern Russia. They were concerned about a pincer movement coming down through Norway and so they cut off all the telegraph communications, and religiously one can say, at one metre high the whole of the way along this telegraph line, until we left the line and did something else, every post was cut off. I'll just add at this point that they did more than that in their retreat. They totally devastated the whole of the north of Norway, every town, every village, every little local factory that was weaving and so forth, every point of habitation, every quay was wrecked, damaged, burnt. There was not a thing. The people who were there, and we're talking about perhaps 60,000 or 70,000 people were just displaced several hundred kilometres south. It was a devastating time and that was not so very long after we were there... before we were there. That was obviously happening in 1944/45 and we were there in the early 1950s.

So I’ll just add one or two more things to that. We had decided to walk from Kautokeino to Karasjok [sic – should be Karasjok to Kautkeino] but we weren’t able to get that far where we hadn’t... we’d underestimated the problem. So in the end we had to cross a large river called the Alta River and by that time we were on a main road on the other side of Lappland that was going up to Alta which was a port on a fjord north. How to cross? We didn’t know whether to go north or south of this river. There was no bridge. As we were standing there pondering, two Lapp women appeared and said, in their own language presumably, ‘We can take you across’, and we didn’t know how to recompense them but, as I told you, mosquito oil was the currency there and we had some, and so they had two canoes and they rowed us across. I don’t think they had outboard motors and the stream was fairly fast flowing so it was quite an exercise because not only were there six people, but there were six huge haversacks which were a little bit lighter because we’d eaten some of the food but they were still pretty impressive.
So there was like quite a lot to transport over but we managed that and we managed by sign language to ask whether we headed north or south on this road to get to the nearest village and we worked out that it would in fact be... to go north and to travel or to walk for about five or six kilometres to the township that we were heading for. Then we caught a bus and we went to Alta, caught a bus down to the head of the railway line. This was already a two-day journey back on land to the head of the rail line. It goes a bit further north now but we then picked up a train which took us back to Trondheim. By this time the Norwegians in the party, that was my fiancée, Kirsten, Odd and Kirsten’s sister, Aud, and the friend Karen Peach they, of course, were all working people. They had to get back to Bergen. Their holiday was finished.
Ray and I being Cambridge research students had a bit more time so they took the coastal steamer from Trondheim back to Bergen. Ray and I continued down by bus to Jotunheimen.

Jotunheimen is a wonderful part in the vidda, the mountain ranges between Bergen and Oslo, the one that the Bergensbanen that we were talking about crosses a bit further south, and Ray and I thought this is great walking country. We’ll go down there and we’ll do some walking, which we did and we crossed Jotunheimen doing some walking, crossing a glacier. We actually saw a Cambridge expedition there where they were burrowing through the front face of a glacier, along the bottom and going in 300 or 400 yards to try and work out what was happening inside the glacier as it moved down the mountain, and they allowed us to come in there and we have some photos of that. So that was an interesting experience but that’s a brief account of our crossing of Finnmarksvidda in the north of Norway.

[Q] Well, it seems to me, Norman, I think your period at Cambridge was inspirational in so many different ways, but how would you sum up your experiences? I mean, what value did you take away from Cambridge?
There are several things, one has to say. The first is the atmosphere of the place – one had this feeling that everything was going on around, there were world-famous people that one was meeting all the time, talking about their work, being involved in their work. And one really felt that this was a place where everything was happening and I wanted to take part in it and contribute as well. But, more specifically, I got a feeling from Harry Emeléus of how to tackle preparative chemical research. My work in Melbourne had been… on solid state chemistry, a totally different field and was looking at the properties of nonstoichiometric solids. In Cambridge it was much more preparative work in the lab, but I was preparing compounds and then studying their physical properties as I’ve explained, particularly with relevance to catalysis. But I picked up many techniques there; had good interaction with others in the laboratory and, of course, in the final year with Lennard-Jones, I... indirectly, I learnt some theory as well. So I would say it was a very rounded experience which was an enormously fine basis to build a productive career on.

Now, when I left Cambridge, I’d, of course, thought what I might do. Originally, I had planned, I think, in my own mind, perhaps to do a post-doc in America for a couple of years, go back to Australia, get a lectureship there and have my career in Australia. But I had, as I’ve indicated, met Kirsten Rydland from Bergen; we became engaged and so it was rather a bigger step to think of going away, and particularly for her. And so I looked to spend a little bit more time in England and I was fortunate that I had the possibility of going to Harwell, the Atomic Energy Research Establishment which is about 20 miles south of Oxford.

After the war, in England the people who’d been working on the nuclear power and the nuclear weapons, came back and it was clear that in terms of power generation, nuclear energy would be a very good way forward, for at least some of the power. And so Sir John Cockcroft, who is an eminent physicist, was put in charge of building up the Atomic Energy Research Establishment to research a British presence in that. They built a graphite low energy-powered pile... GLEEP, it was called, Graphite Low Energy Experimental Pile, the acronym for that and that was the first nuclear reactor that had been built in Europe as distinct from America.
And then later that produced... a power producer at Windscale and that was the first commercially-produced electricity, I think anywhere in the world, in fact; and the British nuclear energy programme began at that point.

Now the background, of course, to being able to achieve this was to have the facilities which had to be built and my old research supervisor from Melbourne, Stuart Anderson, was the deputy head of the chemistry department there. And he had suggested that I apply for a senior Harwell research fellowship; it was a post-doctoral fellowship; it was well-paid and was a very free-ranging fellowship, and I could do whatever research I wanted. So I applied for this and fortunately got such a fellowship, went over to Harwell and established myself there. My overall aim was to pick up the techniques of radiochemistry which I thought might be useful in some of the work that I was doing. And so part of the work that I did was actually to join the Isotope School and learn how to handle safely radioactive materials – how to make measurements; the instrumentation and so forth. So that was another technique, if you like, in my armoury for doing research.

As far as actual novel research goes, it was not particularly productive, I think, for a reason which is a little hard to say politely. But the fact is that I was put in a group of physical chemistry whereas I was an inorganic chemist and the head of the physical group was rather annoyed, I think, that he was foisted off with someone who just wanted to do inorganic chemical experiments with isotopes. And so… though, I didn’t find this out till later when I put in requests for chemicals and instruments and things to do the work, it took inordinately long because the supply chain had a weak link in it, would be the politest way of saying it.
However, I did do some work and some of the work that I started doing was to make use of, interestingly, a non-radioactive isotope – deuterium. Clearly heavy water is an important component of thinking in atomic reactors for moderating the nuclear reactors. So there was a plentiful supply of D2O, deuterium oxide, heavy water, which was not very generally available and was certainly enormously expensive whereas at Harwell there was a lot of it. So I used this and I used the fact also that boron trifluoride was an important component – I needn’t go into the details, but boron was also a moderator for the pile, so that was… the boron isotopes absorbed neutrons so that was one way of controlling things, so there was some boron trifluoride around as well.
So I put these two together and made BF3 di (deuterium oxide), the heavy water equivalent of the H2O compound I was talking about earlier. And by comparing those we got a lot of extra information about the systems. That bit, I think, was about all that came out of it, but for me it was an important couple of years. 

Whilst I was there I also got married to Kirsten; we got married in Oxford at the Registry Office there. Ray Martin was my best man and Kirsten was staying, at that stage, with a colleague of mine in Harwell, Gwyneth Wayne as she then was, one of Ronny Bell’s PhD students from Oxford, and she later, interestingly married a professor in Copenhagen, Nord, so she became Gwyneth Nord and became a reader of chemistry in Copenhagen.
So, we were married and, in fact, the following year our first child was born, Karen, and it was clear that I would need to look for a more permanent position than the one that I had. And at that stage the University of Nottingham was newly formed and I applied for a lectureship there and was successful in that application.

It might just be worth reminiscing for a moment – when I left Melbourne in August of 1948, there were in England, 11 universities. That’s a carefully designed phrase – it’s England, not the United Kingdom, so that excludes Scotland, but there were 11 universities which were autonomous universities. The 12th one took its charter and became independent by the time I’d landed in Colombo and the 12th one was Nottingham which before had been the Nottingham University College and a distinguished university college, but it was part of the University of London.
So that was the beginning of a trend in the late ‘40s and early ‘50s to found new universities which had been university colleges. Another one was in Leicester, for example, followed soon after, and there were other examples. But I did mention this to get philosophical for a moment. Now there aren’t 12 universities in England, there are 124 and more, of course, in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. It was sometimes fashionable, I should say, it was sometimes fashionable to deride new universities, but I don’t do that. I think that universities are an important concept – the more of them you have, of course, the more their nature changes. So one is not saying that there are 124 Cambridges or Oxfords or, indeed, any other sort of university; the new universities have to find their own way. Some will be successful, others will be less successful.
But if now, in 2011, we look back to 1951 which we’re talking about in Harwell and going up to Nottingham, one has to say immediately that many of the universities that have founded in the last 50 years are superb institutions, doing first-rate work. They are real universities, some of the best in the world, but some people chose to deride them when they were first formed. It’s just a philosophical point, but I make that about Nottingham because in Nottingham – and one of the things which attracted me to staying in England, was the excitement of an expanding tertiary education environment. 

People often ask me, coming from Australia, why did you come to England? The climate, blah, blah, blah, and so forth… And part of the answer is, of course, my family situation – by this time I was married to a Norwegian girl, we took holidays in Norway. The other was, I love the cultural environment in being able to move around Europe and seeing so many different backgrounds. But the predominant one really was the intellectual excitement of being in a place where the tertiary education horizons were expanding so rapidly.

Now, in Nottingham, again I was fortunate – I should be blessed with good fortunes that go around, but in Nottingham, the head of the inorganic department was Cliff Addison, Cyril Clifford Addison. He’d been a teacher before the war, but set up a research group in Nottingham, and interestingly, he was one of the first people in England to be studying, what in Germany is called wasserähnlich lösungen, water-like solvents, solvents which are liquid at room temperature, but which have the ability to ionise the things that are dissolved in them, like water and ammonia. We’ve already rehearsed this because that was in the area that I was working in in Cambridge in the halogen chemistry and, indeed in the boron trifluoride work as well.
Cliff Addison chose to work in dinitrogen tetroxide which is a very reactive brown liquid, hard to handle until you learn how to do it, but has some very interesting chemistry associated with it.

In science, one often does experiments for the excitement of finding something, curiosity if you like to use the word, but you don’t necessarily have a practical end in mind. I firmly believe that in universities one should be doing blue skies research, research that is there because you want to find out more fundamentally about things in nature. These things that are discovered may have applications; they are very important, but, by and large, the applications, in my view, are better done by people in industry who are geared to applying what is known. It is a symbiotic thing and, of course, there is no such thing as a pure research, an applied research. As George Porter once said, there is pure science… no, there is applied science and not-yet applied science.
But the idea, I think, is encapsulated best by Derek Birchall. He was a very distinguished research scientist in ICI and Derek said, ‘Because of research which we are doing today, the future is not what it was’. You don’t know how you are changing the future by the curiosity-led research that you’re doing today.

Cliff Addison, as I said, was working on dinitrogen tetroxide. It so turned out that a decade later, when the Apollo programme was being developed to put a man on the moon and return him safely to earth – in Kennedy’s phrase – one of the important things was, how do you make sure that the rockets fire when you want them to. You can’t strike a match in outer space, electric sparks aren’t necessarily reliable or desirable. What you need is what is called a hypergolic fuel. Hypergolic fuel is a fuel of two components which, when put together, immediately catch fire. And dinitrogen tetroxide is one component of such a fuel – it is actually the fuel of choice. When you see a rocket blast off from the moon, as we’ve all seen on television, what happens is, that dinitrogen tetroxide is mixed with a derivative of hydrazine which is itself a derivative of two ammonias stuck together. There are methylhydrazines and then we put dinitrogen tetroxide and our methylhydrazine together, there’s an explosion, a rocket, if you like, and it blasts off. No matches, no spark – it happens every time because that is basic chemistry. Now that was clearly far from Cliff Addison’s view – he was trying to make new compounds by using dinitrogen tetroxide. But the physical background work that he’d done was enormously useful.

In some of the work that we were doing, also had this unexpected consequence with the Apollo mission. And that is, with my access to heavy water, I thought I would test the conduction mechanisms that had been proposed for sulphuric acid by Ron Gillespie and others, and he got it absolutely right, of course, but I would check what would happen with heavy water sulphuric acid. And also anhydrous phosphoric acid... and anhydrous phosphoric acid, which I now want to say something about – is a very interesting compound. It is a very syrupy compound, its viscosity is very much greater... like treacle, really, and... or glycerol. And it has some curious properties when it melts, which I don’t want to elaborate on now, but by measuring the properties of H3PO4 phosphoric acid and D3PO4, heavy phosphoric acid, Alan Thompson, one of my graduate students in Nottingham and I, were able to establish that the conduction there went by a proton switch mechanism like it does in sulphuric acid and in water itself. The ions don’t actually move through the solution, they are working by proton switch mechanism. The detailed physical properties that we found out – the melting point of the compound, about 40 degrees, the viscosity, the density, all of these humdrum properties, we had to measure during the course of this work... and the viscosity... and they became important for the fuel cells which generated the electricity onboard the spacecrafts. I don’t want to go into fuel cells, but they need, as part of their component, phosphoric acid or some other well-conducting liquid and this is part of the fuel cell that was used.

I’ve already briefly mentioned that I was doing work on heavy water and logs of phosphoric acid, sulphuric acid and so forth. Another theme that I thought of, which you will understand was very much related to the periodic table, is that boron is the lightest element in group three – or group 13 in the modern nomenclature of the periodic table. Next below that is aluminium and I’ve already mentioned that aluminium chloride and Friedel–Crafts catalysts were important components in my thinking a couple of years earlier. Boron, aluminium... gallium comes next, then indium and thallium. Very little chemistry was known about gallium, indium and thallium in the 1950s so I thought that would be an interesting field to develop.
I started with gallium, which is a very important element, in fact, for a variety of reasons. The first one is that it was discovered in, I think, 1875 by Lecoq de Boisbaudran who owned, or his family owned some of the best vineyards in the Cognac region so he was not short of money. He chose to use it by being an independent scientist; he was interested in spectroscopy; he discovered gallium.

And gallium and the next element in the periodic table, germanium, which was discovered about the same time, are important. Because in building up the theory of chemistry, the seminal idea is the periodic table of the elements. There were many people who put their mind to this and many partial developments, but the one which really hit the jackpot was Dmitri Mendeleev who, working in Leningrad, came up with this idea as a teaching aid, actually, just up… he came to it from his teaching of chemistry. He arranged the elements in the order of atomic weights. It’s been modified since, but that’s good enough for the present time. He did something more – he didn’t arrange them in a way which made chemical sense. He also said, the only way to make the known 63 elements, in those days, fit was to leave spaces otherwise the natural chemistry would not fall out. So he left spaces, and he did more. He said, this first space which he called eka-alluminium – ‘the next one after aluminium’ – is gallium. He predicted, did Mendeleev, what the properties of… and if you look at what Mendeleev predicted and what Lecoq de Boisbaudran found, it is just astonishing. The melting point, the liquid range, the valency, the chemical compounds, the stable oxide element... it was astonishing. And he did the same trick with germanium which was the next element in the periodic table that he’d left a gap for. And that really, more than anything else, was the seal of the periodic table: to be able to predict.

Someone said, Kitaigorodskii, I think it was, in Russia, he said there are three sorts of experiments. The third class theory explains, the second class theory forbids, a first class theory predicts and that’s what Mendeleev did.

And in my view, the most astonishing development of chemistry, as a theoretical concept, is the realisation in the 19th century that absolutely every physical thing in the universe is composed of atoms. Whether it is a star or a plant or your brain or the light-producing materials, whatever, it’s composed of atoms. There are only a limited number of atoms, 92 of them… I said 61 before, but now there are known to be 92 in... occurring naturally, and man, as nuclear theory has progressed, has made transuranium elements as well; but sticking with what occurs in nature, there are these 90-odd elements which are all built on a very simple pattern, which we’ll come back to later, I think. But there is a little kernel in the middle called the nucleus which has a positive charge composed, roughly speaking, of protons and neutrons and around that is a cloud of electrons. That’s the model and by following through chemistry and physics you can get the model and, of course, in modern terms, they go deeper and deeper into the atom, but as far as chemists are concerned, that is a huge generalisation which is not, I think, well enough understood by people in general, that everything around them is composed of atoms. And by manipulating atoms one makes new compounds and those new compounds can have new… the colours of flowers – how does the plant make these colours? Anything that you’d like to think of is composed of atoms and one of the important applications of chemistry is to find uses for the things.

I was very lucky in my first year to have as a graduate student Ken Wade. He was my first PhD. Up until now everything that I’ve been talking about has been done in principle under supervision; I was learning my trade; I was doing original work, of course, and I was given a free hand by my supervisors, but essentially, it was guided research and I benefited by that. Now I was the boss; I had to have some ideas to suggest to other people to work on. Ken Wade was my first graduate student and you will know, Brian, that Ken has made an enormous contribution to several areas of chemistry, not the least in boron hydrides which we’ll be saying more about later, and the rules that enable you to deduce quite rapidly and quickly and simply what the structures... and they’re pretty weird structures, some of them... but Wade’s Rules are very valuable.
Now, Ken came to me and we started working, not on boron trifluoride, but on boron trichloride and tribromide and then, missing out aluminium because that was well studied, on gallium halides. And Ken was working with me on gallium halide coordination compounds. We did some nice work on that, a lot of publications as well as I’d got with Ray Martin in the boron trifluoride work.

And then in the next year I got two further graduate students – Ian Worrall and Peter Perkins – both great chaps, both good chemists. With Ian Worrall, I got on to the lower valence gallium compounds, which I don't want to expand, but we used Raman spectroscopy, courtesy of Len Woodward in Oxford for some of that work, and we were doing the conductivity experiments as well. With Pete Perkins I started something new. I thought if we want to understand the properties of these coordination compounds that we've been talking about, we need to know something about their thermochemistry.
As I explained earlier, you can make and break one bond – what happens to the energy of formation when you add a donor to an accepter and form a coordination compound? Now there's some tricky theoretical work that one has to do and I'm going to skip over that at the moment, but the principle thing is, I said to Pete, what we need to do is to design a calorimeter where we can study the heat of formation of coordination compounds. And we can then get some idea of the strength of donor-accepter bonds and the energetics of the process. And as these were, of course, fairly reactive compounds, obviously the reaction calorimeter that we made had to have particular properties. I don't want to go into the details of the construction, but it was a very neat piece of work that Peter Perkins did. He carried on in this work when he was at Sheffield and, in fact, he joined me later in Newcastle, but then was turning more and more to theoretical work. And when he went to a chair in Glasgow to Strathclyde, he, in fact, was by that stage, completely theoretical and made some important contributions there.

So by this stage I had a nucleus of research workers, they were very productive, highly motivated, we had a great time together at a very useful lab. But then a new event occurred and that was, because of the growth of Nottingham University, after its foundation as an independent university in 1948, it, of course, expanded. And with the expansion came lack of space. Fortunately Sir Jesse Boot, who was the principal of Boots, the chemist, had his factory for making pharmaceuticals just down by the Trent, and he gave a huge tract of land at Highfields – you will remember University Park, and the university could expand there from the original buildings into more salubrious accommodation. In fact, I was doing work in temporary huts. The temporary huts were only finally removed a few years ago, in fact, but they served a valuable purpose. But in amongst building up a graduate school and designing lecture courses with Cliff Addison – and Eric Addison then joined us as well – there was a new project and that was the new chemistry building.
That was built under the architect, Sir Basil Spence, who had some interesting design concepts which were incorporated into the building. And that building, I think, came on stream in 1960.
[Q] 1960, Norman.
1960, yes, that's true. So, for 1957, 1958, 1959 there was building and designing and so forth, and Cliff and I had a good time working out laboratory designs, practical work designs, where the research workers went and so forth. And that building, as far as the inorganic is concerned, followed closely on the designs that we had. On the physical chemistry side, Dan Eley was developing his group there, he'd come from Bristol and he was the professor of physical chemistry, and Freddie King who's a distinguished organic chemist left to go into industry and his place was taken by Alan Johnson as the professor of organic chemistry.
But one interesting feature of the chemistry department was that all branches of chemistry were taught equally – inorganic, organic and physical. A third, a third, a third, which was quite unusual in those days. Each had a professor in the end as head because Cliff Addison was promoted to... from reader to a professor, and so there were three independent research groups, but the undergraduate programme was developed in a coordinated way and each part of chemistry had a fair swipe at the course work.

[Q] Well, it’s interesting, you’ve obviously got a great… your first formative years at Nottingham, but what was going on outside Nottingham?
That I was involved in?
[Q] Yes, absolutely.
Yes. Well, I think the first is that with the growing number of publications which were coming out, I obviously became known outside Nottingham and even outside the UK. I was active in attending conferences and in this general period, and we’re now talking the back end of the mid to late 50s, several things happened which I think are important. The first one was that there is an organisation called IUPAC, the International Union of Pure And Applied Chemistry which was formed as a non-governmental organisation of chemists to do several things to have a uniform nomenclature, so chemists in all languages around the world were speaking the same language, meaning the same thing, also deciding on the units, also deciding on best values for things if there were constants of nature and so forth, and applications in applied chemistry, analytical chemistry, medicinal chemistry and so forth.
Now the area that I became involved in obviously was inorganic chemistry and the Commission… I should also say that the actual work of the IUPAC was done in Commissions which were constituted of experts who could contribute to a particular task or problem. And then they reported to Bureau and Bureau had an Executive Council. But I was involved first in the inorganic area in the atomic weights.

Now we’ve talked a lot about atoms and from Dalton’s time when it was generally recognised following in that materials in the real world were formed of atoms. He also said that atoms were unchangeable, which, of course, has since been modified because of radioactivity, and he also said that they had a characteristic weight. Each atom of an element had a characteristic weight. So the concept of atomic weights was born.
But the problem was that there were several views... as to what the actual weights were. An atom is so small, minutely inconceivably small that you can’t weigh it by putting it on a balance. You have to find ways of doing it, and, in fact, until moderately recently, you couldn’t weigh individual atoms or find out what their mass was. You could only say, this is twice as heavy as that or 50 times as heavy. And so the problem was, what do you use as a base? And, unfortunately, different countries used different things – some used hydrogen because it was the lightest element, so you could count hydrogen as one, and then you found that lithium was six times heavier and carbon was 12 times heavier and oxygen 16 times as heavy, and you could call those atomic weights. Or, because oxygen combined with so many other elements and you could characterise them well, oxygen was thought to be a useful one. Oxygen equals 16. But then, unfortunately, a thing called isotopes was found by Aston, working in England, he found that… and JJ Thomson’s technique is what he used... that simple compounds, sometimes… or simple elements... were composed of more than one isotope. Isotope means occupying the same place in the periodic table. So it was an atom of oxygen, for example, but it was an oxygen of mass 17 or 16 or even 18. The genie was out of the box at this stage, because unfortunately, the chemists, being simple-minded people, as we are, said oxygen is oxygen – we breathe it, we use oxygen. But oxygen, the physicists say is composed of several isotopes so we’ll do it accurately and we’ll use oxygen 16 which is the predominant. And so there was a difference between the oxygen scales of physicists and chemists.
And finally a way out of that was found in 1961, in fact, where it was pointed out that if one used carbon 12 as a simple isotope, and I needn’t go into detail here, that would be the most acceptable scale, and that is now what is used.

But to return to IUPAC [International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry], we were set up to study all the literature that was being published year by year and to recommend the best possible values for the atomic weight of each element. And that is what we did.
I joined in 1965 at the Paris meeting. By 1967 – we meet every two years in Cortina d’Ampezzo – I was a full member, in fact, I was then elected chairman at that stage and I stayed as chairman for quite some time thereafter. And as secretary, and a man who did a lot of the work, was Steffen Peiser, who was a physicist from the National Bureau of Standards in Washington, and we worked as a team. And the other members of the commission who were experts from many different countries would feed us with information and we would meet every two years for two or three days with the whole group and discuss what our report would be. And then that, for the next two years, was the atomic weights.

The important point that I want to now go on to talk about is that pretty much until this time, following Dalton, an atom of an element had a characteristic weight and all the atoms in... of that element... had that weight.
Once we had isotopes this varied and it explained, for example, why chlorine has an atomic weight of 35.5 – that couldn’t be explained on most ordinary theories until isotopes were discovered. And it was that chlorine had an isotope 35 and 37 and it was a mixture of the two of them, so 35.5 meant that there was more 35 than 37, but it was not a whole number. That was creating a problem. The problem of oxygen was there, but much worse, it turned out that as we did – or had – better and better results and measurements, it became clear that for many elements, the atomic weight did, in fact, vary, and it varied for one of several fairly simple reasons.

Over the millions and billions of years that the Earth’s crust had been formed, the atoms were reacting and if they had different weights to different isotopes, they’d react at different speeds, there would be a fractionation. Just as you can make heavy water by a process, that is going on naturally. So if you get the water from seawater or you get it from the Baltic or you get it from snow or you distil it and keep distilling it, you will alter the atomic weight of hydrogen minutely, perhaps in parts per million. But sometimes those variations occur much more noticeably.
If you get a sample of boron dug up from compounds in Turkey it has a different atomic weight from... the boron that you’d get from the lakes... dry lakes in California. And so people were getting different values at the highest order of instrumentation... different values for the atomic weights so that one could only publish a range of values and sometimes that limited. Now, there is a caveat I have to put on there – there are 19, possibly 20 elements which are what are called mono-isotopic. There is only one type of atom of that element that occurs in nature. There are 19 of those and they have their atomic weight now known to at least nine significant figures because it can be measured by a mass spectrometry very, very accurately indeed. For all others, in principle, there is a variation. For some, the variation is large; for some it is not so large and is only noticeable.

I said that there were several reasons why the atomic weight would vary. One was the geochemistry would alter. A second one is radioactivity. One of the strange things about the periodic table was that the sequence of atoms didn't always exactly follow the atomic weight. Iodine and tellurium are inverted and I think potassium and calcium [sic – should be argon], and the reason is, with the potassium and calcium [sic] that part of the potassium that we have, as you probably know, is radioactive. When people get upset about radioactivity – they don't realise that they are, in fact, surrounded, particularly if they're living in Cornwall, with quite a lot of radioactivity, but it is not at that very low level harmful in any serious way.
But because the atom is mutating from one element to another, the atomic weight of both of them is changing slowly. And that is most noticeable, I suppose, in lead, because lead is the end product of many of the radioactive series, the naturally radioactive series that were discovered by Becquerel and then Curies and so forth at the beginning of the 20th century. Because they alter and all of those series end in lead, depending on the ore that the lead is coming from, it will have a different atomic weight. And Theodore Richards found this in Harvard – no matter how carefully he did it, he just had to say that there were different types of lead and that became an anomaly. But for other elements it was thought that it would be constant. It turns out, of course, that there's another very serious element. Suppose it is one particular isotope which is giving you an effect as it would be in nuclear reactors, 235 is the important one, 238 is not to the same extent fissile. Depending on the concentration of 235, so the fissibility of it, the fission ability of it, will vary.
Now that is important in controlling some of these reactions, and the crucial element here is lithium. Lithium consists of lithium 6 and lithium 7 and only one of these is useful in nuclear chemistry, and so one of the things that was done, if you were doing nuclear energy production, is to have a source of one particular isotope. And so you separate the isotopes 6 and 7, but because this was classified work in America, it was not possible to say that they were doing that. It was rather like these super-injunctions – you can't say that there is an injunction there and not about who it was or anything. So they did not disclose that and it became obvious to us in the Atomic Weights Commission that virtually no sample of lithium compound that you bought in America had the standard atomic weight, because it had been milked of a particular isotope. And so if you were doing physical chemistry or weighing it out, you're weighing out the wrong amount and we weren't allowed to say anything about that because it was classified information. We weren't even supposed to know it.
So, there were serious consequences of these things, but there is also, I think, a very important message in this area which I want to digress for a moment and tell you about. It has to do with atomic weights and it has to do with a thing called the Oklo Phenomenon.

So, let me tell you about the Oklo Effect. One of the results of working on the Atomic Energy [sic – should be Weights] Commission was that I became aware of some beautiful work that the French Atomic Energy Commission was doing. They were… of course, the French have a big nuclear generating programme most of their electric power comes from nuclear energy. And they get the uranium for this from some mines in Gabon in West Africa in a place near Oklo, so it has now become the Oklo Phenomenon – that is what I want to talk about. And, very careful analytical work had showed that the ratio of isotopes in various elements that they were studying as impurities, did not follow a normal isotope pattern, but followed a double-humped curve which was very characteristic of fission product elements. They also found that the concentration of uranium 235, which is the important one, was quite different from what it was in normal minerals. Instead of being, I think 0.67% it was substantially higher than that. And, to cut a long story short, again, with very excellent detective work and so forth, they came to the conclusion that the reason why there was this anomaly was that there had been, in prehistoric times, a nuclear reactor there. And what had happened, apparently was this. The half-life, the rate at which uranium 235 disintegrates naturally is about six or seven times as fast as uranium 238. So if you extrapolate back in time you would find that uranium would have a much higher concentration of uranium 235.
If you go back 1 billion years when some of the rocks were being formed, or even 2 billion years, perhaps, the ratio of 235 was as high as 25%. Now you will have heard of nuclear enrichment programmes, the enrichment of 235 to make the reactors work efficiently, will raise it from the one in nature, up to 3% or 4% quite normally – 25% meant that it was more susceptible to fission. But you need a moderator. You will have heard of water-cooled moderators, and we talked about heavy water in Harwell. It turns out that in this region of Oklo, there is a high concentration of uranium ores, billions of years ago; the concentration of uranium also had a concentration of 235. And then with the course of time, the rain fell, there were floods, lakes formed, the beds were covered with water which is a natural moderator, a nuclear reaction started. A nuclear reaction went on for thousands of years but as it went on it, of course, gave the fission products, which we’re digging up now, but it also evaporated the water because it heated the water and that evaporated. The water level sank. As the water levels sank it was no longer moderated so the nuclear reactor stopped. And the experiments that they did in France on the distribution of minerals and so forth, showed that there were probably several cycles lasting hundreds of thousands of years, of this natural nuclear reactor.
Now, there’s an important message there. Firstly, that the techniques of modern chemistry are such that you can get incredible and unexpected data from these things. But also, that it is possible for the environment to grow over, study, mask nuclear explosions – not that this is an argument to have them, but it does mean that in the distant past there have been nuclear reactors which, as a phenomenon we only started finding out about in the middle of the 20th century.

Let me show you something. This lovely little Japanese sake vase. One of the members of our commission, Fujiwara was on the commission at this time, and he, in his retirement, took up ceramics and made, for some of his friends, these little sake glasses. And because we were interested in the Oklo Phenomenon at this stage, he got from the French Atomic Energy Commissariat, a small sample of the Oklo uranium ore – it’s not dangerous because, of course, it’s in very low concentration – and he smeared that on the glaze – you can see there.
So this is part of the Oklo phenomenon, part of the Gabon natural nuclear reactor incorporated into a modern Japanese ... I thought you might like to see that.
[Q] Yes, that’s lovely.

So, let’s the return to the Atomic Weights Commission. The net result of these musings is that it became clear to us on the Atomic Weights Commission, increasingly from 1967 onwards, that one could no longer preserve the situation of atomic weights being constants of nature. They certainly weren’t, there are too many variables, and they were well within the variation that a careful experimenter might have. So what to do with the atomic weights? What we did to start with was to put footnotes, and if from ‘67 onwards – 1967 onwards – you read our bi-annual reports, you’ll… in the atomic weights which are published by the IUPAC [International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry], you’ll find that there are footnotes, and one of the footnotes is that the atomic weight is variable, either for geographical reasons, or for inadvertent or undisclosed reasons.
And the inadvertent is because, paradoxically, the more you purify some things, the more you vary the atomic weight of what you’re taking off. The other is that of course they may have been altered for reasons of industry or atomic energy and so forth. So one had to be careful and we flagged that up. But the situation became worse and worse because experimenters were getting more and more precise in their measurements and so now, for the first time, when you look up your most recent atomic weights table, you’ll find not a number, or not only the most probable number, but you will find a range given. So if you want the atomic number [sic – should be weight] of boron, you are given a range within which normal samples will be found. And if you want a more accurate one, you jolly well have to go and find out what the atomic weight of your sample is, which is a big ask, of course, but you can get it... if necessary you get a national lab to do it for you for a price. But that is a complication which has crept into things and it becomes more and more important when many of the effects which modern technology depend on, will depend on a particular isotope. And so you want to make sure that the concentration is of that ‘one’.

 I’ll say one other thing about the Atomic Weights Commission because it has affected teaching to some extent and it is, I think, due to a misconception. Teachers, for very good reason, want to emphasise to their pupils and students that there is a difference between weight and mass. They have different units, they are different physical concepts. Atomic weight is what Dalton called them. You weigh things in a balance... in fact you’re comparing masses. And now, of course, the values that are in the tables are obtained almost exclusively, not chemically, but by mass spectrometry where you actually do, through physical techniques, measure the mass of something.

There is a movement amongst teachers to want to rename atomic weights, atomic masses. But the fact is that they’re neither weights nor masses. They are a ratio, so they are dimensionless. The… what we call an atomic weight has two components. The first is it is the ratio of the mass of the element that you are looking at compared to the mass of carbon 12 equals 12 – bit of a mouthful – but that is a ratio of masses and therefore it is dimensionless. So the numbers in the atomic weights table are pure numbers. Now why not just call them that? The reason is because an element can have a complete range of atomic weights and what you find in the table is the one that occurs in nature, with some variation perhaps, it is an average, it is the sample that you would pick up. But you have to be alerted to the fact that that number might alter, depending on the variation of the isotopes in the particular sample that you have. So it’s still valid to call it atomic weights and so there was a move to say that we should think of another thing, if it’s not atomic masses and it’s not atomic weights but it’s a pure number. But in fact the Atomic Weights Commission, when I was chairman, have decided and stayed with it, that it is still valuable to call it atomic weights because that is traditionally understood to be the natural average of things. And, indeed, there are many things in physics and chemistry which do not have the dimensions of the name that they have. The resolving power of a microscope hasn’t got the dimensions of power. EMF, electromotive force of a battery is not a force, it is an energy. Resolving power... any of these things, there are many of them; so it’s not particularly worrying that this is just another one such. So that is, I think, something to be said for, about atomic weights and was one of the things that I became very much involved in, and still am.

Okay, so that is IUPAC’s [International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry] contribution in atomic weights. It does many other things. It arranges conferences, for example, and gives its cachet to conferences, and this was very important, particularly in post-war era in the ‘40s,’50s,’60s – the so-called Cold War era – because you could not get sponsorship from IUPAC unless every country allowed it’s delegates to come. And at a time when certain countries forbade travel, if they wanted to hold a conference they were obliged to accept anyone who was from a member country of IUPAC, otherwise they wouldn’t get sponsorship. So that is another important thing they were doing. And nomenclature again, the naming of compounds, is important work. So for many years, about two decades I suppose, I was intimately involved both with atomic weights and then, as President of the Inorganic Division of Atomic… of IUPAC and on Bureau and so forth.

As I’ve mentioned one of the things that IUPAC [International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry] did was sponsor conferences and I went to many of these conferences where our own work in the Nottingham group was being discussed. And, fortunately, we went to marvellous places because many countries in the world wanted to sponsor conferences. So I, and my growing family, got to go to many interesting and fascinating places around the world. Also, as the work that we were doing became more and more known, I began to be invited as visiting professor and so, again, we were able to go to many countries and take up visiting professorships.

Another thing that developed, as I got better known from the work that we were publishing, was that I got invited to various places as visiting professor, and after the Cortina d’Ampezzo meeting, that we’ve just been talking about in ‘67, I was invited by my old friend, Ray Martin, to go back to Melbourne as a visiting professor. He was, by that time, professor there and it was 18 years since I had left Australia but, because of what I had been doing, and married, and by now I had three children, I had not been back home. So it was a very pleasant opportunity to do that.

From Cortina we went first by plane to Perth, where my mother was now staying and my brother, who had come to England later, done a PhD and was now back in Australia where he was a soil science researcher in CSIRO [Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation]. So I spent, with my family, a very pleasant time in Perth, and then went on through Adelaide to Melbourne. So that was one time and I gave a series of lectures there and met many old friends, obviously, at that time.

The second time I went as a visiting professor was indeed to Perth, and that was in 1969, and I was scheduled to give a set of lectures. The head of the department was Noel Bayliss, who interestingly enough had been to the very same primary school that I’d been to in the early 1930s, and he was now a distinguished professor and head of the department in Perth. He’d put me up in one of the colleges there just on the edge of campus, George College, and a very pleasant place, but there was a problem. I had got there over the weekend for – and I was travelling alone on this occasion – for a start of lectures at nine o’clock on Monday morning. So I rang Noel at home because I think it was late... I got in late on Saturday... this was early on the Sunday morning. I said, ‘I’ve arrived but there is a problem’. And he said, ‘I know what’s coming’. And I said, ‘Well, nine o’clock is the time in Australia that Neil Armstrong is about to step on to the moon’. It was indeed the famous Apollo landing on the moon and the pictures were going to be beamed by television, which was a fantastic technological achievement to get television from the moon surface. But I said, ‘Obviously I’ve come to give lectures but what’s the status of the lecture?’ And he said, ‘Well, Norm, let’s put it this way, you’re welcome to give your lecture at nine o’clock, but I can guarantee that you’ll have an audience of zero’. So I was very pleased to hear this because I looked at the college television and saw that, and then went later in the day to see my mother, and it was in the end, of course, an excellent time that I spent in Perth.

Okay, so after that pleasant interlude I was back again to my family and the research lab in Nottingham, and there’s one other piece of work which I want to mention before leaving Nottingham and that concerns boron hydrides, which are very reactive species. And I was concerned that a lot of work was being done in America, at this time, as potential rocket fuels in fact, and I was being supported by the United States Air Force to do research on whatever subjects I wanted. But what I was working on was actually aluminium hydrides and gallium hydrides, and then boron hydrides. The work was difficult because there wasn’t much modern work in the literature, except for some work which was being done in Germany, and the Americans, for perhaps understandable reasons, were cagey to say how they were making the compounds. But I had one or two students start work in that area and on the gallium hydride complexes and, at this stage, I got my first post-doctoral fellow, who was Malcolm Wallbridge. He’d come to me from Leon Long in Exeter and had spent a time in the States, and he came in 1970 to join the group and we started the hydride group there. Unfortunately for him and, particularly, his wife who was particularly unhappy about it, I then got a call to go to Newcastle, to the newly established Chair of Inorganic Chemistry, so virtually the whole of our group moved up, with their families – if they were married – to Newcastle at that time. So that was the end of my period in Newcastle… in, I’m saying that again, but in Nottingham. And it was time to go to Newcastle.

Now Newcastle was, like Nottingham, attached at that time to another university; it was attached to Durham University which was, I think, the fourth university to be founded in England. There were Oxford and Cambridge, then University College London and, virtually simultaneously, Durham University started. But the science and medicine side of Durham was carried out at King’s College in Newcastle and it became, over the years, almost a case of the tail wagging the dog because Newcastle became much larger than Durham and had the medical school and had science and engineering. Whereas Durham, although it had some science, certainly, and some distinguished science, was concentrating more on the arts and other subjects.

So Newcastle was going through the stages of becoming independent, and by 1963 it had in fact become the independent University of Newcastle upon Tyne. As I said, one of the reasons I was in England, was this excitement of new universities being established. I think actually, technically, I was the first established Chair of Inorganic Chemistry in the country. There were, of course, several inorganic chemists who had chairs, Harry Emeléus in Cambridge, Geoff Wilkinson in Imperial College, Ron Nyholm in London, but they were professors of chemistry who happened to be inorganic chemists; this was established as an inorganic chair.

In negotiating for the Chair, I was asked by Professor Wynne-Jones who was the Chairman of the School of Chemistry... I said, ‘Well, what is the relationship between the lecturing and the research of inorganic chemistry, which is a new department, with organic chemistry under Jim Baddiley, and physical chemistry under yourself, Wynne-Jones?’ And he said, ‘Well, what do you think it should be?’ And I said, ‘Well, I think the simplest arrangement is a third, a third, a third’. And he gulped and said, ‘Well that’s not usual, is it?’ And so I said, ‘No, but we want to be in the lead, as we were becoming a new university’. And so he said, ‘Alright, if you think that’s right, that’s what you’ll have’. So I was very pleased about that and, in fact, I have to say that Wynne-Jones, who later became Lord Wynne-Jones under Harold Wilson’s regime, stuck religiously to that – he gave me enormous support in starting up there. We had to build new laboratories in the Armstrong building, part of the Arts block actually, and they were put in charge whilst I was... before I’d come up there, and Jim Baddiley went along with the idea as well. So, in fact, we had a group of three chairs in, if you like, a federal School of Chemistry. And that was an importance advance, I think, for inorganic chemistry because, up until that stage, although as I said there were a few chemistry departments that had inorganic chemists in them, very frequently the inorganic chemistry in other universities was a very minor adjunct, particularly in the early years so there was no research group from final year and so forth. And that we were able to establish, at a stroke, as they say.

Now, at Newcastle, I had to think about the courses. Suddenly, I had a third of the syllabus, and whilst I could give a lot of lectures and there were some other staff there, whom I’ll mention later, we really had to plan for a third of the syllabus and a third of the practical work. An enormous help to me was Ernest Aynsley – EE Aynsley – who was an Anglican minister of religion, but a superb fluorine chemist – he’d been associated with the fluorine chemistry group in Newcastle. And he was there, and there was Littlewood and Tony Trenwith was there as well. And we had discussions on this and it was clear that we needed new members of staff and I was able to appoint some post-doctoral people there to help with the lecture load, but it did mean that I had to think what the purpose of education was.

And from that time onwards, I paid particular attention to this aspect of it and it was a thing, in fact, that I think I got well known about and used to be called to lecture at many universities around the country, as to what the purpose of the university education was and what inorganic chemistry, in particular, should be aimed at.
Now one can make a lot of pompous phrases about these things, which I don’t intend to do, but an idea perhaps is encapsulated in the simple phrase is, I said we should think of education through chemistry, not education in chemistry or education about chemistry, but education through chemistry. And the analogy that I used was, if you think of history as a subject, you don’t expect the department of history to discuss the history of all cultures, in all continents, in all time. What you do is, you take Tudor history, or the Elizabethan period, or whatever, and you use that to get the ideas of historical research and knowledge over, and at universities you’re making the translation from being fed information at school and, of course, to some extent, learning how to think. But the point of the university education, in my view, is to make a transition where the undergraduate thinks of the ideas for himself or herself, can plan experiments, learn how to do things, learn what the significance is, work around the subject and also, of course, have a historical perspective on the subject.
So we began to design courses like that. But, clearly there’s a balance, because at the end of the day you were training a professional chemist and there’s no point in going out into industry and not knowing any actual chemistry. So to me, fact is not a dirty four letter word: fact is essential. The facts of chemistry are important, partly because they are pretty permanent - occasionally they alter for technical reasons and as techniques get better - but by and large the facts don’t change. What changes is the theory, in other words, understanding. So if you go too far on the theoretical, you are teaching the student something which will soon be out of date and not necessarily applicable. You then also have to avoid the problems of so-called relevance, and there the phrase that springs to my mind straightaway is that, today’s relevance is tomorrow’s obsolescence. The big thing about the modern world, and it was the same in the ‘60s and ‘70s, is that the people who are graduating now may know what the state of chemistry is now, but in 10 years’ time it will have doubled in its content, there will be lots of new concepts, lots of new ideas, so we have to work on the concepts of dealing with a continually changing and growing body of knowledge which has to be incorporated into the theory.

Now some people approach that by saying what you should do is teach the theory and the facts will then emerge. But that is wrong for two reasons. The first, as I’ve already said is, that the theories will change as we understand more deeply about the nature of atoms and molecules. The second reason is that it is philosophically wrong; you cannot say sodium chloride has the properties it has because so and so, because you are using the theories to explain the facts, and this is not a very sound way of proceeding. What you should really do is start with the facts and try and generate… it’s going the wrong way round. One person who encapsulated that particular idea very well was, of course, Karl Popper who said there is no point in proving that all swans are white, because you can go anywhere in Europe and find white swans and that is certainly true. But you only have to go to Perth in Western Australia, where the Swan River... it is built on the fact that the swans there are black. Popper’s point was that the one observation of a black swan disproves the fact that all swans are white. And whilst you can carry that idea too far as well, it’s very important to try and think of ways which undermine the existing ideas to get an advance. To take a simple example, you can say, that water boils at 100 degrees Celsius – why? Well, you can think of theories but, in fact, if you then climb a mountain and do the same experiment, you find that water boils at 95, so you’ve got a new fact to explain and you have to think about the pressure that the water is under, and so forth.

Whilst, as I said, we were certainly training professional chemists and they knew really quite a lot about the chemistry of the elements, which is my particular interest, and other aspects of physical chemistry and organic chemistry, they knew more than that. They had a background appreciation of why we were doing the chemistry, what the situation was in the current climate that we were in, in the civilisation, if you like, that we were living in and the place of chemistry in that. And to get them to think about it, I gave over some of the practical period time to writing extended essays. It’s perhaps not unlike the technique in Oxford and Cambridge, where a student will be asked to prepare an essay on a particular subject, particularly in Oxford where you’d read it to the tutor and have a discussion on it, and depending on the quality of the student and, particularly on the quality of the supervisor, you’ll get a good discussion and the student would learn something from this. And sometimes, perhaps, in the best possible cases, as with Longuet Higgins and Ronnie Bell, you’d get a new theory coming from that in the boron hydrides that I was mentioning.

We designed... essay subjects where the student had to think about it. And one other little trick I introduced at that stage was I found that a student got more interested in a subject if they felt they had a proprietary right to that particular one. So, instead of saying write an essay on the chemistry of mercury, let us say, I would have, make a case for including element... the element mercury, in the syllabus of chemistry; why would anyone want to learn it? And so he was committed, or she was committed, to thinking why it was important and automatically then learnt a good deal about the chemistry of the element.

So, the ideas of teaching, the fact that inorganic chemistry was an equal third of the syllabus, should be taught in all years, and that it was broader than just the factual basis and the current theory were, I think, innovations which I was beginning to bring into the teaching of chemistry. And it also went further. I realised that the teachers of chemistry at school had a difficult time, particularly as chemistry was increasing, and if you put more and more into a syllabus it becomes sterile, it becomes memory. In fact to my undergraduates – and Brian you might remember this in Nottingham but it was the same in Newcastle – I said in my first lecture to the beginning students, ‘Chemistry at a university is different from chemistry at school. You’re not here just to learn the facts, you’ll learn to gain understanding and to apply it’. And I said, ‘What you must not become is matriculated sponges’ – that was the phrase that I used. ‘If you are a matriculated sponge, you come in, you absorb the re-distilled knowledge and understanding of your lecturer, and at an examination you are squeezed and it all comes out again, and at the end you leave just as empty as when you came in – it’s much more than that’. And I was trying to get that broader perspective over.

Well, as I say, school teachers had problems too and they felt isolated, at least many of them I got the impression did. And so what I did was start the concept of Chemistry Teachers’ Centre and this I did, I was a member of the Royal Institute of Chemistry as was in those days, and they were very interested in the training of chemists and the teaching of chemists through practical work in technical colleges and so forth, but they were also interested in the school syllabus and they backed my starting of the Chemistry Teachers Centres. And our idea was to have a... period, I think we met once a month in the university. All teachers of chemistry within a 30-mile radius, which went down to Durham and up to Morpeth and so forth in the Newcastle area were invited to join and many did. And we talked together, it was semi-social... there was a lecture on a particular topic, particularly new chemistry that was going on, or how to approach teaching. They had subjects that they put… but the important thing was that they were interacting with the staff of the chemistry department, particularly the inorganic chemistry because that was the area that I was most involved in, and that was an enormous success.

And then the Royal Institute had what was called a ‘travelling circus’, and that went round. They had a group of about five of us, Professor Ron Mason did it, and several others joined in as well. And what we would do was we would have a three-day conference and we would take either a morning session or an afternoon session, give our lectures, have our discussion and then go on to the next university grouping. And that was for mainly teachers of chemistry and that I think also... but also university teachers came in – that served a valuable purpose.

At this time also the Chemical Society was thinking of the problems of teaching of chemistry at the university and at schools, and they started Education in Chemistry as a new journal. And I was very much involved in this and, in fact, had two pieces as I recall, one in the very first issue, and one in the first year, but later on. And one of the subjects that I had was ‘Models of Boron Hydrides’ and another one was the ‘Chemistry of Inert Gases’, which had until the ‘60s, been inert but then, of course, chemistry developed so that was an obvious place to have a piece for teachers of chemistry. And later on I also, I think in School Science Review perhaps, had one on ‘Chemical Exploration of the Moon’ because, as we’ll hear later, I got quite involved in... both the Russian and the American moon probe work.

So there was a lot of work on the teaching of chemistry at that stage. And, in fact, the inaugural lecture that I gave which was called, if I remember correctly, ‘Patterns of the Invisible: the Shape of Atoms and Molecules’. What I used as the theme there was, atoms and molecules are so small that we cannot actually see them. How can we talk about their shapes? How do we know anything about their shapes? So I went through the various spectroscopic techniques and I had a lot of demonstrations where one had a Perkin Elmer infrared spectrometer and as it went through it absorbed some... it dipped like that – I had a little light on the cursor. So that was a good experience of giving an inaugural lecture.

I also brought to the audiences’ – it was a general audience – to their attention the rate of advance of chemistry which was doubling; the known chemistry was doubling, I think, about every 13 years at that stage. In other words, everything that was known from Adam and Eve in chemistry up till 1961 would be approximately doubled in the next 13 years. How do you cope with this at a university? And to illustrate this point, I brought the current volumes of chemical abstracts, which was one year’s, tens of thousands of journals, publishing hundreds of thousands of papers. How do chemists keep up with this, the transfer of knowledge? All of this was part of the thoughts that I was working on in the inaugural lecture. And, again, I was emphasising the point that in universities you must be prepared... preparing students for things which are changing; it’s not a static world, it will be changing all the time.

So that’s enough of undergraduate teaching and the ideas of teaching. The other part, of course, of work in the university department is research work. And I was very fortunate in being able to transfer virtually all my research group... I think only one of the graduate students, for personal reasons... stayed in Newcastle though he was very interested in the project he was doing, but all the rest transferred with me. And so I had two other big jobs besides the teaching: one was to get funds to fund the research, and the second, which was to do the research with the research group.

As far as funding was concerned, as always, the Science Research Council, as it then was, had responsive funding – you put in applications for grants. If it was a good grant in the view of the committee, you were funded. You could get technical help, postgraduate fellows, instrumentation – and instrumentation was a very important part of it – but it didn’t of course cover the whole of the costs. And so we had to go to industry and at least at that stage, although I had some success in industry in the UK... I have to say that it was a lot easier to get funding from American sources than from British sources. I did get some money from ICI and from one or two other big firms but, at this stage, I think the majority of my funding was coming first from the American Air Force in Europe – they had undedicated funds which they gave. They said, ‘We like your work, we are happy to support anything you want to do’. There was no military connotation in it, and although actually some of it was of interest to them at that stage I wasn’t aware of it, I was just doing it for the chemical reasons. General Electric in Schenectady was also very interested, particularly in my solid state work, so they were funding that.

We were again lucky to get funding from an unlikely source by a gentleman called Dr Tadyon, and I mention him by name because he impressed me considerably. He had heard of me and he was making a far infrared spectrometer at a time when there weren’t far infrared spectrometers. There were the normal range, which were done by Perkin Elmer and others, but not the far infrared and as we were interested in heavy atoms like gallium, indium, thallium, bromine, the vibration frequencies were in the far infrared. So it was necessary to get an instrument to do that. Tadyon had developed one of these instruments but it was very expensive, and I went to him and I said, ‘Well, look, we want one of these instruments but frankly we can’t pay for it’. And he said, ‘Well, let’s go out to lunch and we’ll talk about it’. So he asked about what I’d done; the thing that turned him on, interestingly, was that I had done my degree part-time and that I’d supported myself in going through university and then done research and then come over here on scholarships and so forth, and he said, ‘That mirrors my experience’. He said, ‘I would not be where I am now if I hadn’t had help from people who sponsored me when I was young. If you want money, I’m not a big firm, but I will give you one of my instruments’. And so we had the instrument, and Brian Straughan who came with me – though he had not previously been one of my students – he came with me to a demonstrator post in Newcastle and he set that up. And then I went back to Tadyon and, shamelessly, said, ‘Well, it’s a marvellous instrument, but we need a technician. And so he gave me the money to support a junior technician to run the far infrared spectrometer. So that’s an interesting case study of chickens coming home or eggs hatching, whatever simile one likes to use. It was a very heart-warming experience and he was certainly enormously helpful.

Another important instrument we got was a nuclear magnetic resonance. My students, in later years, looked at me when I said we got one of the first nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometers in the country. And the fact was that, except at a research level, this was Nobel laureate winning work that got the infrared spectra [sic - should be nuclear magnetic resonance] effect. And then of course people like Rex Richards took it up in this country and made great advances. But, in fact, it was quite late in time that NMR became available commercially, because we couldn’t make the instrument as a scientific piece of research – we weren’t competent to do that – but we needed a machine that worked. And, as you will know, as the years went by, it went from MHz to 40 to 60 to 100, 200, 500 and I don’t know what the limit is now, but it’s very high I’m quite sure. That was increase in technology, but we got one of the early ones, I think it was a 40 MHz, to start with.

So building up instrumentation was another thing. Well, getting funds and having instruments is only the beginning, you’ve got to use them on something – you’ve got to have ideas. And that was one thing we were never short of. It was a very productive group, everyone had bright ideas. Pete Perkins joined for a while after being in Sheffield, he came up as a lecturer on the staff. Joyce Lockhart came from Royal Holloway College, and did reaction kinetics on three atoms… on three-coordinate centres, like boron. And several other people joined us as well at that time.

In my own research work, I was concerned with carrying on the fluorine work; I thought I could extend that to iodine pentafluoride. Now iodine pentafluoride is a very heavy liquid and would not be a normal thing to think of, but I knew that Newcastle, along with Emeléus’ lab had one of the very few fluorine labs in the country because of PD Robinson who had worked there, and Ken Dodd [sic – should be Neil Bartlett] who discovered the inert gas compounds – he was a PhD in the department just before I came up.

So they had a fluorine facility, and they had a chief technician called Jim Smith who was an absolute marvel. Now I can illustrate that by a very simple story. He met me when we came to the lab and he said, ‘Well sir, welcome to Newcastle. Is there any way I could help?’ And I said, ‘Well, Jim, I’ve heard that you’re an excellent chief technician. I thought of doing some work on iodine pentafluoride and I know that there’s a fluorine cell around here. Do you think some time, you know, along with your other things, we could get some iodine pentafluoride?’ And he said, ‘Yes, sir, I’ll work on it’. That was day one. Nine o’clock on the morning of day two, I came in, Jim knocked on the door – he was already in – came in with a 500 ml flask of this heavy liquid – a beautiful, colourless liquid – and he said, ‘Here you are sir’. And I said, ‘What’s that?’ He said, ‘That’s the iodine pentafluoride you wanted’. And I said, ‘But you can’t buy it. Did you have some in stock?’ He said, ‘No I made it last night for you, you said you wanted it’. And he was brilliant. And when we expanded and got other technicians, he was very helpful in leading them in the fields that we would need help in.

So, with Ernest Aynsley’s background in preparative fluorine chemistry, and with Jim Smith’s help, and my own background, and people like Malcolm Wallbridge, we soon got a very productive group going.
But what did we work on? One thing, and we’ve mentioned it already, is inert gas compounds. Before Neil Bartlett did his world changing experiments in Vancouver in 1961 – and it was a beautiful experiment that he did to make the first compound of xenon, an inert gas – I’d been thinking that inert gases had a lot of lone pairs of electrons, the ionisation potentials of these electrons are very similar to some of the compounds that we were studying, I wonder if they would form a compound. I was beginning to become familiar with making and breaking of one bond at a time, and I knew from our work on thermochemistry – and counter intuitively – that boron trifluoride is in fact the weakest of the acceptors of the group. Trichloride, tribromide, triiodide are actually better acceptors but they don’t form coordination compounds normally, because they have weaker bonds than boron fluoride, which the very strength of the boron fluorine bond when you have to reorganise it from planar to a tetrahedral that makes it the weakest. Chlorine doesn’t take so much effort to reconfigure, so it should be a better acceptor. But unfortunately the boron-chlorine bond being weaker, it will then solvolyse so if you try and form an etherate, you form an ethoxide, and you start chlorinating the compound. So it’s a trade off there. But, of course, xenon and the other inert gases don’t have any groups attached, so I thought maybe they would join on. Now there’d been a little bit of work on argon, which in my view would not have been the one to start from, but the Munich group had started work on this, I think a decade or so earlier. And there were some suggestions that there were some compounds there, but I think later work had discounted that to be so. But to cut a long story short, we looked at that by sealing up all of the group three trihalides with various inert gases under pressure, and you recall from earlier things I was used to working under pressure as well, but in fact the idea didn’t work out for ideas… for reasons which I think we now understand. It was worth a try, but it was a good idea which didn’t work out. But I think you have a memory of the phials which we had... we’d clearly two layers, liquid boron trichloride or tribromide and liquid xenon under pressure, or liquid, I think, xenon and…
[Q] Absolutely, Norman, I remember it so very well.
...krypton I think we did as well. That was an interesting experiment – it didn’t work. We also tried seeing if helium, was unduly soluble in sulphuric acid and phosphoric acid as well, to see if that would hydrate the proton or solvate the proton – that didn’t work out either. But we were working round these areas. Pete Perkins, as I mentioned was doing the thermochemistry side going theoretical . We also had an X-ray crystallographer in the group, Alan Hazell, who later went to work in Copenhagen and stayed over there at the University of Aarhus, and Hans Stadler was a crystallographer in the physical chemistry department as well.

Another aspect of our work concerns hydride chemistry, and it’s the hydride chemistry of the group 3 elements: boron, aluminium and gallium. Boron hydride became, actually, one of my major research interests. I had started work on it in Nottingham, as I think I’ve already alluded to, but it became a much larger part of our work as time progressed in an astonishing and exciting new way, which I’m going to reserve, and get your... whet your appetite for that – I'll come back to that, because I want to mention... because it didn’t lead quite so far... the work on aluminium and gallium hydrides.

Aluminium hydride is not an easy compound to work with, and has a very complex structure, but it also forms – and we found ways of making it – complexes. So you could add a ligand onto aluminium hydride, and one that Malcolm Wallbridge and I, with Allan Storr worked on was one molecule of ammonia onto aluminium hydride made a tetrahedral complex. You can put a second molecule on, which makes it five co-ordinate, and I think this was the first, or one of the first, five co-ordinate aluminium compounds that there were. And gallium hydride did the same. That was unusual.

In the hydride field, in particular, we were looking at the hydrides of boron, aluminium and gallium. The boron work had actually started in Nottingham with John Morris and John Wright, and they did some very nice work of adding borane, BH3, to unsaturated organic compounds, which was not unlike the Herb Brown work on hydroboration. But we didn’t pursue that further when I went to Newcastle.
In Newcastle we went more on the chemistry of the higher boron hydrides, and particularly in later years on metalloboranes. That is an interesting field. If one thinks that boron is the element immediately before carbon in the periodic table, so it has the same number of orbitals, but one too few electrons, and that has developed into a concept of electron-deficient compounds, but as Riley Schaeffer once said, ‘There’s no such thing as an electron-deficient compound, only a theory-deficient chemist’, and we took that very much on board – there was the right number for the structures that were being involved.
Now, one had the view that, even so, there were fewer electrons available for bonding, and so the boranes appeared to be electron acceptors, that would be their natural thing. We developed a concept of boranes as ligands, and that was an entirely novel thing.

Bob Parry. He and his group had, I think, come to a similar conclusion, but that was on an isolated piece of work, and I think quite a large part of our later research programme developed along those lines. And essentially it was using certain parts of boron, for example in B6H10, which is, as its name implies, a six-fold structural shape, and there is a boron-boron bond there, and that could donate an electron into a three... electron bond with metals.
What happened, in fact, was that the structures that evolved from that were quite remarkable, and it became, in fact, such a big field, that even after I left Newcastle and went down to Leeds, I had a group involving particularly John Kennedy who developed this work.
 

But back in Newcastle in those days, we developed some high yield syntheses of compounds, the preparation of which was not well known in the literature, because it was being kept secret for either... confidentiality company reasons or defence reasons. But in our work we, of course, did not have that restriction, and whatever work we did we published.

Now, in that area, we also did work with the aluminium and gallium hydrides, which I briefly mentioned before. The aluminium hydride work enormously excited the people at DuPont, because unbeknown to us, they had been working very hard on that, and, in fact, other people in the States had been working on some of the boron hydrides as potential rocket fuels, which I also didn’t know at that stage. But it did mean that we could get supplies of some of these things, particularly pentaborane, and decaborane as well at one stage, from the States, and that was very helpful in our work. Saved us making them.

Indeed, it just strikes me, incidentally, that Harry Emeléus, which I talked about in terms of my Cambridge... was actually the first person to make and demonstrate decaborane. He was working in a vacuum line, and this work was in Stock’s laboratory in Karlsruhe, and Harry’s name is not on the paper. He’s thanked as being a post-doctoral assistant, and two other senior scientists got the credit for that work. But he actually was the first to see and analyse and characterise decaborane as really the first moderately stable boron hydride.

But back to aluminium and gallium, that aroused interest, as I said. Gallium was entirely novel work, and the problem was as one could make aluminium hydride and boron hydride, could one make gallium hydride? There had been a little bit of work done in Schlesinger’s group in Chicago making lithium gallium hydride at the same time that the famous reagent lithium aluminium hydride had been made, but that hadn’t been followed up, and we were actually trying to get free gallium hydride, GaH3, and to see whether it was dimeric or not, because as you remember, diborane is B2H6, aluminium hydride was a solid, AlH3. Was gallium hydride a dimer, like its chloride was, or was it a solid, like aluminium hydride? That was the motivation.

It turned out not to be so easy to make, and Allan Storr and Malcolm Wallbridge worked very hard on that area, and we got what we thought was very good evidence for it, and that work stood for quite a while, several decades in fact. But I think more recently, about five or 10 years ago, using some more modern techniques, Tony Downs, who’d been with me on the staff in Newcastle, had gone down to Oxford, and he continued that work down there, and many, many years later, as I say, I think he showed that probably our work was not quite what we’d thought it was, and that he’d got the real gallium hydride. But it was a very testing and interesting piece of work to do.

There is in the United States an organisation called the Gordon Research Conferences, which is a marvellous institution in many subjects, there’s 20 or 30, something like that, Gordon Conferences held each year in particular subjects, of which inorganic chemistry is one. And perhaps not surprisingly I was invited, in due course, to give one of the main lectures on our work that I’ve just been talking about.
The point about the Gordon Conferences is twofold. The first is that the speakers talk about contemporary work, there is no photographing of slides, some of the work is already unpublished... still unpublished, and it is for discussion of work in progress.
The second point is that it is a discussion conference, residential, and in the case of inorganic chemistry it was held at New Hampton School, which is a well-known boys’ boarding school in upstate New Hampshire in delightful countryside, surrounded by wooded hills, Lake Winnipesaukee, Lake Pemigewasset, boating on the lakes, it’s tennis courts, walking, whatever, is there. And the idea is that one held conference meetings all morning, until lunch, there’s a communal lunch, and then the afternoon was free, either for discussing science with colleagues, taking up points, or going on the lake in a yacht, or playing tennis, whatever. Getting to know scientists as people. But a lot of chemistry was talked there as well.
And then in the evening, there was an evening session until about 11 o’clock. And that went on for five days. It was a full week’s conference. But it was a very fertile discussion conference, limited to 100 people, and there would be... perhaps 15 or 20 full papers given, but other people could join in the discussions.

And over the course of the years I went to many Gordon Research Conferences, but this one in particular I want to talk about.
I’d given my lecture, and another man called Rolfe Herber, who was at Rutgers University, gave a lecture and this was then followed by someone and I just forget who it was, but he was talking about a new iron complex, and Rolfe Herber got up and said, ‘Well, Mössbauer spectroscopy would solve that problem’. There, I have to diverge, because I’ve got one version of this story, and Rolfe Herber’s got the other. Rolfe Herber says at that point, when he said Mössbauer spectroscopy will solve this, I said, ‘What on earth is Mössbauer spectroscopy?’ And he interrupted his lecture and gave a short talk about it. Actually, I got a clap when I mentioned it, if I did. Because no one else had heard of it either.
My version of the story is that Herber said Mössbauer spectroscopy would solve this problem, and Hans Jonassen, who was sitting at the back, said, ‘What is this Mössbauer spectroscopy?’ And got the answer. Whatever, that was the first mention of the word, as far as I was concerned, and I was intrigued by what Rolfe had said, so instead of going on a yacht on the lake that afternoon, I said to Rolfe, ‘Can you give me a tutorial on this? What on earth really is it?’ Pencil and paper came out, and we talked for three hours.

In short, what it is, and it was I think the year that Mössbauer actually got the… Mössbauer... sorry, got the Nobel Prize for the Mössbauer effect. It is, essentially, that if you have a particular type of radioactive transition, gamma ray emission it’s called, and the atom that is giving off the gamma ray is embedded in a solid, you get no recoil. You know that if you fire a gun, the gun recoils. And there are ways of minimising that, but the recoil is there. When an atom gives off a gamma ray, that is energy, and the atom recoils. And that is taken from the energy of the ray.
Now, what Mössbauer found, and this was totally unexpected, was that if the atom was in a solid, the whole of the crystal recoiled, and as the recoil energy is inversely proportional to the mass, it was negligible, because it was the whole crystal, not just the atom, which took the recoil energy. So he had the perception to realise that he was seeing the recoil-less emission of gamma rays, and their resonant reabsorption in another atom. So you have an emitter of gamma rays, and you have an atom in a sample... solid state sample of interest. The gamma rays pass through, and if the atoms in the absorber have exactly the right energy for the gamma ray, the energy will be absorbed. The trick is how to count it. 
Well, Mössbauer did it in a particular way, because it was the first time it was done, but in the course of a year or two, some electronic ways were developed, which I needn’t go into, but essentially they used the Doppler effect.

You know that if you hear an ambulance siren pass you on the road. Bzzzz as it goes past. Or a train whistle, when it’s blowing. That is the Doppler effect, because when a sound emitter, in this case, is moving towards you, the sound waves are compressed, so that the pitch of the tone rises. When it’s disappearing away from you, it is attenuated, and the note drops in tone.
The gamma ray is also electromagnetic radiation, like light, but of a very much shorter wavelength, very much more energetic, in fact. And so you can get devices which move backwards and forwards with particular wave shapes, and they will be a Doppler velocity which gives more and less energy, just around the absorption energy. So one gets a curve, or perhaps I’ll start this way… there is the baseline, comes down like that.
And magically, that works… well, Mössbauer found it first in iridium. It turns out that iron is by far the easiest, the 57 isotope of iron is the pre-eminent Mössbauer absorber, and that’s of course the one that we started on as well, when I’d heard about this.

Rolfe was doing it, Goldanskii was using it in Moscow, and after I came back from this Gordon Conference, I immediately wrote an application to SRC [Science Research Council] for this totally new concept, there was no one in England had applied for it before, I think someone… I think Charles Johnson in Harwell was doing a physics experiment on this. He was testing Einstein’s gravitational theory with it, but in terms of chemistry, no one had put in an application, no one on the selection committee, apparently, knew anything about it, but they knew it was novel, and they knew that Mössbauer had just got a Nobel Prize, so it was worth supporting.
And, in fact, what Mössbauer had discovered was a totally new form of spectroscopy which gave gamma rays of unprecedented precision, so that you could see minute effects... the effects of chemistry on the nucleus. Chemists traditionally learn that radioactivity is independent of the chemical compound. That’s only true to a first approximation. If you look precisely with this enormously closely defined gamma ray, monochromatic, you can detect changes. If a compound is formed, the s-electron density in the nucleus is altered, minutely, and that is what it monitors.
But it does more. Not all nuclei are spherical. Some of them are oblong-shaped. So they would have a quadrupole moment, the positive charge of the nucleus is not just a spherical blob, it is football shaped, so it would have a quadrupole moment. Depending on which way that is aligned to the gamma ray, you will get a quadrupole splitting, depending on what the nuclear spins are. And also if the compound is magnetic. In iron, typically, you get a 6-membered peak, with the intensity ratios 3, 2, 1, 1, 2, 3. So you have an enormously powerful way of looking at things.

So it’s like inventing NMR spectroscopy, or infra-red spectroscopy, or quadrupole resonance spectroscopy. Mössbauer spectroscopy was a new one. Well, I thought that was terrific. I had been interested in solid state chemistry. I could immediately think of many problems in solid state chemistry, particularly mixed valence compounds, where you couldn’t work out the valence from chemical ways, Mössbauer would tell you there’s some iron in 2+ state, some iron in 3+ state, some of the iron atoms are magnetic, others are in centrosymmetrical environment. And enormous amount of new range of studying defects in solids, migrations in solids, and the structure of co-ordination compounds. So willy-nilly, although I was a main group element chemist, I found that I was getting interested in co-ordination compounds.
That is the story of how I got interested. It says the importance of Gordon Conferences and how, by collaboration in this way, one can get into a new field.

I have to say that both Rolfe Herber, who is now in Israel, and Goldanskii, who is unfortunately no longer with us, were enormously helpful to me as a beginner in this field, and there are many other people who were working then in America, and increasingly on the continent, Mössbauer’s group as well, I got to know very, very well, and Mössbauer himself, and there was a camaraderie and a helpfulness to new beginners which came in, and I benefited from that enormously. It was science collaboration at its best.
And the beauty of it was that no one was treading on anyone else’s field, because it was the whole of chemistry, so long as the compound had a Mössbauer nucleus in it, it could be studied. And you’d get new information.
Well, iron was the easiest, as I said. You had to do these experiments often at liquid helium temperature, so that was a new technique we had to master as well.

My first graduate student in this – and he was the first in Newcastle that I had – was Terry Gibb. He was an excellent student, a highly gifted student in mathematics, and in Mössbauer spectroscopy. I got a position for an electronics engineer, Derek Cooper, who built our first Mössbauer spectrometers, before commercial ones were available. And so over the period of a year after the Gordon Conference, I was able to get a graduate student, and then a technician, or an electronics engineer, to build up the apparatus, and we were working, and Bob Greatrex came on, and then the other people.

Now, cutting forward very rapidly – I’ll come back again to what I’ve been saying – but cutting forward, I’ll just say that after eight or nine years of this, we became... because the group was so productive, we became recognised as experts in this area, both in this country and more widely throughout the world, and Terry Gibb and I decided that at the end of the decade, it would be a good time to write a book on it. And we wrote a book which was very well received, Mössbauer Spectroscopy, which for several decades was the ‘bible’ of Mössbauer spectroscopers.
We gave the physical basis of the effect. It was a book written for chemists, by chemists, and it wasn’t a physics book – as there was a physics book available – but our concentration was: explain in chemically intelligible terms what the effect was, what it could do, and then we went through all the known compounds, and all the known papers, of which there were many hundred by that time, into quite a large book.

The other elements are more difficult to study by Mössbauer spectroscopy, but tin is not too difficult, so we started tin compounds, that got us into the Tin Research Institute, and they were very supportive of our work. And we did quite a lot of work on tin compounds, the 109 isotope of tin is the one there, and then later, when I went to Leeds, as we’ll come to later on, we looked at many other elements as well.

Now, that is a good introduction, perhaps, to Mössbauer spectroscopy, but what you’ll realise, Brian, is having said that, that it is a solid state… you need a crystalline solid, perhaps at liquid helium temperature, certainly liquid nitrogen temperature, whereas most of my other work had been done on liquids. But this new interest in solids revived my interests in what I had been doing in Melbourne many years earlier. 
That was, you recall, on nonstoichiometry, and the effect in cuprous oxide, which had cuprous and cupric irons in the lattice. Copper, unfortunately, is not a Mössbauer element, but I realised that this would be a very good technique in principle for looking at the structure of defects in the solid – whether it was an interstitial site, whether it was a vacant site – a lattice vacancy, what the structure was around the vacancy, is it a vacancy cluster, what the actual energy and oxidation states were, of elements, when this was confused.
For example, if you have a mixed iron sulphide, is it ferrous and ferric, in what proportions? Are there other elements there as well? Something which you can’t get from simple chemical experiments on the solid, but Mössbauer would give a clear answer to.

So I thought it was now… let me calculate, it was 15 or so years getting on that way, certainly more than a decade, from… yes, it must have been 15 years since I left Australia, and my Masters work on copper oxide was, in a way, a dim memory. I hadn’t been keeping up with that sort of literature, so I thought I’d better find out what the current scenes in solid state nonstoichiometry were, and whether Mössbauer could solve any of these problems.
And remembering an old adage which JS Anderson told me as a graduate student, ‘Norman, if you want to learn a subject, write a book on it’. Well, I’d just done that with Mössbauer Spectroscopy, I suppose, and I thought if I’m going to find out what is current in the solid state field, I’d better write a book on it. And the way to do that was to take sabbatical leave and go to a university in America and see what would come of that. So I did. I went to Michigan State University, and I wrote a book called Ionic Crystals, Lattice Defects, and Nonstoichiometry.

One final thing that I’d like to say before leaving the Newcastle period of my work is to say what a wonderful part of England Northumberland is to live, to work, to bring up a family in. During all this work that we’ve been talking about I was, of course, also a family man, and the fact that I could do all this was very much made possible by the fact that Kirsten was such a wonderful person to have as a helper and a background, and encouragement.

We had three children, they were all growing up. They went to the Newcastle Central High School for Girls, and of course with growing children they had friends, and for those who know Northumberland, they will not be surprised to say that we had a marvellous time. It was a 10-minute drive down to the beach in Tynemouth, Whitley Bay, the beaches were superb. The water, I have to say, was jolly cold, in the North Sea, but they were excellent beaches. The hinterland, up in the Tyne and the Upper Tyne, Hadrian’s Wall which we explored in detail and the Roman camps that were there, the River Coquet and Rothbury, Alnwick Castle, and going up north there were Bamburgh Castle, Dunstanburgh – they are superb Norman forts which are not as well known as they should be.
And then, further north again, there are the Farne Islands, which was really the northern seat of English Christianity when the monks came over from Ireland and founded the monastery at Lindisfarne. And in the Farne Islands, actually, there is now a bird sanctuary. In about July time each year, literally millions of birds of many different sorts, puffins, kestrels, eiders, you name it, seabirds of all sort came and nested in the cliffs, in the ground, in every nook and cranny, and it is just alive with birds. And we went out, by boat, there to see this. It was a wonderful place for young people to grow up in, and a wonderful place to do science. The other thing, of course, was it was very close to Scotland, and before I’d gone to Newcastle I’d not had the chance and the privilege of going to Scotland. And we’d been to Wales on a holiday once. But Scotland was also, of course, very much more accessible, and we went on several trips up there as well.

[Q] I think, Norman, you know, given your highly successful career at Newcastle, apparent to us all, why did you choose to leave to go to Leeds?
Good question. Obviously we were happy there, as a family. It was very close to Norway, which we often went to. The research group was going very well, all the people that were working there had an international reputation, so it may seem a bit strange.
What happened was that Harry Irving, who built up a very good inorganic group in Leeds, came to retiring age, and as was the custom, I found, in Leeds, about 18 months before retirement, the university would set up a committee to find a successor.
And... I’m now talking about 1971... or actually, 18 months before that, so it was probably early 1970. I got a letter from Leeds explaining the circumstances, and saying they were looking for an appropriate person to fill, did I, as an inorganic chemist, have anyone to suggest? Because I clearly knew many of the people, I was on the council of the Chemical Society and so forth. And I knew the inorganic scene fairly well, so what I did – and it’s what I thought I should have been doing – was to make a list of all the people that I thought were ‘chairable’. These were the people who were lecturers, senior lecturers, people who were very productive, and who were doing work which I thought was admirable.
And I made, perhaps a list of eight, ten perhaps, people of this sort, and mentioned their strengths and characteristics. And then said – as perhaps a fateful final sentence – but of course the distinction of Leeds is such that it may well be that someone who’s already in a chair would be attracted to it. I have no idea if anyone is, because I’ve not approached anyone who’s already in a chair, but if you would like any further information I would be glad to give it. And so signed it.
And to my utter astonishment – and it’s something that I don’t think could happen nowadays – about two or three weeks later I got a letter from Sir Roger Stevens, who was the then Vice-Chancellor, and he said the appointing committee has considered yours and other responses that they got from their initial inquiries, and as a result of this, it is their unanimous decision, that if you would do us the honour of coming to Leeds, we would be glad to make arrangements that would be attractive to you. And we hope that you would like to come down to Leeds and discuss the matter with us.
Well, as they say, with an invitation like that, it was difficult to refuse, and I thought certainly, out of courtesy, I’d have to go down and look at what was there. And of course I was not so unworldly as not to realise that I was in a fairly strong bargaining position at this stage. So I went down at an appropriate stage, and I had to say that I rapidly formed the opinion that a) Newcastle was excellent, b) Leeds was also excellent, and about twice the size, with twice the facilities, nearly three times the inorganic staff, and in many ways it did look a very tempting offer.
But of course there were problems of schooling that I had to think about, and Kirsten was very happy in Newcastle, being so close to her hometown of Bergen, so we talked about this, and to cut a long story short, in the end I said, well, I would come if we could discuss the funding and whether there were positions available that I could fill, and Leeds seemed very pleased with this. It happened to coincide with the end of a quinquennium, which was the way the universities were funded in those days, and some of my grants were supplied by the University Grants Committee (UGC) and there was then also the possibility that some of those posts could be made permanent.
And so Newcastle and Leeds had to negotiate between them as to whether my posts would come with me down to Leeds and so forth. So there was some toing and froing, and they certainly offered an attractive salary, though one had to say that that wasn’t really the main thing, but it was not negligible. But what was important was that all the people would be happy to come down with me, and I had quite a big group by then. I had some unfilled posts that Leeds had very sensibly, perhaps, kept vacant until the new professor was appointed, and so in the end a deal was struck, and I think it was a good deal, and I hope that I did Leeds well by coming down.
Certainly we enjoyed… I came down in 1971. For reasons of schooling, Kirsten stayed up in Newcastle with the girls. Our eldest girl, Karen, had just got into New Hall Cambridge, and the Master of New Hall was Miss Murray, Rosemary Murray, who’d been a colleague of mine in Cambridge – she was in the inorganic section of the Chemistry Department. And then our next girl, Anne, was just about to take the final year of A level. So it wasn’t fair on her to move from her school, even though there was a good school, of course in Leeds, but all her friends were there, and she knew the teachers and the system. So it was agreed that she would stay up in Leeds for that year, and Kirsten would be there.
Our youngest daughter, Linda, who was four years younger than Anne, was in the middle of high school, so that wasn’t really… such a difficult problem, at least for us. Though I think she cursed us at the time because as a 13-year-old she didn’t particularly want to leave her friends. But the move was made, finally.

During that year I stayed in one of the halls of residence, and by a most amazing coincidence, one would have to say, the person... the member of staff who happened to be in charge of the Henry Price hall of residence, was Jimmy Austin.
Jimmy Austin, whom you may not be familiar with, was actually the person who I replaced in Trinity College, Melbourne. He was a Melbourne graduate. He’d been the tutor at Trinity College before me, it was his leaving that triggered the vacancy. His sister, June, was a girl that I knew, because she had been a lab cadet like I was, in CSIR [Council for Scientific and Industrial Research], but had subsequently married an American serviceman and gone to live in America. And he was not only in charge of Henry Price Hall, but he was also in the Chemistry Department. So I immediately knew Jimmy Austin, and it turned out that Don Baulsh was there – he’d been to University High School, so I knew quite a few of the people, as well as the chemists.

Perhaps I could mention some of the other people there, because you’ll certainly know some of them. A very distinguished group of chemists there. The three most senior ones, I would say, and certainly most productive, were Bernard Shaw, who subsequently became a Fellow of the Royal Society, there was Geoff Sykes, who not immediately following me, but the one after, went up to Newcastle, and also subsequently became a Fellow of the Royal Society, and the third one was Leslie Pettit, who’d been a student of Harry Irving’s in Oxford and who was well known in IUPAC and other circles for his very excellent work on thermodynamics of aqueous solutions.

There was also a big X-ray diffraction group, because before Harry Irving had been professor, Sir Gordon Cox had been professor, and as you know, he was a very distinguished crystallographer. Not so interested, I have to say, in inorganic compounds, but the chair that I went to, and one that I thought was very well named, was Inorganic and Structural Chemistry. And I was very much aware of the structural aspect of what I was doing, and there were a couple of crystallographers there. Geoff Pringle, who retired shortly after I came, and Wally McDonald, who was also a good crystallographer... younger man. And there was a chap called Bradley who was there, who was a solid state chemist, particularly high pressure chemistry. He was an expert in high pressure chemistry.

So there was a largish group of senior people there, and so I had to be mindful of the fact that I was the new boy on the block. I happened to be the head of the department, but I certainly took care to respect what they were doing, because it was very distinguished work, and I hope I did nothing to upset their source of funds or the work that they were doing. We all seemed to get on very well indeed, and I certainly enjoyed the company and the camaraderie within the department.

Well, of course, coming down... and I think there were about 13 people with other people’s families coming down with us, but at least half a dozen of the science group came down with me, to various posts. Some of them I’ve mentioned: Terry Gibb and Bob Greatrex, then there was Arthur Howe, who came from Melbourne, and several other people came, both in the Mössbauer group and in the... in the solid state... in the Mössbauer group and in the borane, boron hydride and gallium work. They came down.
And of those, I should mention, I think, particularly, Tim Akitt, who was an NMR [nuclear magnetic resonance] specialist, and he’d been appointed to run our NMR... I haven’t said much about NMR, except that it got continually bigger and better as the years went by. But where we were interested, and where we made our impact, I think, was that instead of concentrating, as most people did, on the ‘obvious’ and easily done ones of proton, carbon, phosphorus and fluorine – they were the ones that were easy to do and they of course have many important compounds including the whole of organic chemistry – we wanted to look at the NMR of other elements, particularly, for example, aluminium. We did some very interesting work with Tim Akitt on aluminium compounds in solution. That’s a long story which I won’t go through, except to say that, as you know, that aluminium is amphoteric, so as you make it increasingly basic or acidic, you go through a solution phase, it precipitates, it’s hydrated aluminium, and then redissolves again, so there are many solutions, and he did some beautiful work unravelling that.
Gallium, I think we were the first. Gallium has two isotopes, 69 and 71. Both are NMR active. The 69 is rather easier to work with, but we did work on both of those with Tim Akitt and successive graduate students.

I forgot to mention when we were talking about Newcastle that one of the things we started was an MSc course, which was funded, on spectroscopic properties. It was a one year Masters course, where the students were paid for by SRC [Science Research Council], and we got funding for it, so we had a big group of students who started by doing lectures and then experiments in either NMR spectroscopy, Mössbauer spectroscopy, far infra-red spectroscopy, these sorts of things, under various members of staff.

On the lecturing, there was, of course... well, I should also perhaps say that like Newcastle, Leeds had a tri-partite arrangement of three departments: inorganic and structural, physical, and organic. But there was a difference. Whereas in Newcastle the department was one department of chemistry, in Leeds each of the three departments was an independent department. The head of department had a seat on Senate, had all the perquisites of a head of department, and the three heads, between them, formed the School of Chemistry, and if there were things like services, technicians, lab space and so forth that could affect or impact more than one department, the three heads met. But it was three heads of independent departments.
Now that works if the three heads get on. It doesn’t work so well if they don’t. And it’s probably common knowledge that Harry Irving and Fred Dainton and Basil Lythgoe did not always agree eye-to-eye with things. And that was a limiting factor. And unbeknown to me, I had been brought in not only because I could do some good chemistry, but apparently people had judged that I might be a person who could meld this together into a good working relationship again.
And I can well remember the Registrar coming to me several months after my appointment, when I was down there saying, ‘What’s wrong with chemistry? You haven’t had a row yet’. And I said, ‘You’re not likely to hear one if we have got one, because it’ll be in-house’.

From the beginning, Basil Lythgoe and Peter Gray – as he succeeded Fred Dainton – all got on very well, and... but one of the things was, as a result of that, that from day one, I was Chairman of the School of Chemistry. So not only did I have to look after the inorganic and structural chemistry, but I had to feel my way into the politics of the School of Chemistry. But it worked out well, and it was three years on, and each one took their turn in this, and then it came around again.
That system worked for a while, but as you well know, progressively over the next two decades, it became clear, particularly with the decrease in funds and so forth, that it became more sensible to have a unitary School of Chemistry, albeit perhaps with sections in it, but it wasn’t a particularly good model to have three entirely independent professors in charge of bits of chemistry, independent in making their appointments, independent in what they taught in the undergraduate courses and so forth.
And there was a little bit of flavour that we’ve alluded to before between physical chemistry in Cambridge as it was, and the other side of chemistry. There is something of that there, and Bristol had the same problem, another department, but now I think virtually all departments of chemistry in the country are – if they haven’t been abolished – at least unitary, and there are identifiable sections, but they are much more coherent. And that, I think, is entirely to the good.
But starting from where I did, as one of the first professors of inorganic chemistry, it was very important in the ‘60s and ‘70s to build up inorganic chemistry as an equal third of the chemistry structure, because before that, many departments had very little inorganic chemistry at all. So I think the separation served its purpose, but after that we came together. 

Once established in Leeds, and understanding what the situation was, the teaching part worked very well, and we had courses, and I had an input, and started feeding in some of the ideas that I’ve been talking about developing in Newcastle. As far as the research is concerned, I had some quite well defined areas which didn’t interact... they were quite separate.

So Mössbauer spectroscopy was well established, and Terry and I had written a book on it, we’d become well known throughout the world, and that had two effects: the first was in coming down to Leeds I was able to build up a dedicated large laboratory space with many Mössbauer spectrometers and good access to liquid helium. On the other hand, it meant that, because of our growing reputation, people were coming from all over the world, with their own money, to work in the group both as post-doctoral fellows, if they’d won a scholarship from their own country, or from visiting members of staff, people came on sabbatical leave, and so forth.
So that work went very well, and I suppose the main thing from the point of view of our discussion now is that we picked compounds clearly that could be solved in iron chemistry and tin – tin 119 was a moderately easy isotope – but I thought we should also try some of the more difficult ones, that is to say, more difficult technically from the Mössbauer effect.

I thought that what we should do is develop some of the more difficult compounds... elements. Iron in the group of the periodic table has the next element beneath it, ruthenium, so that was one. Ruthenium-99 was not an easy one, both in making the sources of the radiation and in doing it at very low temperatures, and also the physics group at the Technische Hochschule in Munich, Mössbauer’s group were working in that area as well and as far as the physics of the technique were concerned they were clearly in much better shape than I would ever be to do this. But we knew the chemical aspects of it well and many of the compounds of ruthenium that we studied gave us some interesting information and I think we also found out for the first time the quadrupole moment of the ruthenium nucleus.
 

As a leap out of the main group and the transition elements, we tried europium which was also... europium-151, I think, and I did some work with Ian McColm on solid state compounds of europium carbides and borides and so forth which gave some interesting results which couldn’t have been obtained.
So in summary what we were doing with the Mössbauer group was a) to train many people coming from oversees, b) of course talking at conferences about the work and publishing in this area, and then also doing these nuclei.

Perhaps the most intriguing work that we did at that stage – and Arthur Howe did this – was some of the returned lunar rocks. As you probably know, the Russians had sent spaceships to the Moon, not men but spaceships. They mechanically dug up some of the lunar regolith and took that back to Earth... the so called Lunar Program that they had... and we acquired some of their samples to look at, and certainly the NASA samples we had ready access to because Keith Runcorn, who was the Professor of Physics, was already on the NASA team and gave me an introduction there and he was able to get me as a senior investigator so we had all of the Apollo mission samples.
One thing we did do at a later stage I went to one of the Apollo lunar launches, and that was just an extraordinary experience. I can’t elaborate on it really but... unless you’ve been there you have no concept of what the size of these things is, what the power of it is, what the impact of seeing these is.

As far as the Mössbauer was concerned it was a lively group with people from not only our own group but overseas which came here, particularly from Japan, from New Zealand, Australia, India there were several coming from, American. There was a large group of people.

Now, one of the other groups – and we’ve talked about this to some extent in the Newcastle era – was the boron hydride work. That was growing apace and... it became obvious to me that with all my other commitments, both outside the university and within the university and the university administration and so forth, and with two active groups it was getting too difficult for me to be up-to-date with what was going on and planning things, and I didn’t want the machine to start running me. I wanted to have some input into it, and the problem was the that Mössbauer experiments were certainly solid state experiments, nuclear physics almost, and they had no connection whatsoever with the boron experiments which in fact was now bifurcating into two different regions. One was the metallo-boranes, which we’ve just alluded to in Newcastle, and the other was the reactivity of the boranes themselves.
So, to cut a long story short, I made a decision after about six or seven years at Leeds that it wasn’t sensible to try and keep on top of all this and I would stop doing Mössbauer work. I didn’t lose interest in it. I was very interested in what was going on there but it was more as a spectator and I was happy to put in odd ideas if they occurred to me, and no doubt the group tolerated the old boy if he said something, but I didn’t after about the end of the 1970s take an active part in that work any... but the work continued particularly under Terry Gibb, who was by now a Senior Lecturer and then a Reader, and he was the main continuing influence there.

On the reactions of the boranes I asked Bob Greatrex to come with me. He had been doing Mössbauer work so he was very used to deconvoluting curves. In fact Terry Gibb helped us with the project that I’m about to tell you about and it’s an amusing transference of an idea from one area to another. Nothing could be further apart than solid state nuclear chemistry at liquid helium temperature on the one hand, and the gas phase thermolysis of reactive boron hydrides on the other. But there is a connection. How do you follow rapid reactions which are going on in the gas phase amongst – and I have to say it unblushingly – the most complex atmospheric gas phase several reactions that had ever been examined? It’s alright taking A and B and mixing them and seeing what happens. You can do that in the gas phase, or you can have A which decomposes to B, decomposes to C. That can be followed. But suppose you start with A which decomposes to B and C, and B and C react with A and with each other to give D and E and F literally, perhaps at least half a dozen, probably more, main species all going on in the gas phase, all colourless, all non-magnetic. In fact it reminds me once of talking with your colleague, Jack Lewis. I’d been at a lecture once of his and I said, ‘All this transition element work, beautiful work with magneto-chemistry, crystallography and so forth, how would you study a colourless gas which was non-magnetic and so on’, and he said, ‘I wouldn’t. It’s not for my techniques’.
So the thing is this. I devised a way of looking at this. As you know high resolution spectroscopy [sic] will give you a precise mass measurement of a species in the gas phase. If it was a simple compound with one isotope in each that is very easy. You’ve got A and B, put them together is AB. That’s the sum of the masses. The mass spectrometer will measure it and it will tell you precisely that it is that. Now, in terms of the problem that I’m talking about you haven’t got that situation. You’ve got boron who... that has two isotopes, boron-10 and boron-11. If you have species which have two borons, three, four, five and six not to say 10 boron atoms in them, you have an isotopic random mixture of boron-10 and boron-11 so there is a mixture of that. If you’re doing this at unit mass resolution, you can’t tell, but boron-10 is not exactly one unit less than boron-11; it’s just fractionally different for all the nuclear reasons that you would understand. So you can tell which each peak is if you can get it at high enough resolution and get the precise mass. That’s the first thing. The second thing is, not only does boron-10 differ by one from boron-11, but boron-10 with one hydrogen has got almost the same as boron-9.

So we rigged up an apparatus which essentially consisted of a glass reaction vessel which was surrounded by a heating element and an oven, and that oven was thermostated at successive temperatures, kept constant... and then this reaction flask was connected by a lead to the mass spectrometer, and at intervals during the reaction we would bleed some of the gas, a minute fraction, into the mass spectrometer which was immediately analysed and give us all the masses which were present and their concentrations by the height of the peaks. So we had all this information and the problem was how to deconvolute it and make it into compounds because we had to, as I say, discern the difference between a B10H and a B11 and so forth. And it turns out that the mathematics for doing this was very similar to the mathematics that was required to deconvolute the Mössbauer spectra, so although the two subjects seem miles apart, the way of reducing the data to something intelligible was fairly similar. And so, as I said, we had Terry Gibbs initially to help us with the mathematics of this, and we found that we could follow the course of the reaction – and again there’s no need to go into detail – but the method worked and we were able to, I think, give a reasonable explanation for how each of the various boron hydrides was formed and having been formed then subsequently reacted to form other boron hydrides... to the total that we could get right through the whole range of the simple boron hydrides, the first ten of them.
So that was a thing that we did with the... with the mass spectrometer and the gas phase reactions, and I was able to talk about this at several of the conferences and we wrote some of it up in full papers as well.

The other part of the boron hydride work we did was quite different. We were reacting specific boron hydrides, B5, B6 and so forth. For example, we’d thermolise B5H9 with iron pentacarbonyl and we found that B5 is a pyramid of four hydrogens [sic – should be borons] in a base and an apex. The apex boron came off and iron tricarbonyl was there and we got a neat, very stable molecule. That would be a simple and straightforward action but what happened was that when one put other elements in like ruthenium, for example, the platinum metals, iridium, we got extraordinary mixtures and completely unprecedented structures where two boranes would join up by having a platinum unit in the middle of one or two platinums and so forth, and we were able to open up this new field of metallo-borane compounds to give a very rich range of chemistry, and the way we were able to make progress was because, firstly, many of these compounds were crystalline solids and the group got very expert at making the compounds, recrystalising them and then doing an X-ray crystal structure and so it wasn’t necessary to analyse any more by analytical chemical means. We would have crystals with a known structure and you would know precisely what it was. And that was made possible, of course, by the advent of computers which though we haven’t mentioned them before were actually coming into use about this time. In the early ‘60s you would rarely see a computer in a chemistry lab. You certainly wouldn’t see a desktop computer. The university might have a mainframe computer and many of the experiments would be connected by a landline to the main computer. But the idea of having a computer integral with the apparatus was something in the ‘60s and ‘70s which was not feasible.

The other thing which made it possible was – and I think John Kennedy developed this very well indeed – was... he noticed, well we all noticed that these compounds were now stable in air. From the reactive boranes we got metalloboranes which were very stable and John realised that he could work more efficiently if he did the reactions and then did a paper chromatograph of this, separate the bands of different colours, cut out the part of... that he was interested in and then react that or react it further or characterise the compound. So by working with very small amounts of compound, which was of course important when the platinum metals were involved because the compounds weren’t trivial for their costs, it was possible to open up completely new ranges of structures.

Now, in between those two parts of boron chemistry, the gas phase analysis and the metalloboranes, was another field which became possible and that was we learnt how by certain reactions to make what we called conjuncto-boranes. In other words, boron units which were conjoined, joined together, so that instead of forming multicentre bonds we made a B-B bond or other sorts of bonds. And it turned out that we were able to do this because by reacting, say, thermolising, heating up decaborane... as you know one of the products of decaborane reactions is a gunge... a polymer, and no-one had any clear ideas what the structure was so we worked this up into separate fractions and were able to show first by mass spectrometry and then by NMR [nuclear magnetic resonance], which was also a very valuable technique, boron or proton-decoupled with boron and so forth, to work out what the chemical structures of these were and they were complex borane clusters conjoined either by boron-boron bonds or by sideways bonding or three in a triangle and so forth and we got B20 compounds, B30 compounds and could be quite certain that it was what we were saying because we also did the mass spectrometry and counted up the masses precisely and got the chemical compounds.

Perhaps that’s for the moment enough of the chemistry that I was interested in doing. At the same time of course there were other aspects of being Head of the Department which are perhaps worth recalling. I was a member of Senate and we were discussing general university policies but there were many areas of student politics, for example, which were important then. Students were becoming increasingly active to become part of university governance, and slowly they indeed gained some access to sitting on Senate and its representatives. The other things that senior professors had to do, of course, was select members of staff, appoint other chemists and then sit in various faculties, plus at one stage I was Chairman of the Faculty Board, essentially Dean of the Faculty of Science. There we had to talk about the interaction between departments and how they developed because of changing things, the expansions, halls of residence. I was on the Hall of Residence Committee as well.

One aspect which became complete... well very important was the external relations of the university – crudely put, publicity. The Chancellor at this stage was Lord Boyle and he was Chancellor in fact for much of the time that I was at Leeds and we had a very good working relationship. When the university rejigged itself we decided there should be, in fact, a body which was concerned with relations of people outside the university and Boyle asked me if I would be chairman of this committee which I was happy to do. One aspect of this, which I’m quite pleased worked out well, was in having open days.
Now, in Melbourne University, where I came from originally, open days were a very highly regarded aspect. It was a day when the university was thrown open to the general public. People would come in, walk around the departments and do... find out what was going on. It was very helpful for senior school children, for teachers but also parents were interested and the general public who, of course for obvious reasons, had very little idea of what a university was. And we talked about this and there was surprising opposition to the idea of an open day at Leeds University to start with, but I persisted and several people on the External Relations Committee agreed with what I was trying to do and gave me very enthusiastic support and finally Senate approved that they would have an Open Day which we had.

I don’t think it was the first open day ever, but it was certainly the first open day in the modern era; there hadn’t been one for half a century before at least. Most departments joined in. They had very good displays and in the end I think there was over 30,000 people on campus, coming of all ages. The medical school of course was important; throat swabs and things like that. The physics students were going... the physics department was showing their experiments. We showed Mossbauer. We had experiments on samples from the moon, for example, and they could see what we were doing with that, which caused great interest. Colour chemistry, another department, was an obvious draw. The biological and zoological departments, engineering – the whole of the university, including I have to say the mathematics department who put on some very interesting displays. It was generally counted to be a great success, and I think they have held them annually since then. Certainly for several years this was so, and I have here to pay tribute particularly to the administrative staff of the university, particularly Jillian Rennie, who was the entertainments officer of the university. They gave us enormous support and put in hours in the evening preparing for these things and, of course, the technicians and technical support, secretarial support of the university came in on the Saturday... and that reminds me in passing, it’s amusing now to think that people came in especially on Saturdays. In Newcastle, and indeed in Nottingham, we just worked through. Occasionally I went home to carve the Christmas turkey or something like that but, in fact, one worked on Saturdays and often came in to take readings on a Sunday as well and that, I think, is something which has probably disappeared. I notice now when I go in after 21 years of retirement – and I go in most days to the university – if I have to go in the evening there aren’t many people still in there. It’s a different style of working, perhaps because of the computer control and instrumentation. It’s certainly different.

Outside the university I was still interested in the affairs of IUPAC [International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry], was very much still working in the atomic weights area, and because of that I was called on to be one of the two chemists on an international group that looked into a very important problem. The other member was Yves Jeannin from Paris. And the problem had to do again in the general area of atomic weights, but not so much the determination of atomic weights but who discovered particular atoms. Now, all the elements up to element about 100, even 101, had been discovered by this time and there wasn’t particular contention about who had made the discovery.
But then during the Cold War period, after the war and in the ‘60s and ‘70s and ‘80s, there became a rather acrimonious competition between the Soviet Union and the United States, and then subsequently with Germany, on who had first made a particular element and this was important for a variety of reasons. Firstly, of course, there was the national pride which is very important in having people discovering new elements. But also the people who were doing the work were doing experiments at enormous cost and the funding agencies wanted to know that the cost was being repaid, and one only has to think in present days of CERN and the problems of funding big multinational things that this is a problem.
Now, let me explain the nature of the problem. What is a discovery? How do you discover an element? In fact, in the context that we’re talking about, which is the trans-fermium elements beyond element 101, discovery is not a very good word. It is synthesis. You are making it. You are making something that doesn’t exist. You are not finding something that does exist. But the way that science is organised in different countries means that there are considerable difficulties in making decisions about who first made a particular element. For example, what are the criteria for a discovery? We said that it should be a published paper in a refereed journal. Saying something at a conference didn’t count because, a) you could think you’d said it or, b) you’d said something different or, thirdly, by the time you’d come to write it up you’d changed your mind and modified it to some extent which might be crucial. So, it had to be a published paper and the date of receipt was the important thing. There is the problem or one of the problems.
In the USSR, certainly at that time, the Academy of Science published all their work internally as non-refereed reports. They circulated amongst the academies and they were not sent for public presentation until review processes and so forth had been carried out and sometimes that could be 18 months. In America, on the other hand, Glenn Seaborg’s group in Berkeley, California could do an experiment today, write the experiment up if it was clear-cut and have it published within a couple of weeks. So the date of doing the experiments was important. Whether an experiment was repeatable was important. Whether people outside the lab could do it was important, and also, remember, that we are making a new element and characterising it by its decay patterns and so forth. It may decay into unknown isotopes of lighter elements which had yet not been synthesised or, one group might prepare one isotope of the element. Another group might prepare another. They would have different isotopes and different masses. Are they the same element? Another problem. Another technical problem: these new elements are all unstable, many of them exist for a millisecond. How do you characterise an element in that time? How do you know what a half-life is? Well, a half-life is the time at which half the sample decays, but you haven’t got half a sample. You’ve got one atom. Some of these experiments you would do millions of encounters of atoms by the bombarding processes that they do. One of them will form this atom which the computer can pick out and you’ve got it. You might wait a week to get another one. If you’ve got three you’re lucky, but is it the same element? Is it the same isotope? Because half-time... half-life is an average? How do you average one or two events? It’s... there are technical problems.

We had a group which was formed under the chairmanship of Sir Denys Wilkinson, who is a distinguished physics professor originally from Cambridge then to Oxford and then Vice- Chancellor at the University of Sussex in Brighton, or near Brighton. And there were about five or six other physicists as members plus two chemists, myself and Yves Jeannin. This was a joint IUPAP [International Union of Pure and Applied Physics] physics and IUPAC [International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry] chemistry committee, and we had to agree first of all on the criteria and that took a long while. Then we had to visit each of the labs which were major players in this, principally Berkeley, GSI in Darmstadt and Dubna in... north of Moscow... to find out what they were doing and what they agreed.
Now, to give you some idea of the difficulties this was not the first committee that had been formed. The first committee had been formed I think a decade earlier under the chairmanship of Jack Lewis, and Jack Lewis is no mean person when it comes to running committees. He had a committee. I don’t think they actually ever met once. They may have corresponded but not everyone did. It really just was in the long grass and nothing happened. So we had a difficult job, but Denys Wilkinson was very patient, took his time. We thought at first he was taking too long but in retrospect he knew exactly what he was up against and he was a superb nuclear physicist as well, and we visited Berkeley for nearly a week and then Dubna. Well, actually the order of it doesn’t matter but we visited in turn Berkeley, GSI in Darmstadt and Dubna and looked at their experiments and tried to judge as fairly as we could the discovery process or the first formations and this took quite some time – two or three years to do – but we finally had a consensus which we put to the laboratories of main concern and they were able to comment on this and then it was published both in physics and chemistry journals and those judgements, I think it’s fair to say, have stood the test of time.
The criteria are still exactly the criteria that are used 20 years later now and the assessment of the particular elements was now accepted, albeit grudgingly in some cases. Sometimes we said the judgement should be joint. It should be a joint credit given. Sometimes it was one laboratory, sometimes another one and there was just one other problem that sometimes an observation is made and it is recorded but people don’t know what it is and then someone else does an experiment which immediately makes you say, ah the original experiment meant something, a new element. Which is the discovery, the second one or the first one, or both together? It’s not a simple field but I think that was a very important job and it was important for one, final, further reason. Because national pride, and indeed personal pride and ego, was involved in this – understandably – people wanted the right to name an element.
Now, at this stage, and I’m talking 1990, 1991, the person or the group that was charged with the naming of the elements was the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, and they would consult both the Atomic Weights Commission of which I’d been chairman and the Nomenclature Committee for obvious reasons because, interestingly enough, you can’t just name an element whatever you want. Sometimes it doesn’t translate. Sometimes it’s almost a swear word in some other languages. Other times it is misleading, and so you have to have an agreement on the name. But the person who’s discovered it said, hey this is my element I discovered it, and so again there’s a problem.
 
That was not our problem. We had the criteria of discovery which we solved. Since then all the elements which have subsequently been discovered – and we’re up to about 118 now – most of the elements have been discovered though not all, between 101 and 118... interestingly enough, one of the important facts coming from this is that the so called island of stability, the theoretical concept that whereas heavier and heavier elements get more and more unstable what is happening is that as you go to even further... you come to what are called ‘magic number nuclei’ and they should become more stable, and that was predicted by the theoretical physicists and there seems to be growing evidence now that the half-life of some of these new isotopes which are being made of the heaviest elements are, in fact, rather longer than the ones immediately after 101.
So those elements are now being named and the problem is, of course, a continuing one because the work is continuing, but it was a very interesting example of international collaboration at its best where goodwill finally came and, of course, in a sense the Cold War aspect has disappeared now because that era of politics has passed. But the chemistry is still advancing and still there are the personal and laboratory problems.

Just an aside, Brian, on the nature of discovery. Here’s a good example: whether a discoverer can be beaten to his own discovery. You’ll know that there are events called supernovae. They don’t occur very frequently. At least they’re not observed from Earth very frequently, but they are phenomenal events when a star explodes, to put it crudely, at the end of its life and blows out its content and that is in fact where the elements come from. All the elements that we’ve got are in fact made from stars and they find their way into our universe because that is matter condensing from the rest of the universe and it will take up the results of these explosions and that’s how many of the heavier elements were formed. Now, these events can’t be missed in the sky but they don’t occur very often.
There was a famous one found by the Chinese, Galileo saw one, and there was one occurred and I just don’t recall the date but about 30 years ago I think in the South Magellanic Cloud in the Southern Hemisphere and what happened in the actual observation was that an astronomer was doing some work with a telescope on one of the many telescopes on the mountains in Hawaii where the mountains are high and the air is clear so there’s not much disturbance from twinkling of the air, and he’d been there for a while so he thought he’d stretch his legs, go outside and have a smoke. He knew the area of the heavens very well because being an astronomer he’d been studying this and he was just looking up and... he saw a star which he knew hadn’t been there before and the only way that he could have missed it as a bright star in a well known constellation was because it was a supernova and he said, ‘My God, a supernova, turn the telescopes round, let’s look at this’. Confirmed, within minutes almost, a supernova. That’s the observation which actually nobody doubts. What did he do? Excited, I don’t think the internet was there then, but he telegraphed or got in contact with the people on the other side of the Pacific from Hawaii, which is New Zealand, and said, point your telescopes at these co-ordinates, you’ll see a supernova which they did. So they observed it the day before because New Zealand’s on the other side of the date line and so they said, yes, we can see this star. Now, they didn’t say it of course but they could have said, we’ve seen it a day before you. In absolute time of course that’s nonsense. The first guy had seen it and discovered it but did he meet our discovery criteria? The answer is no he didn’t because he hadn’t published it, but that shows of course that in different areas of science you can have different criteria and no-one doubts for one moment that this man... particularly as everyone else in the world could say that what he saw was actually still there.
But another thing just on the side is that the seeing of this explosion actually occur and then decaying away over weeks and months gave some enormously valuable information about what elements had been formed. They were all radiating and remember of course that this occurred light years away so it really wasn’t happening now. It had been happening in the remote past, but the light from that supernova was just reaching us. It’s an interesting parallel in a different field of study.

I want now to say something about the arrangement of chemical societies in the United Kingdom. The first of the chemical societies, which was actually called, unsurprisingly, The Chemical Society, was founded in London in the mid-19th century and was in fact the first such chemical society, I think, in the world. They were concerned with the publication and transmission of chemistry, organising conferences and so forth, but particularly publishing the results of chemistry that were of work that was being done in the United Kingdom and elsewhere. The thought of training in chemistry, the degree courses, the professional qualifications of chemistry was not high on the agenda of the original Chemical Society and because of this the... there was a breakaway society, I suppose we could call it, which was the Royal Institute of Chemistry, and that was concerned, amongst other things, with professional qualifications, with professional standards, with the training of chemists, particularly part-time chemists who were perhaps in work and studying part-time or at technical colleges and places where there were evening classes. So that came along, and then there was the Society of Analytical Chemistry and at the turn of the century, about 1901 the Faraday Society was formed which was specialising in electrochemistry and physical chemistry.
Now, these went on and they had their own publications, but the feeling gradually developed that it was not a good idea to have these as separate organisations but chemistry as a profession would be very much better served if there was a single overarching society where all of these matters were taken care of and there was not any duplication of effort. And so in the ‘60s, I suppose, it became a fairly rapid movement. But there were difficulties and the sort of difficulties there were was that the... each of the individual societies had their own remits and their own rules and two of them by this time had royal charters. The Chemical Society had a royal charter and the...
[Q] Institution.
Sorry, the...
[Q] Royal Institution.
The Royal Institution [sic – should be Royal Institute of Chemistry], sorry for the hesitation... The Royal Institution also had a charter. They were charities, had charitable status which was important for taxation reasons, and the Faraday Society did not have a separate royal charter but it was a charitable organisation. So the legal and legalistic problems of joining these societies had to be overcome, but by and large there was goodwill. The individual societies ballotted their members on this and got, I think, an overwhelming support for it – there were some people who didn’t like the idea, obviously – but the idea of amalgamation developed and in ’71 – and I was on the council of the Chemical Society and, in fact, was Vice President of the Royal Institution... Royal Institute of Chemistry at that stage – they agreed to amalgamate, and the Faraday Society did not have such difficulty in amalgamating, but they wanted to make sure that physical chemistry was a recognised part of it.

Well, to be brief, the new Society was formed in ‘71 and started functioning in ‘72. It was amalgamation and it was decided to... I won’t go into the detailed structure. That’s not appropriate. But it was one of the main features that there were individual sections of the society which had the same status as the original independent societies. So the Faraday Society was already named after a distinguished early English chemist. Organic chemistry was now represented by the Perkin Division of the Chemical Society. The inorganic section, which I was most concerned with, was called the Dalton Division for obvious reasons and there was an analytical section as well. So each of the Presidents of these separate sections had seats on the Council of the new Chemical Society and were quasi-independent but working under the umbrella of the full organisation. So in that way the present structure of the now Royal Society of Chemistry came into being and has functioned extremely well since then.
One of the main functions was again external relations, interactions with other societies in other countries and indeed in this country and so a section was devoted to that and I was the Deputy Chairman of that section so was very much involved in the international aspects of our work.

Another section was in the business of training chemists and examining chemists which had never been part of the remit of the Chemical Society but was one of the main things in the Royal Institute of Chemistry, so I’d like to say a little bit about the examining functions of the Royal Institute of Chemistry and they were incorporated then into the new Chemical Society. There was a complete system of qualifications that could be obtained independent of the universities which was training chemists who were working in industry or working part-time and hoping to go into the chemical industry. Those qualifications were highly regarded, particularly for the practical aspects of the subject, and they had the status of an honours degree in chemistry. They were called graduates of the Royal Institute of Chemistry and, in fact, they... the qualification was equated to at least a second class honours degree and that was important for the reason that the grants for research in universities which were predominantly supplied by the grants committees insisted on having at least a second class honours degree before you could register for a master’s degree or a doctor’s degree. So you could come up through the Institute without going to a university but then do research in the university.
So how did they obtain these qualifications? They were by external examination. They were taught in their polytechnic or college of technology, wherever they were studying, often in the evenings, and the Institute set examinations in the major branches of chemistry, that’s inorganic, organic and physical. The problem of course was to set papers which were fair to the candidates because the same people were not both the teachers and the examiners. You had a syllabus, of course, to follow but it was important to be realistic on what sort of questions people could answer. Another part was that the practical aspect of the subject, as I have indicated, was very much to the fore so that practical examinations were there and they were huge affairs taking days at a time to organise in their institutes.
Now, to see that things were going well, the examiners had moderators, that’s to say the person who was concerned let’s say with inorganic chemistry was the examiner, but there was a moderator in inorganic chemistry as well to ask questions, check the validity of the questions, the reasonableness and so forth and then there was a general examiners’ meeting.

When I was involved I was the moderator of inorganic chemistry and the examiner was Geoff Wilkinson and anyone who has had any contact with Geoff Wilkinson realises that he’s not the easiest guy to moderate for. But, in fact, it worked out very well and he was setting good questions and we got on fine so there was no difficulty there. After, I think, two or maybe three years I became the examiner itself and so it was my responsibility to set the questions and then afterwards one has to write reports on each of the questions, how many people answered it, what the mean mark was and these reports were published and studied, of course, very closely by the institutes who were preparing the candidates for the exams so that they could modify if necessary what they were doing.

Now, you will have already gauged from what I was saying that there is a problem of external exam which was to be fair to the candidates, because one always had the feeling you were asking a question which is perfectly reasonable but they may not just have been taught that particular aspect on the subject, though it was covered in general in the syllabus. And so I thought I would write a particular question which solved this problem. It was in fact the sort of question you can only ever set once and it became in the end known as ‘Norm’s famous Question 9’. But the question was... and it was the final question on the final paper that I wrote: ‘Set yourself a question on any subject which has not been treated by other questions in this paper. Write down your question and then answer it. Marks will be awarded both for the quality of the question and the quality and relevance of the answer’. Now, that of course caused a bit of a stir in the examiners’ committee and some people didn’t want to let it through, but in the end I insisted that that was a reasonable thing to do, and I think it was appreciated by the people sitting the exam. But the interesting thing was that when I came to mark it, it wasn’t the only question that was popular on the paper. There were other questions – and by and large popular questions were well answered and unpopular questions were poorly answered – in other words there was something about the structure which is difficult about them. My Question 9 got about the average number of answers and the average number of questions so I felt that I was getting the measure of each of the candidates by the rest of the questions as well, and it was a useful moderating thing as well I think. So that was part of the examining aspect of the Royal Institute of Chemistry.

One other aspect I’ll talk about of the chemical societies and this concerns the problem of keeping up with the literature as it is appearing. It’s of enormous extent – I’ve already alluded to that in my inaugural lecture that I talked about earlier – but for working chemists how do you keep up? There are things like inorganic... things like Chemical Abstracts, for example, but even they were getting unwieldy. Nowadays, of course, computer access of journals makes things a bit easier. But in the ‘70s the problem was that working chemists found it increasingly difficult to keep up with work in other areas of their subject. So if they were a lecturer in a university, for example, they clearly knew what was going on in their own little corner of the subject, but how to keep a balanced assessment of what is going on?  And, indeed, by reading the literature it also sparks ideas and cross fertilisation for your own research.
Well that had been dealt with from the early 20th century in the UK by the Chemical Society’s Annual Reports which were highly valued throughout the world. They were a single volume to start with which treated the important steps in advance in each branch of chemistry that had occurred in the preceding year. So it was an annual report and these are the important things in inorganic chemistry. And actually whilst I was at Nottingham, I was an annual reporter with Cliff Addison for inorganic chemistry. We had to survey the whole of the literature, as other reporters did, and then write a report of a few hundred pages, a couple of hundred pages, incorporating those important steps of advance. So there was assessment and valued judgement, but importantly rapidity, because it had to be published the following year otherwise it was really losing its purpose.
So that was the basis of the mechanism for keeping up but as things got more and more numerous – the papers – it became increasingly difficult until if one had just listed the references to important papers it would fill all the space that was available.

Well, I made the suggestion – I was on the Publications Committee, of course, of the Chemical Society at that time – I made in committee the suggestion, and two or three other people had had similar ideas and we supported each other, that what we really needed was specialist periodical reports in addition to the annual report. The annual report should back off and just take smaller themes which were of real importance, or of startling discoveries and talk about those, but for the professional inorganic chemist, and equally for organic, physical, analytical and so forth, they needed more about inorganic chemistry and more about the techniques of doing it.
So I proposed the suggestion that was widely accepted to have Specialist Periodical Reports in named aspects of the subject. These weren’t to replace the annual reports but to supplement them.

I suggested for one of the first ones, Spectroscopic Properties [Spectroscopic Properties of Inorganic and Organometallic Compounds] – because that is one of the main... was one of the main ways of getting information – spectroscopic properties of inorganic and organometallic compounds. And there was one on nuclear magnetic resonance which sprung off separately from that later.
Now, that is still going on, 40 odd years later. It comes out annually and for the first nine years I was it. I was the Editor-in-General for the specialist periodical reports and in the end there were, I think, about getting on for 30 titles so you can imagine you’re getting a volume of 500 or 600 or 700 pages on one aspect, and there are 30 such volumes coming out each year. Clearly, you have to be selective in what you’re doing and what you’re buying and keeping up with.
But those spectroscopic properties were I think... we arranged it according to the wavelength of the... from far infrared and then there was electron quadrupole resonance, electron spin resonance. There was visible spectrum and of course Mössbauer spectra as well... and NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance. So those were the specialist periodical reports which are still being published and the team that I got to start with was in Newcastle because that was in the late ‘60s when the idea germinated first and then I carried that down and it was expanded, the group, when we came down to Leeds.

So spectroscopic properties were well catered for and they were one of the main techniques in practising inorganic chemistry. But what about the work... the archival work... what had been done before that? To solve that problem, I thought it would be a good idea – and this of course was before computers were available in the form that we know them now – I thought it would be useful to have a compendium of all the compounds that had spectroscopic information available on them with their reference, so I started in Newcastle before we came down to Leeds and continued in Leeds with Brian Straughan and others in Newcastle to make this compendium. It was a monumental task and because it wasn’t necessarily mentioned in the title of the paper or the abstract; we literally had to look at every journal page of all the major journals in all the languages to find if compound X, which had been made, had had its visible spectrum recorded, its NMR spectrum recorded [sic – should be Raman] and so forth. And then we had to get those compounds in book form and Spectroscopic Properties [sic – should be Vibrational Properties]was a huge thing, came out in three volumes, each of between, I think, about 800 and 1500 pages in the end of all this information. Now, in a sense ironically, that has been superseded though it was an important thing at the time. Nowadays of course what a researcher would do would be to type in his particular compound, say NMR [sic- should be vibrational spectra] query, infrared query and it would locate the thing for... the journal article, if there was one for him. So, in a sense, it is not useful now, but it’s useful to have... up till 1967, which was the first of the specialist reports, all the back data is there if I want it in one volume.

Let me say something now about chemistry in other countries that I’ve been involved in. I’ve indicated of course that I’ve had from time to time visiting professorships which have enabled me to visit various places, and I want first of all to tell you a bit about my involvement in America. I’ve indicated that many of the firms and institutions in America were funding some of our research, but I want to say that on one occasion and this is between 1967-‘68, that era, I held a visiting professorship for a six-month period where I was lecturing and teaching at Michigan State University, which is in the Midwest of America. And the set up within the university there enabled me not only to take part in their courses and learn about their education system but gave me an opportunity to go to conferences and visit other parts of America and indeed for the last three months of that, the children had school vacation so Kirsten came with the school... with the children and joined me there.
In Michigan State my main sponsor was Alex Popov, who was an ebullient inorganic chemist and the other person who was in charge of the laboratories was Andy Timnick. They were both originally from Russia, but had lived most of their life in America.

The type of institution that I visited was called a land grant university, and it’s worth perhaps just mentioning this wonderful institution which they have in America which was instituted in the mid-19th century, I guess, as an act of congress, and it granted land to the evolving states of America. As the western civilisation people – the whites, if you like – were moving further and further west and occupying more and more of the country, universities followed and they were funded in part – apart from the private institutions which existed – by land grant universities. A large tract of land was granted to the universities to use and the profits from that land would be used to fund a university. These are often large institutions, by the then standards in England, instead of 2000 or 3000 or 4000 or maybe 8000, at most, students in the university there would be 20,000 or 30,000 or 40,000 students in huge areas. So that is an important aspect of American universities that I learnt and was very important.

I was giving courses both in boron hydride work and in Mössbauer spectroscopy to senior students, and they had to have credits for this towards their degree. The degree system was that you had a course which would last for several months. You would then be examined in that course at an appropriate time, and that would be graded A, B or C with pluses and minuses, and that would go on your record and you would then be a straight A or an A or B student and so forth.

So I had to learn first of all what level to pitch this at and then of course to examine it and that was where I got one of my interesting shocks in the States.
I hadn’t expected that having marked the papers and handed them back, a student would say, I don’t agree with this mark. That was not a thing which was common either in Australia or in England at the time, but you had to hold your ground. But that could sometimes get difficult, and I’ll give you an example. I had one young lad come to me and he said, ‘I can’t accept this. You’ve given me a C. Why did you do that?’ And I said, ‘Well, I read it and I had been reading the other scripts, and I thought that C was the right answer’. He said, ‘But you don’t understand the implications’, and I said, ‘What’s that?’ and he said, ‘Well, if I don’t get an A or a B I’ll be drafted to Vietnam. I can’t continue because I’ve got so many low grades at the moment that I needed an A or a B to get a grade average which will continue with my university work. And I said, ‘Well I’m sorry to hear that but, you know, I can’t just alter the grade for that’. ‘But’, I said, ‘leave it with me and I’ll see what could be done’. So I went along to Alex Popov and said, what could be done, and he saw the dilemma and he agreed that the student was in a very awkward position, and so in the end I suggested, ‘Well, suppose I set him a supplementary’ – not as a right but as a privilege – ‘because of his situation. I’ll give him a fortnight. He got a low mark because he hadn’t studied properly. If he studies and gives me satisfaction I’ll be happy to give him an appropriate mark’. So that seemed to be a reasonable compromise. We did that and he got a B+ actually, honestly. So that was an interesting aspect which was different.

Another personal thing, it’s perhaps trivial but it, I think, illustrates the camaraderie in the department. I took a great interest in the birds of America. There’s an astonishing variety, as you know, of brightly coloured, big, small... even on campus, and it was a large campus with a lot of natural woodland in it. It was a continuous delight to find these. I had to buy books on spotting American birds and see if I could... and I saw at least 100 species, I suppose. But because of my interest it percolated down from staff to staff wives, and Andy Timnick’s wife was a keen bird-watcher and she said, ‘Would you like to join our bird- watching group, and I said, yes I’d love to do that. I didn’t quite understand the implications of it.
I was on... in a hall of residence which was only 100 metres from the chemistry department, so that was very handy. In those days, each room had a telephone which again was, of course, unheard of in an English college or a hall of residence, but I was happy to have the telephone there. I’ll say in a moment another reason why it was important. But one morning at four o’clock, Midge Timnick rang me up and she said, ‘Happy bird-watchers! Are you ready for an expedition?’ And so I said, ‘Yes, it’s only four o’clock’. She said, ‘Yes, I’ll be round in half-an-hour. We’re going to Mio, Michigan to spot a Kirtland warbler’. So I said, ‘Alright’. I’d never heard of a Kirtland warbler, but briefly a Kirtland warbler was a little bird that had been discovered by Kirtland in America. It was precisely the same as a little bird that had been discovered in the Bahamas a couple of thousand miles to the south in the Caribbean. One of them in their migration, as it turned out, had fallen down in Ohio and they then realised it was the same bird, but it’s such a remarkable bird, a little yellow breast and a lovely song, it only breeds in a little place near Mio, Michigan, nowhere else, and it breeds there because there are jack pines, a small type of pine tree, and it likes to build its nest about 10 metres, five to 10 metres above ground. So it needs saplings and there had over the centuries been periodic bush fires which burned down the trees, opened the pine cones which then sprout, grow up and, at the right height, the Kirtland warbler comes in and that’s the story of the Kirtland warbler. But we went there and we saw some other wonderful birds at the time. But that was the sort of thing for bird watching.

Talking about having the phone in the room reminded me that on one occasion there was a general announcement of a tornado coming through, and I didn’t quite realise the implication of that until everyone said, you leave your windows open, you go down to the basement. Everyone in the married quarters dorms were sort of little prefabs on campus. They all came in down to the basement. This tornado came through. We all now know what tornadoes can be like but... and fortunately it passed near Flint which was about seven miles away. It didn’t come closer than that and touch down through campus, but they took that very seriously, and campus policemen were roaming around campus checking that everyone was out of sight.
On another occasion, they rang me in the middle of the night and I... there was a car park, a multi-storey car park that I used because I was hiring a car, of course, to move about and they said, you’ve left your lights on. They of course had the number plate. They knew where I was staying so I could go back and switch off the lights from the car. Well, that was Michigan State.

Because I was one of the principal investigators appointed by NASA to study the lunar rocks, I was obtaining samples from each of the missions and also from the Russian missions, as I’ve already mentioned, and because of that, in a sense, privileged status, I was able to go to Houston, which was the main control center for the Apollo space missions, and to see their space records because I wanted some thin sections and geological sections and descriptions of the rocks that we were looking at, and so forth.
So on one occasion – which had nothing to do with Michigan of course – I went down. Actually it was a... I was in America on this occasion for another Gordon Conference, which I won’t mention, but as part of that trip I went down to Houston in the days before Apollo 15 was launched, and I’ll in a moment get back to Apollo 15. But in Houston, I went to the Space Center. Quite extraordinary – all the experimental facilities they had and the training facilities. They have become familiar by being seen on television programmes, of course, and I’d been looking avidly at television programmes about these things. But it is different – as you appreciate – actually being there, seeing the facilities, seeing the training, seeing the way the apparatus was done, the special laboratories that they had for screening to before it came into general distribution.

For example, to show you the level of technology and we’re talking now about the early to mid-... the mid- to early ‘70s, I suppose, for Apollo 15. There... I wanted to get some thin section photographs of the specimens we were looking at. I was taken to the photographic archive room. It was sealed and the man who was showing me around had a touchpad out of sight up in the air which he keyed in the appropriate number. The door came open, we went in and there were enormous files of each of the missions, and I said what I wanted. They sorted that out, took out photos and gave them to me. And so I said, ‘Well, shall we copy these because I’d like to take them away with me?’ and they said, ‘No, that’s all taken care of’. And I said, ‘But you’ve taken them out of the file!’ and he said, ‘Yes, but when we opened that file a signal comes up saying the integrity of the file has been violated’ – was the phrase that they used – ‘and so a message immediately goes back to the photographic : this photo has been removed, print another one. Another one is automatically printed, come and put back in the place, so don’t worry about it’, he said, ‘we’ve got copies of them being made when they’re taken out’.
 

So that was the Houston Space Center and I don’t think I’d appreciated that the control of the Apollo missions was from Houston after the launch and the crucial moments are when the launch starts and the spacecraft rises up. As soon as it clears the tower it is launched and the monitoring is taken over by the Houston Space Centre.

Okay, so I knew when the Apollo 15 was being launched. I had an official invitation to see this and I knew by this stage that Cliff Addison’s and our work had been relevant in the way that I’ve previously described. I went down to the Space Center, three days before the launch, stayed at a motel and I have to say that if you’ve never been to a launch it is an experience which is unforgettable. We’ve all seen these launches on television, but on television it’s something which is 20 or 30 centimetres high, a foot or so on your television screen which comes up and it’s a bright light. But let me tell you what the real thing is like. When you go to the Space Center you are driven for miles from place to place because when one of these things goes off you have to have people well away from it. The viewing station is, I think, about three kilometres from the actual launch pad – and I’m frankly glad we weren’t any closer.
But there was a guided tour for the guests of the assembly. First of all, there was VAB, the Vehicle Assembly Building. This is said to be the largest enclosed space built environment in the world including the Great Pyramid of Giza. It is 40 storeys high, imagine that! It is 40 storeys high because the space craft before it’s launched is about 40 storeys high. It has to be assembled there and then it’s given... it’s put... it’s assembled on a transporter which is then taken very slowly at about one mile an hour down the road to the launch pad. But this building is large enough to have several spacecraft and launch... Apollo spacecraft being assembled at the one time, because it takes many months to assemble them. And then of course they have to be filled with liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen and then the special fuels like hydrazine, dinitrogen tetroxide for the later stages. So they are huge engines, far bigger than... the transporter itself is a monstrous -looking machine.
At the launch itself – and I won’t go through the whole thing because people are familiar with this from television – but to see a launch... we were placed on what were called bleachers, we would call them stands, out in the open about four or five step layers and we were seated there with two or three of these and, as I say, they were several kilometres away and there was a loud public address system so we heard the countdown, and then the launch, and then the flames come out and the flame spreaders and the water that’s poured onto it. The scale of it is unbelievable and then slowly you see this flame, and then a few seconds later you hear this... not only hear it you feel the roar and the earth is shaking. It’s a minor earthquake as the thing goes off. The whole of the land around shakes. The bleachers shake. Everyone’s looking, taking photos and then as it clears the crowd... clears the tower, a spontaneous clapping comes and of course it’s then launched and it’s away and then within a few moments, you get the launching [sic] of the first stage and so forth. But that was an experience I had which was undoubtedly unforgettable.

In India, and we’re talking now about the late ‘70s early ‘80s, I had a sponsored tour of India and the tour took me first to New Delhi and then to Jaipur in Rajasthan down to Bombay and to see some of the institutes down there. 
In Delhi I went of course to see the Indian Institute of Technology which had just at that stage been built.  As in America, where they have their land grant universities, in India, after the separation of India and Pakistan - and we’re talking 1948 now - the Indian Institutes of Technology were started.  They are superb institutions modelled on Imperial College and MIT more or less with their own Indian aspects to it but they are highest quality research and undergraduate teaching in the sciences and engineering and I went to the New Delhi Indian Institute of Technology and to the Indian National Science Laboratories.  Both of those I was enormously impressed with and the work they were doing and I also appreciated that they were both air conditioned because at the time I was visiting, which was just pre-monsoon, it was pretty hot and pretty oppressive.

We’ve all of course seen the iconic pictures of the Taj Mahal gleaming white on its superb site, but what took me completely by surprise was that when you get right up to it, it is not pure white at all. There are huge panels decorated all the way around of inset precious stones into the marble and you can see here lapis lazuli and onyx and all sorts of semi-precious stones which have been inlaid and this was something that I bought at the time in the tourist area being made by craftsmen who have carried on the crafts of doing this beautiful artwork and of course inside the building and in its associated buildings there are also some beautiful parts. It is really an indescribably beautiful place, not only for the elegance of the architecture but this feeling of ineffable calm that you get when you view it.
 

Then from Delhi – and this was the tourist part of it – spent a day in Jaipur just a short aeroplane ride, starting about six o’clock in the morning, to Jaipur which has some wonderful palaces and sights to be seen, and particularly astronomical observatories that were from the 16th and 17th centuries and there are some of those in New Delhi, as well, which I didn’t talk about. And then on early the next morning to Udaipur which has a Lake Palace... a huge gleaming palace in the middle of a lake which I understand now has become badly polluted and is drying up because so much water is being used for the city. But in those days it was a beautiful sight, and we came from the airport into the palace on land with big elephant stables and so forth, which were an amusing thing and to see the town, but also to catch a launch over to the Udaipur Hotel which I was staying at which is on the island in the middle of the lake, which was I suppose a maharaja’s palace at one stage, and the feature there is not only the wonderful view you get, but the sunset. That is the thing. And at the sunset there are such gorgeous colours in the sky as the sun goes down and the atmosphere’s not completely clear because of the pre-monsoonal weather so the purples and oranges and mauves and reds and yellows are lighting up the sky and then, whoosh! You start, and... huge flocks of parrots come in. They are, I think, green and yellow as far as I could make out in the failing light, but – I was going to say ‘drove’ but I think ‘flock’ is the word – flock after flock of these, hundreds of thousands of birds fly from the town where they’ve been scavenging as these birds do, down into the trees in the forests on the far side of the lake and that was one of the sights again which would be a memorable memory for me.
But I was there to work and not to see parrots flying around, so I was on to Bombay. I call it Bombay. I think some people now like to call it Mumbai but to me it’s always Bombay and I don’t particularly want to use Bombay... Mumbai in the modern form reminds me of course that in Europe we don’t talk about München and Warszawa, and so forth. We use the translations and, I think, if you’re speaking English it’s not too discourteous to use the English phrase.

In Bombay there’s of course the big Institute of Technology, but also the Bhabha Institute, and I visited both of those, gave lectures in them and was very much impressed with the work that was going on there.
Incidentally, one of the outcomes of this visit, which was perhaps unexpected, is that I had an excellent source thereafter of graduate students because, both from Bombay and from Delhi, I had several post-doctoral students and, indeed, later PhD students coming from India. And they were, without exception, extremely good scientists. I had them, of course, from other parts of India as well, but it was a particularly useful connection to have that, although the work that they were doing was not in my own particular area, it was important to see that.

Another sponsored tour that I took, and this was in 1985, was to China. And, of course, the China of 1985 was vastly different from the China of today, 2011, but it was nevertheless a very interesting experience.
I was asked to go to Wuhan University, which is in Hubei Province in the centre of China on the great Yangtze River. And by great I mean Great, one has to go and see some of these huge Asian rivers to realise the size of them.

We were put up in a university residence, in those days that was pretty basic, but the people were without exception very kind, very solicitous, very thoughtful, and they gave us a wonderful time there.
My job was to lecture to the students, but of course in those days none of the under-graduate students were familiar with English. Some of the professors were, to some extent, and so I had to lecture by making a particular point and perhaps writing something on the board. And then after two or three minutes that section would be translated, so a one-hour lecture was certainly a good two to two-and-a-half hours.
But this was made possible by a delightful Chinese custom of having fresh tea, green tea, in little teacups, which were continually replaced. As you sipped something, someone was detailed to keep the cup refilled.
And whilst the Chinese professor was speaking he would be putting Chinese characters on the board so that the students were following. But quite clearly it was limited, the amount that one could transmit in this way, or indeed the level, because I began to feel that the level of the students was not as high as we would have expected perhaps in Western Europe at that time.

Another thing, which interested me, was that there was in fact some personal free-trading beginning to be allowed. This was a little after the Great Leap Forward, which had had devastating effects on China and several of the professors, though they didn’t start the conversation, when I asked about it they said, well they took time off, they had been moved into other employment, usually manual employment in this period, but they seemed enormously resilient and kept going.

Now, part of the trip was to give a course of lectures as a visiting Professor in Wuhan, also to visit other parts of China, sometimes institutes, and sometimes, frankly, they wanted to show China to visitors, which is very understandable, they were proud of their country and rightly so.
And, as I’ll say very briefly, as we were on the Yangtze, we naturally wanted to go up the Yangtze, or down the Yangtze, through the Gorges. And so we flew with a guide, which was totally necessary. He was a professor in fact from the chemistry department. We flew to Chongqing which is the place, as you know, where Sun Yat-sen and Chiang Kai-shek negotiated during the Chinese Civil War before Mao Tse-tung took over.
And we came to Chongqing, saw something of that town, and then went down to the Yangtze River, which had quite a different character in Chongqing from Wuhan hundreds of miles to the west... sorry to the east.
And the difference was this, that because it was the season when the snows were not melting, not so much water was flowing, so instead of being indescribably large it was just enormous. There were mudflats, which went for well over 100 metres from the shoreline, and they had plank walkways steeply going down to where the water still was, which was still a very broad river, where the riverboats were. So we walked down these planks on to the riverboat and then started, I think, it would be a three-day journey, back down the river to Wuhan through the Gorges.
And again many people have now seen that on television; the big difference was of course that our trip was before the new Great Dam had been put up, so that the level of the water was, I think, 60 or 70 metres higher [sic] than it is now because of the... as a result of the dam being put up.

Another trip we went to was Guilin, which is an otherworldly place down in the south of China, and there are these amazing karsts or, great mountain outcrops in the water, and you can just drift slowly through these, the river itself is very shallow and they have very shallow boats, but that was a lovely place.
Some of the parks in China were also worth seeing. And we went to Shanghai and saw the Great [sic –should be Grand] Canal there going up to Beijing. We went to Beijing, saw several of the Institutes there and saw the Forbidden City.

One interesting anecdote, we were going through the Great Park next to the Tiananmen Square in the Forbidden City, and I felt we were being followed, and I asked... it was a graduate student who had been with me in Leeds that was showing us round, I said, ‘Is this chap following us?’ So he went back and he asked this man what he was doing, in Chinese. And it turned out that he was a professor of physics, but he wanted to improve his English, so he realised that we were talking English and he was following discreetly behind to learn English. So I said, ‘Well ask him to join us, that’s fine’, and he was overcome but, and joined us. It was quite an astonishing insight into the will of people, if they wanted to do something they were totally committed to it.

Of course in Beijing there are many wonders as well, besides the central part, and further north there is the Great Wall of China, which naturally we went to. And all I can say is, you’ve got to be there to experience it, it is an extraordinary place. It’s a reconstructed part that they show to visitors, but that and the Ming Tombs, which are not very far away, are really an awe-inspiring sight. You... just overcome with humility at the technological feat that it was, and the political understanding and the military supervision that was required to do these things.

On the way out from Beijing to the Wall of China and the Ming Tombs, we passed several large towns, really large cities we would almost call them, and I would say, ‘Oh, what are the main industries here?’ And the first answer came, ‘Oh, this city makes thermos flasks’. And the next one was making treadle sewing machines perhaps or bicycles, and they seemed, in my understanding, it was a one-industry town. I don’t know how it’s run now, but... they’re clearly differently, but it was quite an eye-opener to see that.
But in all, just as in my brief trip of India, I had already had some students from China, but got many more coming as a result of this and was glad to see them.

Can I tell you now a little bit about my experiences in Japan? I had a succession of Japanese post-doctoral workers and visiting scientists. And even before that I had visited Japan – and as things transpired I had the opportunity to go back there many times – in fact, I think we’ve been to Japan four of five times now, and for at least a month each time.
Part of this was because Masuo Takeda, who is... came to learn about Mössbauer spectroscopy, is in an important university in Tokyo, Toho University, and he invited me to be a visiting professor there over three years running in the early ‘90s... well actually just before that, ‘89 to ‘91 I think. And that was a complete revelation to me – I’ll come back to that because that’s almost the end of the story.

In earlier trips, I had been first of all on a trip with Kirsten on a lecture tour, in fact, through Japan, landing, of course, first at Tokyo and then going right over to the south-west, the extreme island there, at Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
And in case you don’t immediately remember the geography of Japan, it’s a succession of islands going up the eastern coast of Asia. And the largest island, the one that Tokyo is on, has a chain of mountains, so there’s the two coastal sites are somewhat separated. Right at the top is Hokkaido, and down in the west is another large island.

Well in Nagasaki [sic – should be Fukuoka] we were looked after there by a professor, whose name actually just escapes me at the moment, but he looked after us very well and took us on tours of the castles and a big active volcano at Aso as I remember, we learnt about Japanese architecture.

But I might say a little bit about the Japanese as people, because that is quite interesting and it is different from what we are perhaps used to in Europe. In my experience they are enormously courteous, they are very helpful, they are very precise in what they are doing and overarchingly honest. I have seen Masuo, for example, stop at a telephone booth in downtown Tokyo, put his briefcase down, go into the telephone booth, come out and pick up his briefcase again.
If you go into a store, you see an article that you would like, and the girl serving behind the counter will come out with a wrapped parcel. And at first I felt a little uncomfortable because there are some places in England where you wouldn’t be perhaps quite sure that what was there was precisely what you had been looking at, it may have perhaps been a second or something like that, but that would never happen, never even occur to the Japanese.
And they have a very keen sense of privacy and rightness – you’ve seen them, of course, bowing, the courtesy is there, they have a great sense of history and they are a people much to be admired. We have had a marvellous time there.

Then we went along the coast to Hiroshima with the obvious messages, what about the atom bomb, which was first dropped in Hiroshima and then the second one in Nagasaki.
The fact is that if you go to Hiroshima now, you wouldn’t know anything about atom bombs unless you went to one particular place, which was the Remembrance Church and Garden where, for very sound reasons, they have retained the shell of a building, which was destroyed by the blast.
But the thought that the whole of the centre of the town, and for kilometres around, was devastated and contaminated by radioactivity would, I think, it had prepared me for a rather desert scene, almost perhaps one might say like the Germany Darmstadt that I described a few years after the war.  The fact is that there’s virtually no indication that that’s happened at all. It’s a huge, bustling city of well over a million people and everything’s working and growing perfectly well, so people can draw conclusions from that. There’s a lot of politicisation I think around nuclear energy, for example.

 
Then we went on a trip around exquisite coastal scenery, unbelievably beautiful, to Tokyo, which I have to say, is a monstrous city in all senses of the word. It is huge, many millions of people, has excellent services, sometimes half a dozen independent railway lines running parallel with each other. There are crowds of people – and this gets back to the privacy and so forth – amazingly in all this welter of humanity, there are oceans or little islets of calm in parks and gardens. Certainly in the private homes the hustle and bustle of the place drops away and you’re into quite another world.
And then some Japanese homes, in fact their sense of identity is such, that they will have a Western room and a Japanese room. And they can eat Japanese and have Japanese customs, or they can have a Western room with Western customs, which is not only, of course, the food that they eat, but the instruments that they would be playing, the role of the men and the women in the house and so forth. It’s a fascinating country to visit.

Of course coming from Australia, I had memories of some of my fellow pupils at school, not so much at university, but who’d gone to the war and there were some horrible experiences in New Guinea and in the islands and Singapore and the Burma Rail and so forth, which I don’t dwell on. But I have to say that, by and large, that is in the past, both for Europeans and for the Japanese, and I think that is a very good thing. There’s much to be admired and learnt actually from Japan.

Now north of Tokyo is Sendai, which has been much in the news, of course, lately because of the tsunami, but the university there is again an excellent university.
I should perhaps not only give a travelogue, if I can put it that way, of the places, but mention something about the university system, because that is somewhat different from ones that we are used to in Europe.
There are the National or Imperial universities as they were called, which were from the Imperial Foundation. And there are half a dozen of those and they are the top-crust universities. All excellent universities, in some areas world leaders, and people aspire to those, but of course the competition to get in is enormous.
But there are many other universities, some state owned, but many private universities, private philanthropists or business organisation, many sources of finance. But in the ones that I visited – and I’m talking now mainly about the research area – there is an interesting characteristic, which I may have got wrong because, as I say, I’ve only visited the place, but on several occasions, I formed an impression that the system works something like this.
It’s what’s called a ‘Cosa’ system, so that a professor has an institute, or at least a group of people around him, and there is quite a hierarchy underneath that of assistants and then graduate students and so forth. And in that way the professor in charge of the Cosa decides the programme, and works on it and gets the appropriate facilities, but the people who are being trained underneath it of course also aspire to promotion.
When the professor leaves, sometimes the Cosa is so highly developed around a particular theme and instrumentation, that the only person that can take over is one of the assistants, or someone who’s working in a closely-related system elsewhere. And I had the feeling that that may have been a stultifying influence.
One of the glories of, at least the older universities in the UK, for example, is that in principle, and very much in fact as well, even a lecturer is an independent research worker. He may be associated with another person or in a group or doing related work, but is independent and certainly by the time one is a Professor, you are independent in choosing the work that you would want to do and can get funding to do.
And doing that it means, as I think I’ve illustrated with my work, I can change, not on a whim, but if I hear the word, ‘Mössbauer’, and find out what that is, I can straightaway decide that’s something that is worth doing, and if I can get funds for it from supporting agencies, I can do that. That I think is not so easy to do in the Japanese system.

As well as the research systems of course I was involved in undergraduate teaching as well, and Masuo Takeda had asked me to give some demonstration lectures and I had a very able assistant there, Takahashi, who is now himself a senior professor. He was a great help to me in mounting these experiments.
It’s clear that they did not have, at least at Toho University, a tradition of experiments performed for the junior classes, and the obvious sorts of things like using liquid nitrogen for specialised effects, using liquid oxygen to make flames, burning gases, crystallisations of things, the sorts of experiments that we are perhaps familiar with and thermo-luminescence, were less familiar to them.

And it was very interesting that the students I found, could understand English, their perception of English was very good, far greater than the Japanese, than the Chinese that I was speaking about in an earlier part. But there were some words of course, and key words, which would have been unfamiliar and then Takeda would write up a symbol on the…
As you probably know the Japanese is a symbolic language, they have... well there’s also a phonetic part of it, but the characters that are borrowed from the Chinese, express an idea. And the word for chemistry is called magical change; that is the symbol for chemistry.

Well , we did these lectures and they seemed to go well, and then Takeda said, ‘Would you teach them to speak English properly?’ Well, I felt less comfortable about this because it’s not my area of expertise, but he was thinking of something more basic. It’s interesting about how meticulous Japanese are... if you’re speaking English you speak it properly and you learn the correct way of doing things.
So the first thing was the names of the elements – how do you pronounce them? So we went through that and I immediately came up against a difficulty. The Japanese and their courtesies... one of the things is, you must not show your tongue. Well, of course, you and I would not go to someone like that, that would be rude of course.
But in English, as you know, there are many sounds which you can’t make without using the tongue and your lips. And so, ‘though’ and ‘thou’ and ‘thither’, not that they were words that I was teaching them, you need to show the tongue.
Now we got to thorium and they said torium so I said, no you put your tongue out, thorium. Great surprise, so they would say thorium, and whenever there was a ‘th’, thorium, thallium, up would come the hand. It’s an interesting cultural thing that is a difficulty that one wouldn’t suspect perhaps until you had met it.

The other thing, of course, was how do you... he would give me... how do you read out units: kilograms to the minus 1, sec to the minus 1, mols; how do you say 10-1, ten to the minus one. There are many things which... and some things which you don’t say, like an exclamation mark or a question mark and so forth.

Kirsten was also asked – and she was accompanying me most of the time – to give some English lessons and to talk to English students, and they were students of English. And we both of us found – it was interesting – that although the students could read English, and could comprehend it very well, and certainly the science students, the Masters students and so forth, were well able to read communication in English and understand it, they did not have the same facility with speaking the language, and almost a non-ability sometimes to actually speak, though they readily understood what you were saying and readily could understand the written word, so that was another cultural change.

One of the great joys of Japan, of course, is the traditional costumes, the churches, if I can call them that, pagodas, the costumes that they wear, flower arranging, all of these things were a delight to watch and see, and we learnt a great deal about the customs.
On one occasion Geoff Sykes had actually, in Leeds, had a Japanese student, and he had gone back and later had got married, and he’d actually timed the wedding so that we would be in town at the time and we were invited to this wedding. It was a thrilling experience for us because the bride and others were in traditional dress and I had, in this case it wasn’t Takeda it was another chap, Saito... Kazuo Saito, he was the Master of Ceremonies. And I said, ‘Well, you know, I’ve been invited will I have to say something?’ Oh no, perfectly all right.
But when we got there we found that this was a 13-course dinner. In between some of the courses the bride would disappear and come back in a different gown, and finally in a Western gown, so she was changing two or three times within the meal. In between each course a fellow student played the banjo and sang something or recited or gave an anecdote, and inevitably... and now Professor Greenwood is here, he will say…
Well, I had no idea what would be appropriate, and I was very conscious of the fact that if you don’t get it right it can be a real social gaffe. So I said something, I don’t even really remember what I said now, but it seemed to be appropriate. But they are very formal when they’re formal, there’s no doubt about that, but they’re also very delightful.

Takeda’s wife, Yoshiko, was looking after Kirsten very well and she took her to many places, so the courtesy and the formality is a very interesting mixture when one has another country. It was, I learnt a lot on our many visits.

One occasion we were going... there are inevitable train journeys all the time in Japan, to and from, because the distances are so vast in Tokyo. And Takeda said, ‘The first qualification of a Japanese professor is to learn to sleep on a train, and the second thing is to wake up at the right station’, which they did.
But on one occasion he said, ‘Excuse me’, and he battled his way through several coaches and he said, ‘Heiso, it is all right’. And I said, ‘What’s all right?’ And he said, ‘Your name is printed’. And I said, ‘What do you mean?’ And he said, ‘I have paid this railway company to put up notices, which say, come to Toho University, Professor Greenwood is giving illustrated lectures’. And he said, ‘It’s a recruitment drive’, and I was apparently well used in that as well.
No it was a great experience to be there.

[Q] Well, it’s been a delight listening to your aspects of chemistry, the way you got into it, so on and so forth, but it seems to me one of the most important contributions you made, together with Earnshaw, was this magnificent textbook, which of course has a worldwide and wonderful reputation. Can you tell me a bit about the thought process that you went through before you produced the book?
Well , yes it was a big undertaking as you can imagine, and for those who are perhaps not familiar with it, I could just indicate something about the size. It’s about... well , depending on which edition you use, about 1500 large pages, so it’s a substantial book, and it aims to cover the whole of the chemistry of the elements which is what the book was called.
I’ve spoken a little bit about my philosophy of teaching in universities and that is reflected in the book, but specifically for that, what I’d felt was that many of the textbooks that were available were either sectional, in other words they dealt with one part of inorganic chemistry, or they were not specifically designed to be a teaching book but were carrying information.
Now I had in my mind, and I started this alone, actually Alan dug me out of a hole later because it was taking much longer than I expected and he very kindly helped me finish it off, but for about the first three or four years that I was working on this I was doing it alone. And perhaps the simplest thing would be to tell you the process I went through and how it turned out.
The first thing that I wanted to emphasise was that chemistry was exciting, wondrous even, that when properly understood a lot of it is very straightforward, it is accessible, but it has to be presented in a reasonable form. That the facts of chemistry are astounding often, but also we have to remember that a compound might be beautiful to look at, it may be readily made or difficultly made, but might also be useful. And so I wanted to join the idea of the actuality rather than just an abstract idea of chemistry.
To be specific, if I mentioned a compound, or a group of compounds, was it something that had been made once and was only stable at liquid nitrogen temperature? Or was it something that is made in megaton quantities, and if it’s made in megaton quantities, how and why? So it brought in some industrial chemistry without the industrial processes being there, it was also the usefulness.

Now no one would ever claim, and I certainly wouldn’t claim, that I knew how every chemical was made, what it was useful for, what it cost, where the minerals came from and so forth; there was a learning curve.
So I started in a simple-minded way. I went to Chemical and Engineering News, which is the house magazine of the American Chemical Society and a wonderful weekly magazine. And every year they have summaries of productions of chemicals and summaries of firms. Out of these... you’ve got many of the firms would be making organic dyestuffs for example, or some pharmaceutical compound, which are very important, but they’re not inorganic chemistry.
So out of this list I got, I think, 484 companies, which were making inorganic chemicals. And I wrote to each of them and asked, what do you make, how do you make it, what’s it used for? And as you can imagine I got a lot of replies, company brochures, some fascinating stuff, I learned a tremendous amount from it, much of it was not relevant to what I wanted.
But it did mean that each time I was talking about a particular element and its particular compounds, I had a sound background of reality from the industry as to where these things came from. So that was important and I wanted some of the production figures and how it changed in time, for example, to come out, so that was one aspect.

A second aspect – and this I think it’s fair to say was unique to the book – was it struck me as being strange in all my lecturing experience, and it had been fairly considerable by that time, students had never asked questions like, where do the atoms come from? Why are there only 90 or so elements occurring in nature? Why do they have the properties that they have?
So it seemed to me, if you’re going to talk, and expect students to spend three years of their life thinking about inorganic compounds, it might be useful to give them some background. So I put this as a preliminary chapter, The Origin of the Elements.
It’s of course a chapter of chemistry or nuclear physics, whichever way you like to look at it, which couldn’t have been written 50 years ago because it wasn’t understood. But from the mid-1930s onwards, and this is a thing worth remembering, that there was no idea why the sun was hot... 50 years ago before I was writing it, in the early ‘30s let’s put it that way - 70 years ago.
Why is the sun hot? Well, Gamow and then others said that a possible thing was nuclear reactions, which by then were known to give high energy, though the processes weren’t really fully understood of course. But how does it get from the sun to the earth, and in particular, on the simple nuclear reactions that were then known, you would make up to the most stable, which was iron as it turns out, but after that how do the elements form?
And it turns out that they are in fact formed in interstellar space and they are formed, as I very briefly mentioned before, in supernovae explosions. And that became clear only a few decades ago.
So astonishingly, although there’s a wealth of these elements forming this myriad of compounds, and everything that we can see in the world is made of these 90 elements – they all came from supernova or stars which then develop particular types – not every star turns into a supernova, but those that do spew out this stuff and the process of aggregation starts again.
So the concept of the different types of stars is important. So... and as you will know, there are different sorts of stars, so I went through the types of stars and what their history is, how many billions of years they were, whether they’re new or young. And the other very important thing, that the further out in space you see, the further back in time you go. Speed of light is important, is enormously fast, but the universe is an enormous size, it is also expanding.
And one of the fascinating things about the ingenuity of human knowledge is that we know what the elements are in the Sun. In fact helium, which is named  from Helios for Sun, was discovered in the Sun before it was discovered on Earth. Think about it, how do we know? We know because of spectroscopy, and I’ve been banging on about spectroscopic techniques as well, and that’s one of the reasons why they’re important. We know the components, many of the components, are parts of the stars.
It was then found, and we talked in Mössbauer spectroscopy about the Doppler shift, we know that all stars are receding from the earth. That doesn’t make the earth the centre of the universe. It means that everything is expanding wherever you are, everything – this is simplified – is moving away from us. And that’s only been known for the last few decades.
But the point I want to make is that, and the reason why the Hubble spaceship and other astronomical telescopes and devices are there is, the longer, the further we see in space, the longer back in time we go. And so we’re not only looking at stars as they are now, what we’re seeing happened before. And so we’re actually, in reverse, getting a history of the development of the universe, and that is one of the major ways of finding out how the universe developed, you can turn the clock around.
So they were some of the ideas that were going around in my mind.

And having established the ways in which the elements were formed, that then naturally went on to the atomic theory, the periodic table, which we’ve briefly mentioned, this astonishing development of Mendeleev and others in the 19th century, which put some shape to our thinking, and that then led on to atomic weights, which again, in all textbooks that I’m familiar with, skated over the facts that we have these 92 atoms. Why? Why do they have the weights they have? Why in some is there only a single isotope? Why in some is there as many as seven or eight stable isotopes? If they have isotopes, what about the atomic weight, we’ve talked about that varying.
So all of those are themes, which are really important in the growing of the subject. And they were all background themes that I put in at the beginning of the book.

I then started, as always, the way I write, is to start at the beginning, to go on until I come to the end and then stop, as Lewis Carroll said. And that’s the way I always write, if I’m writing a lecture or a textbook or a monograph on something, a thesis when I was an undergraduate, graduate student. I have a plan of course – I knew the sequence of the elements – I start at the beginning and I just keep on writing.
Some chapters are longer than others, I have to keep a balance of course, but that then brings me on to another theme, which makes the book perhaps unusual. And that is, as I briefly mentioned, the chemicals that we’re talking about may be unique because they’re theoretically important or because they’re just beautiful or surprising or they may be useful.
So I was able to weave in, and I had what I call panels, coloured bits, inserts, which were the uses of the elements perhaps, or where they came from, or side effects, an aside, like the Oklo phenomenon that we were talking about, that would be one such panel, which is not the main stream but is an interesting thing.
In fact my secretary, who was typing this at one stage, working back evenings and so forth, once said, they’re the most interesting part of the book, I don’t understand the other rubbish, but I like reading this. And that was from a non-scientist.

I think that that was important, that I didn’t give, as early chapters, the theory, I gave the facts. And then interpreted the facts according to the best modern theory but... if it was appropriate... but didn’t emphasise the theory above the facts. Because it seemed to me that one wanted the substance of the subject, which as I’ve said before, the facts don’t change as often as the theories do, they help us with our current understanding.
So they are themes I think which make the book interesting. We were able to get, of course, a lot of good illustrations.
And after I’d got quite a way though the book, as I mentioned at the beginning, I found that time was running away. I’d taken sabbatical leave for half a year at one point to write it, but I was doing many other things as we’ve been talking about; international travel with the Chemical Society in the university in my research groups and so forth, so there was only a certain amount of time to put to this.

Why did I choose Alan Earnshaw? Well I obviously wanted someone who was well versed in inorganic chemistry. Alan was a colleague of mine, he had a very easy-going style, both of writing and of existing, and he had already written, with Jack Lewis [sic], a small but very well known monograph on magnetochemistry, so I knew he knew the mechanics of publishing.
And so I asked him, I said, ‘Would you like to read this to see how it’s going?’ And he read through what I’d done. He said, ‘Gee this is great, why doesn’t anyone else write like this?’ He was very enthusiastic and I said, ‘Well if you like it Alan, would you help me finish it?’ And so he’d taken the bait and he discussed it with his wife, because he realised that that was going to be a commitment, which has an impact on families as well, so but he agreed to do. So we finished off the book together in that way.
So that was a rough story of how the book was generated and why it has the shape that it does have.

There’s something that I’d particularly like to mention in amongst all of these activities that are going on, and I have of course mentioned not only family but research students and visiting scientists, technicians, but there’s another vital component in any professor’s life, which makes the work that he or she does important and possible indeed, and that is his secretary.
And I’d like to just say a word or two here because this really is a vital part of the work that I’ve been doing.
I’ve had many secretaries, as you might imagine, over the years. Some have stayed longer than others, some for shorter time, but there are three in particular who have been with me for really quite long periods of time, periods of several years indeed. And I would like to mention them because of the help that they gave me.
The first, when I was a new professor for the first time in Newcastle, I had actually as my second secretary there, Eileen O’Donnell. Eileen was a young lass that had come almost straight out of secretarial college, but she was a superb secretary. She ran the office well, was discreet, which is a very important thing because one has confidential correspondence.
She was entirely reliable, and in particular, when I left the department – and it’s clear I’d been leaving for longer and shorter periods –she... I wouldn’t say she ran the place, that would be unfair to her and to the others, but she was there at the centre of the spider’s web keeping things going, most importantly, of course, in posting me the mail that was coming in, the referees’ comments on papers, the drafts of papers that were coming simultaneously in from the lab, she would send them to me wherever I was, and I would deal with them in the evening and send them back to her.
So, Eileen was a great help and, if I could be facetious, she only had one failing, which was to fall in love with one of my demonstrators, Bill Errington and... they were a lovely couple, but they got married and inevitably left when Bill left to go down to London to pursue his career after his time with us. But Eileen was a great help and she became a family friend as well.
Following her was Sheila Burnett. Sheila was from a mining village, quite near Washington in County Durham, and... not far from Newcastle. She again was with me for several years and was, as I’ve said with Eileen, the same sort of things could be said about Sheila. She was greatly helpful to me, and the work she did in the background was to enable me to achieve what I and the rest of the group were doing.

When I came down to Leeds, the office was bigger of course, not physically, but the workload of the office was larger because it was a much larger department. And Harry Irving, who was my predecessor, had... his secretary had left about a year before I came down.
So he had to appoint another secretary, which he did, so I can’t take any credit for being insightful and appointing Jean Thomas, who was the married secretary this time, whom I inherited from him. But he did do me the courtesy of saying, ‘I’ve had to appoint someone and if you don’t like it, I’m sorry, but is it all right by you?’ And quite naturally I said, ‘Well yes if it’s appropriate for you, I’m sure that it’ll be okay’.
I wasn’t to know how perceptive Harry had been, but Jean was a wonder, she had many roles that she could play. She had been a school secretary before, so that shows that she was a very experienced person. But she was with me virtually the whole of my period until towards the end, when we amalgamated as a school, and she became secretary to the whole of the school then.
But her renown in the university was such that the Registrar tried to pinch her for the Registrar’s Office on a couple of occasions, but she enjoyed what she was doing.
But Jean was an amazing person in organising the professor. She knew the business that we were doing, she would point out things, which I may have missed, she was like a senior civil servant in fact, always in the background, always helping.
And I mentioned parenthetically that she’d been helping typing the book. Of course that wasn’t done in office hours because it was a private initiative, which, if the book sold well, would actually bring in some income, so I had funding from an alternative source, and she agreed to spend a lot of evenings and so forth, typing, so she was helpful in that way.

To give an example of her insightfulness, for example, the physical geometry of the laboratory and the offices in Leeds, was that I happened to have an extremely well placed office. It had been designed in the late 1920s, actually, by Sir Christopher Ingold, when he was briefly Professor in Leeds, before he went to University College. But around the corridor from that one had the main Parkinson Building and on the same floor as me, was the Council Chamber where Senate met, and I was a Senior Member of Senate, and so Senate was literally within walking distance, I was the nearest professor’s office.
And that had this interesting consequence that one of the businesses of Senate was to finally approve the examiner’s reports for all of the examinations in the university. So at examination periods, there were busy sessions of Senate. But because it was inappropriate for people in one faculty to comment on the standards of another faculty, and they weren’t technically competent to do that, usually only the faculty members whose students were being looked at, would come for that particular session.
Now all faculties, except one, were punctilious in sending their senior staff along. But I have to say that in this, as in some other ways, the Medical Faculty was unique. They were a law unto themselves for a variety of, sometimes good reasons, such as, I mean, they had clinical responsibilities and so forth, so one understood that, but insofar as they were university teachers as well, with university appointments, and had to attend Senate, in my view they should have attended.
But they were notoriously very difficult about this. And on one occasion, that I happen to remember, the meeting was held, and the business was about to start and the Registrar turned to the Vice-Chancellor and said, ‘Excuse me, Vice-Chancellor, I have to tell you that this meeting is inquorate’. There weren’t enough Senate members from heads of departments to have a quorate meeting; they were in fact one short.
And the Registrar advised the Vice-Chancellor that it would cause untold troubles if the meeting was inquorate, and people who had failed perhaps, had found this and had a good lawyer, there would be problems, we had to have a quorate meeting.
What to do? Send for Norm because it was known where my office was.

So the Sub-Registrar was despatched to Norman Greenwood’s office, which was the nearest one there, explained the situation to my secretary, who was in the outer office, and she came in and told me. And so I said, 'Well, that’s a bit of a nuisance. Can’t they find someone else?' But it turned out that I was... fortunately, I’d been in my room. I may well have been in the lab, so I started to take my lab coat off, and she said, ‘No, don’t take it off, they’re interrupting your work; you go in with your lab coat on and they’ll realise that you’ve been doing something else’, which was a very astute observation. So I went in and, I think, impressed is the wrong word, but it was noted that I came in a lab coat, and sat there to make up a quorum, and then left.
That was Jean, but she was very helpful and astute in judgements of people and things, and, of course, I was making my own decision. But she had comments which were well worth hearing, and also, she knew that in some situations that we’d been in before, I would normally have sent a letter to thank for help, couched in appropriate terms. She got used to typing these letters and knew my mind, and would draft the letter, and say, ‘Do you want to send a letter along these lines?’ And if it was inappropriate, I would obviously modify it. If not, I’d say, ‘Yes, that’s fine’, and so there weren’t many people who felt they’d been left out. And that was partly due to Jean’s nurturing of the professor. It’s a very important point that’s sometimes forgotten.

Now there were several other secretaries and some juniors to the ones I’ve mentioned. But those were ones which stand out in mind. Perhaps I will mention just one more, Sheona Ferguson, because this was in a different role.
This was in the role of university administration. She was an Assistant Registrar and her job was to look after the Dean in charge of a faculty, and she had two faculties: Science and Applied Science as they were then, and she was very helpful in presenting the business. She was getting the papers together from the different departments, so she was actually working in the Registrar’s department, but closely involved with my work. And I think I established an interesting precedent there, that by and large, professors were called to the Registrar’s department because he was down there, and the professors came into the senior administration, and I felt that as Dean, as you know, in those days was not a paid appointment, it was fitted in amongst other work, that the Registrar’s Assistant should come to Chemistry, which she was quite prepared to do.
So she came up and we had our meetings, and she ran several other groups, particularly when departments were being not closed, but reviewed and assessed, and downsized and so forth. She had all the papers and arranged all the meetings for those sorts of things, so again, secretarial assistance was very important. Thank you.
[Q] Thank you, Norman.
