paula.rego

Portuguese painter Paula Rego, became part of the London Group in 1965, was shortlisted for the Turner Prize in 1989 and became the first Associate Artist of the National Gallery in London in 1990. Her work is strongly influenced by folk and fairy tales, especially those of her homeland.

My mother was called Maria São José, which means Mary of St Joseph; Figueiroa because my... she married my father called Joseph Figueiroa. And then when she was expecting me... she was tiny. My mother was about 5’2”, if that. She might have been under 5’, she was so small. But very full of energy and she was very... pert and so-on. Anyway, she got pregnant and you can imagine the size of the tummy was colossal. And when it came to giving birth it was a hell of a bad time. She was three days in labour and she was in a... she didn’t think it was strange. She thought that was normal. And when they came to... to pull this creature out — which I still have these... these little dents there from being pulled out from in there — because she’d had so much calcium, you see. It was good for the bones. It was good for my bones but not good for hers. And they dragged this carcass out and ripped her bladder. Yeah. So she was incontinent, poor cow, for ages and ages and she was... was a great... she was a great... she’d been to art school; not... that’s got nothing to do with my birth. Anyway, so that was... I was born and then I was brought up, you know, build, that sort of thing. And... and eventually she was saved, because her bladder was saved, cauterised by a great surgeon called... Reynaldo dos Santos who was Bartolomeu dos Santos’s grandfather. Yeah, the... the printmaker. And she was saved and she was so happy. She went off. And my father was an electronic engineer, so he had... he was still studying. And I think my grandfather — his father — because my... my mother’s parents were dead. Her mother died when she was five and her father was shot under her window; she saw her father die, collapse, when she was 14. And that was a time of a great deal of unrest and revolution in Portugal and that’s some... I don’t quite know the reason, but she watched this. And anyway she married... she’d had a very traumatic childhood and... and youth and when she found my father they got married and were... were well-adjusted, I think, quite happy. My father was tolerant. He was a... a liberal, he... at the time we had a... we lived under a dictatorship. For 28 years Portugal had a dictatorship of António de Oliveira Salazar who was supposed to be a good dictatorship... a good dictator. Doesn’t... there doesn’t exist such a thing as a good dictator, or even a benevolent dictator, it doesn’t exist. It was oppressive; he shut down all the teacher training schools, he... people stopped school. The school was between six years old and 10 years old, that’s all you did. And you learnt the kings of Portugal and... and the rivers. And even... even the railways and all that, that’s all you learnt. Anyway, we lived under a very, very oppressive regime for 28 years. My father was very much against the regime. He... my grandfather... my father was against the regime. My grandfather had been against the monarchy, as a matter of fact. And then when he... when I was very little, he decided to take my mother and carry on his studies in Marconi in England.

So I was left with my grandmother and my grandfather in Lisbon... in a flat, but it had a garden. You go... went down some steps and there was this... this big garden with chickens in it. And Lucia, who looked after the house, was the maid there and she... she looked after the chickens, looked after all of us. And in that house, in that magical flat which I shall never forget, because I loved being with my grandmother, there lived my grandfather when he was home, because he went out a lot. He was very... and his own father, very, very old — bisavô — who was bald. And that was it. And my great-grandfather lived at a... in a room at the end of a corridor where he was surrounded by saints because he was some kind of lay monk or something. And he had a oratório. What is that? That’s a kind of... a cupboard full of saints. What... Wooden carved things? Yes, or I don’t know what you call... what you called that. And they... he had this in his room, a huge one packed with saints in there. And he just lived in there and all he did was write prayer books. And he prayed. And then they would say, ’Look out, here comes great-grandfather’. And he had a potty. My dear, the potty was as tall as a chair, so that he didn’t have to bend down very low. And he’d crap in there and then he’d bring it across, down the corridor, to empty it in the bathroom. And they’d say, ’Look out, look out, here comes great-grandfather’. And I was supposed to run into the library or something and... ‘cause he’d come down and empty it and take it back again. And that was... I’ll never forget that. He also had a brother, Miguel, that used to cut his teeth and scare me, you know, when I was a kid. I was very little; I was like one and a half, to two. And he used to scare me. And they used... used to play cards with my great-grandfather, so it was a wonderful place. It had a pig that moved its head in... not a real pig, a toy that moved its head in the dining room and it had... it was a magical place. I loved being there with my grandmother; she was very kind and cosy and my grandfather spoilt me a great deal, which I loved and... until my parents came back. When I was three they returned. I didn’t know who the hell they were... didn’t know who the hell they were. And yet my grandfather had kept a diary of all the time I’d stayed with him and used to send it off to Chelmsford and... saying, everything that I’d done. I don’t know, I’ve never read it. I won’t read it; I can’t bear to read old letters. But that... so the... then they took me away; they found out I had TB, the beginning of TB, so we left Lisbon and we went to Estoril, up the coast, to a house that my parents hired, a big house. And that was in 1938.

Did they want to have other children? Or did they... did your mother have miscarriages or did she try to have other children or... do you know?
She... she tried but she had to... she had to abort it because she couldn’t have it. She wasn’t allowed to have any more children, yeah. No more. I was an only child, which I’ve always liked being an only child; I quite like that. You got much more attention that way. And also good and bad because of course everything... we went to live in Estoril in this big house and coming from Lisbon and going to live in the country... Estoril is by the sea but there’s a lot of pine trees, it was very countrified with forests and stuff. And we had a large garden. And I remember being very frightened of outdoors; I’d... I hated being outdoors. I was always being told: ‘Go outside and play, go outside and play’. And I’d always stay near the door and I was afraid of flies and everything, she... my mother said, ‘God, she’s... you’re afraid of everything’. I said I was afraid of everything. I wasn't used to it. And so I always tried to get indoors as quickly as possible to go into my playroom, you see, because in my playroom is where everything I liked existed, my dolls, my books, my... I mean, I was even doing little drawings and things then, although I was very little. And they made me come outside, they made me play with other children. We had a neighbour called Toni... Tony... and he... he’d... he always wanted to play with me and I used to hide. And my mother said, ’Bring her out, bring her out’, so I’d have to go and play. Toni... Toni used to do dreadful things like get a tin of tomatoes and then cook them over the fire he made in the garden and it was disgusting and tried... and then we’d have to eat it. Oh, I hated playing with Toni. Anyway, he was a nice boy.
And then of course this was the war, this was the beginning of the war, and refugees began to arrive from Europe. Estoril was the centre of espionage, German, Italian, English, they all joined up there. And they met in the casino. The casino was actually 50yds, 100yds, from my house and they had a place called the Wonder Bar where they drank and they, I suppose, exchanged information etc. People would arrive from all over the place; I remember once, a family arrived in a big car from Belgium and the lady — the mother — had travelled in the back seat with typhoid fever. And there was a little girl in the family and a little boy, and the husband driving. And they got there to... to Estoril and somehow they became friendly with my parents, for some reason. And I was obliged to play with the little girl and my mother said, ’Oh, go and play with...’ I can’t remember her name, she was Belgian. And this little girl... well, we used to play up in the playroom and all she did was sit me up against the wall and say: ’Now, I am going to take out your eyes’. So she’d have a pair of scissors pointing at my eyes and I had to stand very, very still, just in case and I didn’t like this game at all. I remember her as if it was yesterday. She had very short hair. She was... she was very bright, but pretty scary. I said to my mother, ‘I don’t want to play with her’; I never told her why, I never told her she was trying to take out my eyes because I’d never say anything to my mother. And this went on until they went away, thank God. And so... so we went then... they used to go to... then we built a house, we built a house next door, which is the house I still have today.

I remember moving in there. We had... in the old house, we had a nice gardener and they... to cheer me up and to give me... make me more normal, they bought me a Scottie dog. This Scottie dog was a breed... a real high-breed dog and it had... it had tendencies to throw itself off from the balcony. And when I... when this dog was brought to my house I was so frightened. It was a tiny little thing. I remember clambering up onto the settee, you know, a sofa, and running away from it and... and the little thing was so little and cute, and ’Oh, why are you so afraid of this...’ but I was terrified of this creature. And it turned out he was always being stolen because he was... for money, ransom money, because he had a pedigree. And he finally did commit suicide. He threw himself from the... from the balcony on the first floor and poink, died, the degenerate dog. And... and he was buried and so what. Anyway, so then we moved to the new house and then that was a quite a different feeling.

When I’m doing a picture and I’ve got the story and I don’t know where to put it, like, you know, the background, the setting for it, I go back to a place I knew as a child and I remember the room. I draw in the furniture and the room and then put the story in there. So I’ve got... it’s like a stage set. So I’ve got... I’ve got these memories of rooms where I put... where I put the story in... And the proportion of who’s tall and who’s small and... Yeah... yeah. And my... when we moved into the new house there was... You see, my father was working in Marconi in Lisbon, that’s broadcasting. It had a lot to do with broadcasting and he was involved, I think, with a lot of propaganda that the British, you know, put across and everything. And I think he did... I know he worked for the British because he flew to England during the war. In fact, he took the plane before the one that was shot down with Leslie Howard in it. And they say they thought Churchill was in it but in fact poor Leslie Howard got shot down, and my father had taken the plane before. And I remember my mother being so worried; she even made me sleep in the bed with her, which was... anyway, yeah, and they used to... they used to go to the casino a lot and there was a woman in the casino called Miss Cook, who played the piano. And, you know, she taught us tap dancing and I met her the other day, do you know, after all these years? I... I met her once more and it... it was quite extraordinary seeing her again. She was quite important and she... she’s in one of my pictures called Wall, at the bottom. Anyway, they used to go to the casino, they used to come... They’d never gamble; I think they just drank and they danced. They danced a lot in those days.
Then all these refugees... all these refugees turned up; a lot of girls turned up from places like Poland and... and they were very much admired by the Portuguese men because they were blond, tall, and they would sleep with them, you see, where the Portuguese wouldn’t, anyway not officially, and then the Portuguese men were crazy about these blonds. And they would be hired to teach children. I did a picture, as a matter of fact, called... what’s it called? It’s got Toni dressed up as a girl. What’s that called? I can’t remember. Oh, I know, I know, I know. A recent picture. Yeah, a very recent picture which... because recently I went back to... to relive those... those... because I was doing The Pillowman which is a recent picture. I began to... I did a lot... do a lot of research about Portugal during the war, because I realised, at one point, that The Pillowman — which is the play by Martin McDonagh that I... I loved — had a great deal to do with my... with my father... The Pillowman? Yes, it did. Talking to Marco I thought... it suddenly came to me that it was something to do with... so I... I went to the Imperial War Museum and did up a lot of reading on Portugal and the refugees during the war and the amount of people that passed through Portugal, Saint-Exupéry, Stefan Zweig, Thomas Mann, Max Ernst, immense amount of people. Some stayed for a little while. Saint-Exupéry stayed for a little while, gambled a great deal I believe, and the others just... it was just a way through to America really. And they were... they would catch the... the boats to go to America, the ships, where in the... you had... to have a special permission to be able to leave the country. And a friend once needed permission, had to go to Lisbon to get permission. He’d just arrived; he was a refugee from France; he’d been a resistance fighter. And he’d gone to Lisbon to get a permit and as he was coming towards the quay to catch the boat, there’d been a strike going on with the steve... stevedores in port... in... protesting agai... against the low wages and everything they got. And he saw... as he was getting near, he saw all these men gathered together and shouting and singing and he also saw the Guardia Republicana, which is the guard police on horseback, coming and shooting everybody. They must have shot 300 people. Just flattening, to get through, yeah. And he went on and got in the boat and left as quickly as possible. Not a word of it in the newspapers of course, because there was a great deal of censorship. There was always censorship; all you talked about was... was football. You talked about football but nothing else actually, really. And they say they talked about the Fado, which is our national song, but they... I don’t remember them talking about Fado. And Fatima, you know, the apparition, but I don’t remember. I remember them talking about football and there wasn’t allowed anything. It was terribly censored, no political information, so the word of... by word of mouth people got to... to hear things, you know. And my father knew a lot of things because he’d meet his friends for lunch in the café etc, and they would know, you know what was going on, etc. And this was terrible... a terrible feeling of... of unease and unrest and so-on, but all covered up. It was all going... going on, but all covered up. Then you’d have the smart ladies in Estoril; they would play canasta, sit around tables, play canasta, have... have cocktails, you know, and all this was going on at the same time; this misery and this unbelievable poverty.

The school books I had to read, first class, second class and fourth class, that’s what we had... I did my first three years in Portuguese. It had pictures of the happiness of Portuguese life, which was: A country house — a peasant’s house — okay, where the woman was... had an apron, very clean apron. There were roses hanging outside the window, the little boy would be writing at a table, his exercises, and the father would be coming in with a satch... or a kind of digging instrument on his back, and said is supper ready. And that was happiness and contentment for all in a rural scene, which of course it was not like this. It was utter and destitute poverty. And big families and... Enormous families because you couldn’t have abortion... You couldn’t... you had families, you know, never ending. And immense poverty and misery, drunk fathers, not fathers with things, you know. Because, you know, like somebody who da... who dug all day, it was paid like a little and part of the payment was five litres of red wine. So by the end of the day they’d be, you know, a little bit sloshed, but they were so used to it that it was nothing and they’d go on drinking. And violent if they needed to be to their wives or their children, yeah. They’d come home and, you know, they weren’t in a very good condition. There was not enough food; it was a misery. And I’d lived, I... because my grandparents had this... this quinta, which is a kind of country house farm, more like a farm because it had chickens and it had a pig and all that sort of thing, on the beach called Ericeira, a fishing beach, and there was utter poverty there because if the fishermen couldn’t get any fish, of course they didn’t have anything to sell. And during winter they wouldn’t go out fishing because it was very rough, the seas were immensely dangerous. And so there was the most immense misery you can imagine, terrible, terrible. And so it wasn’t at all like, oh, happy family, contented, etc. It was just a lie, complete lie. Children were taught all these lies right from the beginning; the whole thing was lies. And people learned how to tell lies very easily... it is easy to tell a lie, after all... and also to pretend and to be deceptive.

I went to school in Estoril, and my school... all we did was rehearse dancing, in tutus, like this. ‘Eu sou o A do papá’, which is like we used to sing: ‘Eu sou o A do papá’. And we used to be... each have a letter and pretend that we were letters and stuff like that, and we’d do these performances at the casino in Estoril, this when we were like seven. And we didn’t do any learning. We’d learnt the stories and stuff like that. We did... I had a lovely time. My parents then discovered that I didn’t know anything, didn’t know... even how to add or anything. And they said this can’t go on like this, she’s got to learn something. So they got me this teacher at home, Donna Violetta. Donna Violetta came from the official school, yes. She had these great big tits and she wore an angora mauve pullover, my dear, and she was absolutely horrifying. God, when she was about to come and teach, she'd come to the house three times a week to teach me at home. And I had a blackboard put up in my playroom, can you imagine? And she’d come up; I’d watch her coming up the hill and I used to start sweating and sweating. And I was frightened of her because she’d whack me. Anyway...- Suffocate you. She'd smack, ‘You stupida’, and things like that, you know. Anyway I learnt, you bet I learnt, I learnt the third class and fourth class; after the fourth class I said ‘I’m never going to see this woman again ever’. So I passed my exams, very good, distinction and everything, and then finish, and then English school.
My parents then put me in English school, Saint Julian's school in Carcavelos to start doing English. But I knew... I spoke English already because I’d had this teacher who’d come to give me lessons in English. But we didn’t have lessons; we just walked amongst the pines and talked to each other, and she was very eccentric family; she was half French. She used to have farting competitions with her father and I thought: 'Oh, my God, this is extraordinarily rude'. Anyway, I thought that was lovely. And she was wonderful, Marie Laure Pla was her name and she introduced me to other possibilities, you know. She introduced me... she gave me... I think she gave me Peter Pan and all the English stories and everything and after that, I went to English school where I started when I was 10. Which is just girls... a girls’ school or with boys? No, a mixed school. Mixed school, yeah. You know it had 23 different nationalities, not just boys and girls, 23 different nationalities, yeah, every kind of nationality, can you imagine? Because they’d all come, you know, from the war; they’d come there. And this was just after the war; it was 1945. And... and it... I liked the school a lot, I liked it. It was good; we did a lot of sport, we did a lot of climbing trees, we did a lot of necking, we did a lot of... a bit later on, not at 10. And we did a lot of... we had a good time. And we learnt a thing or two, learnt Chaucer, learnt all those things, except science: I’ve never learned science, but everything else I did, yes, and I loved it... art. Art: Miss Turnbull who taught... taught us art was wonderful. And then we had a man called Mr Sarsefield. He encouraged you to do everything, paint all the walls, do huge murals of massacres. I did huge murals of Greek massacres and everything, and cities in flames, very appropriate now, imagine, cities in flames. And you had to take... you say all right, now you decorate the whole of the hall of the school. Superb, that’s amazing. I know! And then you’d get these enormous rolls of paper. I remember getting these rolls of paper and just drawing on them, just like, just drawing on them and covering up the walls with... with paint. It was... it was paint mixed with water, you know, the sort of stuff. Yeah, postery paint. Oh, it was such fun and I did it all, I did all that. I just did nothing but really paint.
Did they see you as being quite exceptionally talented though, by this time?
I don’t know whether I was, but they let me do it. Yeah. You see, and it was fantastic. A lot of people got bored at art school... at art class, but I never did; I loved it. And... and my mother, when she had her bazaars as well, she used to have these bazaars to help — English bazaars; they knit things all the time — and when they had these bazaars she also asked me to decorate the... the rooms in the hotels where they had the bazaars. So I used to do cut-out animals and things and put them up and decorate all these rooms, big rooms, all decorated. And I was still very young... Superb! 14, you know, 14, yeah. And, you know, it was good. One day they came home, my parents came home, and I’d done the whole thing in their living room. It was terrible. I’d cut out all sorts of... of paper animals and stuck them all up on the walls. I said... my mother said, ’Oh my God, oh my God, I think you’ll have to take those down’, you know, and I did take them down and burn them. So I was able to do all this, you see. This is all due... thanks to the English school.

I came in to England to a finishing school... Yeah. First of all, and Mr Bradshaw got me an — was the teacher of... of art there — got me an interview at Chelsea. And I went along with a portfolio, just by myself, and I got in. He said, ’Oh, these are very good, you can come in’. And then my guardians in London said, ’She can’t go to Chelsea because we know of a girl who got pregnant in Chelsea’. And I mean, you don’t want that sort of thing happening, and so the Slade is the best place. University girls never get pregnant there. So I said, ’Okay’, so I got a portfolio together and they... they took it to the Slade. They said, ‘We don’t want this... this is... this is rubbish’, they said, ’This is rubbish’. ‘Oh, never mind, never mind’, said my tutor, you know, ’They’re quite well off, she’ll go off and get married quite quickly, he won’t... it won’t make any difference. She won’t be here very long’. And so they said, ’Okay, she can come in part-time’. But was this Coldstream or Ian Tregarthen Jenkins who let you in? Uh? Who let you in, Coldstream or...? Coldstream. Coldstream said yuh. He said, ’Oh, she can come in part-time’. And... and like Craigie was in, Craigie Aitchison was in part-time as well. And I was in part-time and I used to go three times a week and then I went every day. It didn’t make any difference anyway, I went every day. And I said... and then I... then they said, ’Oh, she’s okay, after all, so we’ll let her stay’. So I stayed. And started oil paintings on easels, and...? I started doing drawings in the Antique Room; that’s what we had to do first, all these... these figures there like that and we used to try and copy them. It was very difficult because they had no hard edges, it was very difficult to do. I got so bored doing that. So they put... allowed me to go the life class immediately so I could draw from the model. So I started drawing from the model; we had little donkeys that we perched on and a drawing board and I drew from the model. I liked that, I liked drawing from the model; we had some nice models. We had the lady that I still have the picture of, who had bells on her shoes. When she got up to rest you’d hear bells tinkling. She was quite a character, wonderful, so I did a portrait of her...  portrait of her, not... it wasn’t an art... it was a portrait really. Yup. And several others as well. But, at the same time as this, the also... Slade also encouraged doing things from the imagination. They didn’t stop me ever. I always had a corner in the Antique Room where I could put up an easel and a canvass and do a picture from my head. Mm, from your head. Yeah, from my head. So there was always one going on. Did you do Summer composition? Did you do the... Summer compositions, of course I did. Where they had a theme, yeah. I loved that because I loved being given a theme to do and I thought that was such a good idea. And I did that. I also decorated the first Christmas party when I got there, of Alice in Wonderland. I did a huge... a huge paper decoration like the ones I used to do at St Julian’s, of Alice in Wonderland.

The artist whom I most admired at the Slade was Diana Cumming, who got all the summer prizes and painted pictures from the imagination, wonderful pictures of... of... I can’t explain how they were, but they were quite magical and fierce and... and very, very strange, moonlit cats and things. She’s marvellous and she got the prizes so she must be good, I thought, if she gets the prizes. And so I very much wanted to... but I can’t imitate her because I couldn’t do that kind of stuff. But she was somebody I admired a great deal. And then there were... there was a group, of course, there was the Euston Road group with Euan Uglow, Tom Espley, Patrick George. I think Patrick George was teaching there, not sure. And many, many, many — Dick Lee — there were many, many people that had come on from Camberwell and that, to me, it was not natural to me to... to do what they did, which was like to try and measure everything and with a pencil, to see the proportions and... and all, and to try and really concentrate on drawing and so-on. It just wasn’t natural to me, so I... I couldn’t; I... I just found it very difficult. But I did learn something, I did. Something came across. It’s like a chronometer that you have, the equivalent to music that keeps things in that way, and that has never left me, curiously enough. A balancing act that has... has never, never left me to today. And that was picked up at the Slade and I think that that was certainly picked up from the... from the Euston Road doing... very roundabout, but it was very interesting. And the... they were the strongest group at the Slade in those days; then there was somebody like Michael Andrews who was outside that, but touched on it. But he was a painter of stories and he’s a painter of... of extraordinary incidents. Like one of his best paintings was just the Man who Suddenly Fell Over, is extraordinary. And who would think of doing a thing like that? He was, I think, he was influenced by Ben Shan, the American artist, who was somebody I admired at the time very much, but who was not talked about at all at Slade. He was considered no good. But I think Mike must have looked at him and I liked Mike’s... Michael’s work very much indeed. And I thought he was just like, you know, my God, he’s a real artist, you know. And there was, yeah... and then there were... there were lots of... of girls who painted at... at... and there was people. Anyway, there were... there were and then was Vic... Vic, whom I married later, many years later. He was... was a kind of intellectual. The Slade was not an intellectual place. We had Professor Wittkover who gave art history lessons... talks, who was marvellous, and made things extremely interesting and marvellous. Then we had Sam Carter who taught us perspective, which was something I was never able to understand, ever. I even now have to have explanations from my son, Nick, who draws things out for me because I find it very difficult. I try work it out with strings and things round the back there. Then we had somebody — I cannot remember his name — teaching us anatomy, which I liked actually, and I wish we’d gone into the anatomy, the dissection theatre when... used to do in the old days, but not anymore.
So we learned all the basis of human body and the construction that people used to learn, way back, way back, way back. But it took... it took Vic to explain to me that the way the body moves, you know, and the shapes and the planes, many, many years later. And I remember asking once in Portugal to Vic, many years later, ’What is tonality?’ Now, he said to me, ’You half close your eyes and you see some things darker than others; that’s tonality.’ Da da! Easy, eh? You don’t have to... so there. So that happened later. But at the Slade you did learn and it was... you did learn; things got through, even though I was not one of... of the... no way could I be part of the Euston Road group. I wasn’t capable, I didn’t have... I wasn’t capable of doing that really. And then there was another... another lot of students who were influenced by Stanley Spencer and who did imaginative pieces with hedges and pools and things. One of them was Joe Hope, who was... who was... I think got a prize once. And I even met Unity Spencer; in fact, I saw her only the other day, who was Stanley Spencer’s daughter. So there were various groups of different kinds of art going at... at the Slade; it wasn’t just one kind. And I think Coldstream encouraged this variety. He was... I... I think he encouraged the variety and... and he was good... very good in that way. He was not... not a closed mind one bit.

LS Lowry was considered like... what’s the name of the woman now who does drunk women? I quite like her. What’s her name, the woman who does... who lives in Plymouth and... and does, and... and shows at the Portland Gallery and has had a show up at the Baltic now? Anyway, she’s very popular, lots of cards are sold, she’s a... a popular artist. Beryl Cook. Beryl Cook. Yup. Beryl Cook. And of course Lowry was considered the equivalent to Beryl Cook. Now, Lowry is a very great artist and Bill Coldstream had the nerve actually to invite him to come to the Slade. And I was one of the lucky ones that he saw. I took all my pictures to... to Lowry and he came by humph, humph, like this, and he looked at all my pictures and, you know what he said, he said, ‘I couldn’t do that, I couldn’t do that’. I thought that was wonderful. And then later on he wanted to buy a picture. Well, they never got... he wanted to buy one of my pictures but then he never got round to it, I know, because I got pregnant. But, anyway, he was like this... I was so pleased to see him; I had him as a marvellous experience and Victor Pasmore as a horrendous experience. He came... he’d just broken his leg. He was riding a bicycle and he came, I think, with his leg in plaster or something, dressed in white, and he looked at this stuff that was in front of him and he said: ‘I cannot understand how anybody living today can do stuff like that’. I said: ‘I don’t know’. Anyway, so I... I cried, I was so upset. I didn’t know why they had me seeing him, for heaven’s sake, it was no help whatsoever. And that was bad, but Lowry made up for it, and then I had a marvellous tutor called William Townsend, who was so kind and was very, very, very encouraging to me, always. We used to meet quite often and show him all the work and he said, ’Good, good, yes, carry on and...’ etc. That was very good. So I, you know, it was fine really... it was fine... there. I learned at the Slade. I learned at the Slade, I did quite a lot of drawing, which I think is immensely important and I think one of the terrible things that is happening now is that there is no... not much drawing done at art schools. And I think that is a great, great shame because I think that, you know — this is a corny thing to say possibly — but I think that drawing, that the connection that you actually draw holding the pencil and looking and putting down something and connects to your brain is not the same as using a computer. And phys... it’s very physical and I think it’s very important to learn. You discover things you never imagined were like that and when you’d done them, you’d think: oh my God, I didn’t know I was able to do that. And it... it’s very important to draw. Anyway, I did a lot of drawing at the Slade, yes, and I liked that.

I took up with... with Vic at a party the Slade, just by chance because he was married. But I didn’t know because he didn’t live with his wife or anything. And he just came in, you know, looking very dashing and everything, but very poor. His shoes had holes in them and everything. And he said to me... it was very, very romantic. We were at this party and everybody was completely sloshed and people had gone into bedrooms and locked the doors and were screwing away. And then I was... I was coming down the stairs and Vic was going up the stairs and then he said — I hardly knew him — and I was coming down the stairs and the first thing he said to me is: ’Take off your knickers’. And I did... and I did. I’ve always been very obedient and I did exactly what he bid me to do. And then we were in a room and then, afterwards, the next day, I was so ashamed. I remember I could hardly walk into the Slade because I was blushing and, oh God, everybody knows and stuff like that. Make any difference anyway. And afterwards I began to... to see Vic and I... I began to see him; he was a great friend of Mike’s.
I remember once going into the cinema in the King’s Road and halfway through the film, I had a feeling. And I came out of the film halfway through — and I never do that — and there, going across the road, was Mike and Vic walking. And I went off with Vic, we went down... he had at the time a studio in Cheyne Walk at the back of somebody’s house. And I went with him and then I began to sit for him; I did quite a lot of sitting for him. He did lots of very good pictures of me down in Cheyne Walk. One of them has disappeared to Belgium, I only wish I could get hold of it; it is a nude, beautiful picture. And... and I fell deeply in love with Vic, deeply in love with him and I respected him, admired him, thought he was very good looking, because he’d shaved off his beard. He looked horrible with a beard on, it was like a nest of spiders crawling round his face. But when he took it off he was awfully good looking. And I... I loved him very much. So... And then you...? I got pregnant. And then, eventually... eventually, I told... I rang up Portugal and told my father and said — because Vic had said: ‘No, I’ve got to go back to my wife’, all that sort of thing — and then I rang up my father and said: ’Look, this has happened, I’m here alone in the house and it’s summer... I don’t know what to do’. And he said: ‘I’m coming’. My father was in Eng... on the road to England in... in two days. And he picked me up from the flat in... in West Hampstead and we spent all night drinking Coca Cola in Soho — it was one of those hot nights — and talking and talking and talking. He said, ’Oh well then, we’d better get you back to Portugal’. And we went back to Portugal in the car, listening to... to Verdi and it was a wonderful trip. And he got me some clothes in Paris because I’d gotten a bit fat and so-on, and when he got to Portugal... we had to take my mother to the beach; he had to take my mother away because she screamed so much when she found out. He had to take her somewhere and tell her. And then I turned up with him and everybody was okay, but it’s embarrassing because in Portugal it’s considered a terrible — was, not anymore — considered a terrible stigma to get pregnant, not being married, my God. And my mother got very nasty letters from her friends saying: ’This is to greet you but not your daughter who has done this... this terrible thing’. Anyway, my... my little Cassie was born... was born. I came to England to have her. And then she was... sort of when she was little brought up there and then Vic came to join us, then he came to join us when she was not even one for Christmas... came to join us and we went to live in Ericeira where all those poor fishermen lived. And that’s where we had... we shared a studio.

It was a huge winemaking barn that had been my grandfather’s and it had an enormous bar... barn owl once flew in. It was so frightening, I thought, God, it’s an angel come in here. So I had to put grills up on the windows and we worked there. And I got stuck because I was trying to draw people and do this stuff I was taught at the Slade. Oh, I couldn’t do it; it was boring. And I said, ‘Vic, I don’t know what to do’. So do you know what he did? He got a blue bowl with some orange... oranges in it and stuck it on the table and said: ’Do that’. And I said: ‘Vic, I can’t do this, this is... this is just terrible’. And so I didn’t do it; I couldn’t do... I couldn’t do painting like that at all. He said: ’Just draw, just draw’ and that’s what I did and what I’ve done ever since: just draw. And I did. And I drew from my head, I drew all sorts of things. I filled up immense amounts of papers with everything and so-on, and so-on and so-on. So that was... we lived there for quite a while. About six years, or something like that? From 1957 till 19... yeah. Well, in ’63 we bought the house in Albert Street so you see it was quite a long time. And we... I came to England to have the children, I had two more children; I’d come to England to have them so they’d have British passports. And we went back there again.

You couldn’t stay there. Vic had no-one to talk to. It was terribly boring. He used to go down to the hotel and pick anybody up who spoke English. We had hairdressers; we had all sorts of people come up to the farm to talk to us. God, we met some really fascinating people. There was Bronson Potter who was a son of an American senator, who was really weird and he’d crashed in Angola and bashed his head in. He introduced us to Kerouac, to all the American writers, you see, of those days, and he’d brought all these books from Africa which he gave us, Burroughs... even William Burroughs in those early days of the ‘60s, ‘50s, no... ‘50s... ‘50s, William Burroughs and all that lot. And we had that and we’d been reading Kingsley Amis and Vic said he’d found out about these writers and Kingsley Amis didn’t seem like you know, it was another thing... we... we prescri...subscribed to the Olympia Press, which was erotic literature with very good writers, etc. Henry Miller and all that. And we... we did a lot of reading. I read all of Dostoevsky and that, and ... but he had no-one to talk to. That’s different really, no-one to talk to except me, and I wasn’t talking then very much. I liked listening and not talking, but... so he’d pick up these people and... and talk to them. He had picnics on the beach and talked to them. We decided to come away; that was no life there. There was nothing to see; it was just always the same thing. I had to look at pictures and be where the people are doing art, not live completely separate. You have to be with things that are happening. And feel more urgency that it’s a little bit competitive and that you need... And you have things to look at, you know. You had not a museum there, nothing to look at except books; it’s not the same thing. So we had to come back really and we did. But it must have been a bit of a struggle to support three children and... My father helped. My father supported us. Very special person your father. My father was... was very special person. He supported us all, bought the house and saw to it that we had enough money to live on. And he was extraordinarily generous and liberal and generous. He was indeed. And so I’m... I’m very proud of him... I’m very proud of him. I think of him; I have a little portrait I did of him in my bedroom I look at every day. And, you know, one does things for him, even now. So, yeah, he was wonderful.

When I came to England to have my second child I rented a studio of Anne Buchanan in Charlotte Street. And there she had on... in the flat, she had a Henry Miller novel which I read. Afterwards we subscribed to it, but it was the first one I’d ever read and it blew my mind. And also, at that time, there was an exhibition of Dubuffet at the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA). Vic was... frequented the ICA a lot and spoke there and stuff, because the ICA was in Dover Street in those days and it was much more to do with painting than it is now. It was... wasn’t so much to do... It had poetry too and so-on, but it was... you know, Roland Penrose ran it and, and Dorothy Moreland. In fact, Dorothy Moreland... was the only place that I was able to show was the ICA because Dorothy Moreland liked my work and Roland Penrose too... did too. No-one else in London would look at what I did because I then started to... after doing a picture a day when I was at Anne Buchanan’s studio I used to do a picture a day, and very quickly in oil paint, quite obscene things. I still have some drawings I did there, pack... stacks of drawings and quite a few paintings; I don’t know where they are. And then I... I put them in storage and went back to Portugal and came back. And, in the meantime in Portugal, I had started doing collage, cutting up paper and putting it... first of all, I used magazines and then there wasn’t enough. So I found out that I had to do my own material, so I used to draw figures, creatures and houses, and then I used to cut them up and then reassemble them to make different forms. And I found that... first of all, cutting up was a great pleasure. It was good because, when I was little, I’d cut... cut off my doll’s fingers and that was very pleasurable because they were really like flesh. And cutting up the material I’d done was very pleasurable as well and it was like doing bad things, which was wonderful. And I did that. And then I’d reassemble them and stick them down and make in... a story would develop and I would go with it. Very often I’d just go with it, so there were lots of pictures done like that. I’ve got a few still left. I had brought them back to England but no-one would... would look at them, no-one. I remember going to Tooths and everything, who showed Appel and all sorts of people like that, and they just didn’t... they didn’t want to know. But... and then I had, also I had a French guy who had a gallery in... in France, in Paris, in Place Vendôme. Monsieur LaCloche he was called. And he said, ’Oh, this is marvellous’, he saw them in Ericeira, ‘this is marvellous, you bring them to Paris, I will give you an exhibition’. So by then we had a little car my father had bought us, a little Floride and we packed the pictures on top of this. We drove all the way to Paris with all these pictures on top. We got to the gallery, unpacked the pictures, ’Oh, very good, very good, we will take them away and you will get a letter when you get to London’. And when we got the letter it was just like this: Monsieur LaCloche ayant refleche... Mr LaCloche, having thought again, has decided not to give you a show. So Vic and I always had a joke like, ’Oh Monsieur LaCloche ayant refleche’. We’d always said that we never, I never got that. Paris, I’m not lucky with Paris actually. So, and then in England I got this little show at... at the ICA with four people, six, or something. And then a long time went by, a long, long time went by, I’d still be doing this collages and stuff like that, and no one would want it, nobody wanted to know.

The first people to... to show me, really in Portugal, and had given me, you know, a recognised something was the Gulbenkian Foundation. The Gulbenkian Foundation were quite enthusiastic, and I remember I put in a couple of pictures, and they... they gave me a prize, and so on, and I...it was very good. They’ve always been immensely helpful to me, always. And then there was this other gallery that... that used to come here and pick up all the stuff I did and then take it over there and sell it. And... and sell it. Any case they were shown there, all these collages and things were shown in Portugal, and they were very successful. But this — I'm jumping ahead — because my first exhibition was in the Sociedade Nacional de Belas Artes, which had just opened a gallery to show modern art — contemporary, we say — and it opened with Arshile Gorky. Now, I'm a great fan. I was a mad fan of Arshile Gorky. And the fact that I was to follow him... I was invited to follow him I was thrilled. It was an enormous honour, so we filled up the gallery with all these collages, to have The Dogs of Barcelona, Iberian Dawn, Regicide, all, every one. August Anxiety, all those pictures, and a few little drawings that I had done earlier. And my father was thrilled, and my father had a... also a typography that it printed all the... the tickets for the trains, so, in those days nobody had catalogues, so he decided he was going to print a kind of fold out for me, and he asked Alberto de Lacerda, who had been an enormous supporter of mine in London, and who was at that time in Portugal, and he wrote for the newspapers. He wrote... it was called Letter from London, and it was... he used to say awful things that you're not supposed to say and — about Portugal — and he used to criticise it in... in a way, and he... he wrote the... the preface for the... for the exhibition, at one point, what he said had to be censored, so they cut it out, yeah. My father said, ’Look, we can't put this in, because you'll be, you know, it’ll be arrested... it’ll be confiscated’. So we cut... we cut it out, and he printed this wonderful piece that he wrote, and... and we... we had the show. And for the first time ever in Portugal there were drinks at an opening. They never had drinks. And so my father got some drinks in, and it was a great... a great feast, and it was a great...it was very, very successful. Well, not selling, it wasn't. Two people bought. The Gulbenkian bought a painting, Manifesto (For a Lost Cause), which was about my father as well, and... and some friends also bought a painting, and that was it, I think. It was... I think I sold two... two, at the most three pictures. But it was a beginning. It was wonderful. And it went down very well, lots of reviews, etc, which Alberto had a lot to do with as well — I think — and all the sort of Portuguese intelligentsia came, an immense amount of poets. We had most of Portugal's poets. Lots of very, very, very, very good poets, and he knew all of them. A lot... more poets than painters came. I only knew one painter, Menez, who was a great friend of mine, and she didn’t come there. She didn’t come. I didn’t know her yet. But all these cezarinis, all these famous Portuguese poets came, and it was talked about. Talked about in the literary pages, it was talked about as art, you see. And I'm getting kind of... quite well known there. And that was in 1965, '66, the year just before my father died — '65, '66 — in '66, he... he died in '66. And so that was... but I'm glad I was able to do it before he died.

The Dogs of Barcelona, which is a picture about... I read it in The Times, that in Barcelona there were many stray dogs, and the authorities got really fed up, and so they poisoned chunks of meat, and they threw... threw it in the streets for the dogs to eat, so they’d die, poisoned. What happened was of course not just the... those dogs died, all dogs who ate the meat died, even people might have picked up the meat. It was very careless and off-hand way, like it would be under such a... such a regime as they had. And I used that. I thought, this is... this is what happens, you know, and I used that. I call it Stray Dogs, but it was The Dogs of Barcelona.

I had at the time a book of Romanesque paintings, from Barcelona, and I took out a... a picture — I... I copied, used one... an image — of St Jerome, who had his wounds licked by dogs, and they were healed, so the dogs were being very kind and also useful. So I had that in the picture, in the middle. And then on top was a frieze of the dogs all dying, all twisted and churning and dying, and all over the picture were flies, flies, flies, flies, you know, and the story... I'll tell you the real story, actually, it’s like this: I was working upstairs, frantically on this picture, had a tiny room, in Albert Street, the back top room where I worked, Vic had the front room, then the children had their bedrooms and the living room and all that stuff. And I used to have a tiny room at the back, and it was full of paper everywhere and I was sticking this thing down, and I got to a point when I'd... I'd finished the picture, up to a point, you know, there was, there was a gap at the top, and there was...I didn’t know how to finish it. And I didn’t know how to finish this picture. It had everything it should in it already, but there was something else missing, and then, one day, we met a... a very, very beautiful Italian girl, and one day I came down into the living room, and there was my husband snogging this girl. Well, I was so shocked and so annoyed, I told them to get out etc all that business, you know, and it was... I then went and put her on the top of the picture. You see, I used her to make her into a kind of monstrous kind of figure, with her tongue hanging out, and her eyes also popping out. And that’s the big, fat, lumpy thing on top, is her. So that has nothing to do with The Dogs of Barcelona. But... but it has got something to do with The Dogs of Barcelona, because it’s a monstrous creature up there, so I... that's how I finished it. I finished that picture, and it was... after that it was... it was difficult doing the next picture. It was... that picture kind of sealed something off for me. And sealed... not personally, it had nothing to do with my personal life, but the picture as a picture was...that... that phase was over, definitely. Expurgate all this... Yeah, it all came... and it’s full of violence and disgust, and flies, and you know, merda.

There was one large... one big one called The Firemen of Alijo, which now belong to the... to the Tate Gallery, and that picture... we went — that Christmas — we went to spend New Year’s Eve up in the north of Portugal in a town called Alijo, which is very, very cold, and it was snowing. And we were staying in a pousada — a very small hotel — Vic, my mother, my father, just us. The children had stayed behind. And it was dismal. It was a dismal, sad, cold place. And we went outside, and we saw the... the chaps — men — standing there, dressed in straw. That's how they dress; to keep warm they dressed in straw. Traditional costume, but they still had it, to keep them warm. And in the snow, with bare feet. And they're all standing outside... outside the...outside the station, just out the fire station and some were outside the tavern, and the firemen were coming out. There had been some accident, or something, and it was horrifying to see these... poverty and everything. It was a very uncomfortable experience. Not just from seeing this poverty, and... and... but also from the uncomfortable hotel and also my father not being well, already. There was a... there was a... the grim... the grim reaper was already smelling around there somewhere, that's for sure. And I... as I came back to London, I did that picture, The Firemen of Alijo. Yeah, and that was... and... and that was actually shown at the London Group, because I'd been... made a member by... by Claude Rogers, who was a... who was... wonderful, actually. And his wife, Elsie Few, bought it. Bought it for... for some collection she was making, which ended up at Kingston College, you know, and it was discovered years later. It disappeared, you know — years later — down there in a cellar somewhere. And they hung it up on the wall, and then the Tate bought it, which was good. It’s quite a nice picture. That was the last. That was the last picture of that lot. After that it was general decline for years, that's what it was. Just... just lost for years. Because my... my father died and all those things happened.

Pop art came in. And be...things...it was pop art. Pop art. Everything was flat, you know, and there was...pictures had no... no texture in them, there wasn't any shadows anywhere. No shadows. Pop art there’s very few shadows. It’s... because Peter Blake and so on, but I never considered... considered David Hockney as a pop artist, to tell you the truth, ever. But, you know... Americans, I'm talking about, I thought, well, this is... this is something I must at least try to be. So... and also, acrylics came in. I began to use acrylics for the first time, and of course everything was flat, and dead. And I went on doing flat and dead pictures for quite a long time. One of them Vic quite liked, so I was pleased about that. But afterwards he didn’t even have anything to say. And I didn’t like them either. I just did them and they weren’t any good, except the... The Punishment Room is good. Because then I was doing in studio, I was doing the room where... it was like, instead of calling it playroom, I call it The Punishment Room. It had my mother’s hats, and it had little girl, and it was... it was, yeah, it was a punishment room. I liked that picture. But apart from that, every picture I did was a disaster. And this went on for quite a while. The only thing that still kept going, because I used to sit by the fireplace when Vic was out doing his business, and I used to do drawings in pen and ink. I did a lot of drawings of my aunt’s house, and Manuela, my little cousin walking with her grandfather, and quite... quite nice drawings, those were. So I kept that going. But the pictures suffered terribly. I could... I was lost, really, till I came back to London. Till I came back to London. And then, also, it wasn't just coming back to London, because I was in a very bad way. My... I'd... I’d had another kind of depression, and I was in a very bad way, and I started therapy. I started doing Jungian therapy, as a matter of fact. Anthony Storr, who was a writer, also writes about the black... Churchill’s Black Dog, he wrote about. And I went to see him, and he was very nice, and he got me to see somebody else, who I still see now, occasionally. Who has got pneumonia at the moment, my God, he's awfully ill.
Anyway, so I started that, which was very interesting. Because doing... doing therapy rekindled all my interest in the folk tales. It was then that it started. It was like... like going back to some sort of source, because I think Jung was interested in... in that as well, and there are lots of things written about folk tales and fairy tales by Marie-Louise von Franz for instance, Shadow and Evil in Fairy Tales and all that stuff. I read all that. I... I also had a period of reading Herman Hesse, all that hippy stuff, and I became very, very interested and I asked for the Gulbenkian, by then I was quite broke, and I went to the Gulbenkian, and said, ’Look, I... I need money. Can you help me?’ They said, ’Well yes. Find anything you want to do, anything, and we'll give you a... an allowance’. And they did. So I spent six months at the British Library, reading up the original fairy stories, Straparolla, the... you know, the Italian stories, and... and then... and then going on from there. I didn't get to read the Indian stories, actually, because they're supposed to come from India, but I... but...and then, you know, going on to Perrault and all that, but I read... read a lot of very early folk tales, and did a study on them, wrote to them, did a whole series of illustrations on Portuguese fairy stories as well, and then moved on from there. And slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, I began to...I began to...well, develop in some way. But everything was kind of dead, for a long, long time. So I don’t like showing those pictures.

I had to go through a whole process of still doing art, using collage and painting it, which I couldn’t get out of, until my friend said: ’Why do you have to cut it up?’ Freedom. That's it. Simple as that. It wasn't simple. You need the right person at the right time. And I was very, very lucky to have had that piece of advice, because I don’t think Vic... Vic was noticing. He was...had too many problems of his own. And... but Juão noticed, and helped me. Really helped me. And then slowly, when I began to draw again, that was okay. That, you know, just one thing led to another, led to another, and so on. So drawing’s always been a kind of line out of... out of trouble, really. One hopes. Oh my God. But I never show those pictures. Will never show them. It's so embarrassing. I also did some sculptures; do you know? I did dolls. Dolls. Not proper dolls. I did a pregnant princess, which is a... a grotesque girl with an enormous tummy. And I had a show of them in Lisbon in my gallery. And when my dealer was carrying this... this incredible horror, a woman went by and looked at it and crossed herself. She was so horrified by what she’d seen she thought it was real. And I did the one... I did... they were all sewn, in a machine, and sewn, did all sorts of creatures. And... and showed them. But I was deeply embarrassed afterwards. I would never... never show them again. I saw one the other day. It wasn’t as bad as all that, actually, but I know, particularly as now I do these things. So there is a connection somewhere. One doesn’t change that much, really.

I tell you something which is quite interesting. Working in Hampstead in a tiny, tiny room and I... because I’d seen an exhibition by Brennan... Do you know Brennan, that man... is it Brennan who used to sell his pictures for wine? Who... an expressionist, a down-and-out expressionist? Not Gerald Wilde, no? Yeah, Gerald Wilde, Gerald Wilde. And I saw this exhibition of Gerald Wilde and I thought it was wonderful. And Timmy Hilton — the curator of this exhibition — I thought, well, this man should come and look at my work because he might like it, you know. I asked him — Hilton — to come up and look at my work, and Tim Hilton said like this: ‘This... this is awful’, he said. ‘You know, you’re completely wrong’ he said to me, ‘you’re completely wrong. You say you need a story to do your pictures; you don’t need a story at all. You know what you need, you need like this: a long canvas, five colours, different brushes, and you start. You dip a brush and you cover the canvas from left to right and then you dip another brush in another colour and from right to left, and when it’s full it’s a picture’. Terrible. So, oh, God, when he went away I cried and I cried. I cried and I thought I’ll give it a try. So I went to Portugal and I did this. I tried to do this... this thing with... with paint and putting it across and, of course, it didn’t mean anything, didn’t mean a... so I had to give up and go back to doing my things; that was a disaster, silly man. Silly man, imagine saying that?
And so then I went back to doing these collages but very slowly, the way of doing, you see, became academic. That is it say it became a way of doing and when it becomes like that, that’s rubbish then, because you are... you become a system. It becomes a way of doing it and you’re not... you... you forget what it is that... what story you’re telling and you... it’s just a... So I was not happy and I was doing... one day I was... I’d hired this studio, very big studio in Bury Street. It had been Vic’s studio and I was doing some monkeys, just cut them up, and my friend, João Penaloa came along and he said, ’What are you going to cut up those monkeys for, they’re lovely like that’. But this was already in 1979, you see, so things were changing. You didn’t have to do art anymore, which is so disgusting to do art, there’s nothing worse. And he said, ’You can’t... you can just... just leave them, they’re so nice’. ‘Do you think I could?’ I said. ’Yeah’. So, God, that was like freedom again... freedom again. And that was in gouache was it? Yeah, it... yeah it was acrylic... acrylic, watered down acrylic draw... draw. So I drew and drew and drew monkeys and half ant, half beasts and... and just... I didn’t have to cut them up and do art, you see, and it was those monkeys beating his adulterous wife and those pictures that I showed at the Air Gallery. And Robert McPherson, who saw... who was the only one who didn’t cringe when he came to look at my pictures, he actually said, ’Okay, we’ll give you a show at the Air Gallery’. And I was so thrilled, I was quite old already, I was 40. I remember it really well. Do you? Well, I remember Bob, my husband, he was on the committee and Patrick Simons. And they... when Robert McPherson said, ’Oh yes, this is good’. Oh, you see, there you are, that’s wonderful. So I was so pleased, I couldn’t believe it. It was so wonderful. I think... I think that McPherson had also run the Gainsborough House. There was a friend of Susan and Patrick George and so-on. He was very kind and... and then I did those monkeys beating his wife especially for the show.

When Vic was little he... he was brought up in the army. And in the army camp he’d made a little theatre and he had a... a monkey, a bear and a dog with one ear. And he would make a story inside this little theatre for the soldiers to see and every time it was different. And I said... I rang him one day, because he was at home because he wasn’t well enough to get up, and ‘I don’t know what to do next, I don’t know’. And then he told me this story. I said, ’That’s fantastic’ and so I began to do... I did that story but then, of course, the people, the monkey and the bear and the dog with one ear became people I knew, you know, that always happens. All these animals become people I know and the thing becomes rather personal really. So I was able to... because if you make them into animals you can do anything, can’t you? Like the girl and the dog. Like the girl... the dog was because of Vic. It was just looking after Vic because she... he was very sick then and again, a friend said — Colette said — ’Why don’t you do something about Vic’. And I thought, well, okay, well then I thought well, I got a dog, you see, because you see, like the dog... when you open a dog’s... when you feed medicine into a dog you have to open his mouth by force, like this, and then put in the medicine. And I thought there’s both... there’s tenderness, there’s curing, there’s tenderness and there’s aggression because, you know, holding the mouth open is aggressive and... So I thought that all those things together were... were like what it was like at the time, you see, because there were so many mixed feelings about somebody who’s very ill. You... you, no matter how much you love them, you resent them dreadfully for being ill and you want to care for them anyway. It... it was what I did, was the girl with a dog, it was all about Vic. And then it led on to other things and so-on. And, in the meantime, I met Rudy Nassauer, who became a very, very good friend and was an enormous... an immense help to me because, first of all, he took me to Italy to look at proper art, not just the one in the National Gallery, to Florence, to Venice, and so-on, to look at the real thing. And he... he said, ’Listen, you must stop buggering around, I mean, you must stop just fooling around, you must just work... just work. And... and I did and he was a very, very strong... very strong influence, a bit of a bully but, that’s what I needed. He was good. He was fantastic at arguing and passionate about his points of view... Yeah... you know... Yeah... But I remember when you were at the National Gallery, that wonderful picture that you did of him in the... Yeah, that was to bring him into the limelight, you see. I did... because... because he was... it was a relationship which was like, you know, I’m not married to Rudy, he’s my friend, but it’s not... it’s not... I thought, but he needs... he needs... it was a homage to him and it was a homage to Rudy to bring him... put him in a picture of... it Joseph sleeping. And it was after Philippe Champaigne. And I did... and he sat for me several times and I did drawings of him and I put him in this picture. And I did... he wasn’t just the bear, he was now the man, you see. I’d... I’d stopped him being an animal and put him into a man and then he was out... it was, you know, shown so that was good.

The show at the Air Gallery got reviewed by John McEwen in The Spectator, and it was well received and had quite a few visitors. And I think some pictures were bought from there. And then I was approached by Alexis Hunter — a conceptual artist — and she was with Edward Totah, the Gallery, and she asked me would I show with her at Edward Totah, which was very nice. Oh, I was so happy. So we had a show together and with somebody else, with Mike... Mikey Cuddihy and we showed a show at Edward Totah in Floral Street. And I did a series of pictures of... with rabbits... rabbit cutting off his carrot, which was like a phallic thing, the cabbage ironing and the cabbage was my mother. And I said to her, this is... she said to me, ’Oh, that’s nice’. I said ’That’s you’, and she... you know, she said, ’You make me look so young’. My mother knew a lot about... about pictures, you know, she really could tell what I’d done, one of the few people. And she always said to me, ’Oh, my daughter does these things...’ and then she’s embarrassed. It’s true, so true... so true. And I showed at Totah, I showed several times with him.
I did a series of operas that were shown in New York. Moira Kelly took a lot of artists to New York to celebrate the 8 in the ’80s which was some... something to do with... I can’t remember why. Arno [sic] and... and I remember... and anyway... because I... there was a short time. She said, ’Can we have...’ I don’t know how many pictures. I said, ’Oh God, it’s not long, four months’. So I not... I managed to do quite a lot of operas. I think there were about eight very, very large 2.5m high, 1.5m wide, operas because I was given the subject matter, all the operas I’d seen with my dad. My father had had a box in Lisbon and he’d taken... he used to take me to the opera sometimes. And I did all the operas that we’d seen. It was quite easy because you have a book with the story, you’d have the story, and you’d start putting the characters down and you’d draw them. So I had the paper on the floor, I started on the left-hand side up there, and I drew with a brush... with a brush I drew the very... Rigoletto and Aida, La Boheme, all those well-known operas, I drew them. So I had... in no time at all, I had all these pictures ready to go to New York. They went to New York and they were hung in a gallery in... Princes Street, or something. And... and so then they came back again. I don’t think anybody bought them, nobody took much notice of them, I don’t think. Anyway, the Totah... then Lewis Biggs showed them in... down at... in the Arnolfini in... in Bristol, which was very nice, know when they came back from America, and then I had another show at to... at Totah with the Vivian Girls, because the Vivian Girls are an invention of an outside... I got very interested in outsider artists.
Outsider artists are artists that have an inner compulsion to do pictures and to show things that are special to them and they haven’t had any... any training of any sort. Some of them are mental patients, some of them are... are people who live in a strange way and so-on, and they’re compulsive. And there was one artist called Henry Darger, who actually was... worked in a hospital, cleaning the floors, and he did a series of paintings which are truly marvellous on Vivian Girls. The Vivian Girls were a group of girls that lived in this... he also wrote a novel of I don’t know how many thousands of words to accompany that. Vivian Girls lived in this country and they were occupied by some alien soldiers, some nasty soldiers that, if they got hold of them, would actually beat them, crucify them and tear them to bits. And they were helped in their fight by magical animals, birds with wonderful wings and creatures — half bird, half insect — invented... invented magical creatures. And they were shown in 1979, I think it was, was it? At the Hayward Gallery. It was done... a show done by Victor Passmore... by Victor Musgrave... Yup. Victor Musgrave. And then I got very friendly with... because I... I’d known Victor Musgrave before because he wanted to give me a show once, and he didn’t; he showed... in fact he showed Bridget Riley. Opposite. We are opposite. So he, he told me about these Vivian Girls and... and then I became very involved with Monika’s Outsider Archive and I... I saw all the books, everything there was to be seen of the Vivian Girls. I even... and I did a lot of pictures of my own stories, my own version of all these girls running wild, breaking the china, being eaten by their mothers, as windmills, at the end of the world, all this... all this magic. They were quite big pictures and they were painted in acrylic so they were drawn... drawn and quite, quite heavily painted, in the garden. And all these pictures were shown at Totah and I... I sold a couple, I think. They were also shown in New York in a gallery called Art Palace, but nothing was sold there.

I was asked to teach at the Slade, which I... I did because I needed the money. And I had tutees. Charlotte Hodes was one of mine. And I used to hide in her room so that I wouldn’t have to go and talk to a lot of people because, you know, I was not a good teacher, didn’t know what to say. I’d just say if I didn’t like the work. I... I didn’t want to say, I wasn’t quite sure anyway. I can’t tell good from bad, you see, it’s very difficult. So I didn’t like it, but I did teach a lot at... I did teach a bit at the Slade. And then later on, when I’d shown these pictures, I went with Monika to Chicago, did a pilgrimage to Harry Darger's room; Harry Darger had died and they’d found him in the room and his... his landlord had been... Lerner... Lerner is his name. And he... he was married to a Japanese lady. And they let me... we went into his room and it was still packed. He still had folded... folded books and things and drawings on the bed. I believe he used to sleep on the chair because he had no room to sleep on the bed because it was covered with stuff. And there were pictures on the walls of Shirley Temple. What he used to do, he used to take photographs, take pictures from magazines of little girls and then have them blown up to fit the picture, the space in the picture, and trace them. And then he’d join everything together and colour it. And he was the most marvellous colourist you can imagine, marvellous. So I saw this. I went into his room; I stayed there for a bit. It was, oh, God, and then as I went out, I remember the door closed on my hand. I thought, he doesn’t like me there, this is no good, I’m not doing any more of them, and never did, no. That's interesting. Absolutely, no more. And I remember then being shown afterwards in the house drawings that had never been shown before. They were unrolled in front of me, these drawings of these girls crucified with all their intestines taken out, and brutally... brutally torn up. And all these extraordinary scenes of violence. And I thought they were extraordinary and... and wonderful. I imagine that people would be shocked by them but I thought they were marvellous and made sense. I think they won in the end; the magical animals managed to make them win in the end of the book. That... I finished that... then I finished with them.

When my father... my father died — had already died — in 1966. ’66 was the year that Vic was diagnosed with MS, that my father died, my grandfather... my father-in-law died. And I took him... because I was drinking quite heavily and I remember taking him to the... hospital, the University College Hospital, in a taxi. And the private wing he was in, and he was going to die, you know. I took him there; went with him... and he said to me, ’Look, you know, just drop the bottle and pick up the brush. It’s no good this’, because I was, you know, really knocking it back. And I said, ’Yes, yes’, you know, and took him to the hospital. He died. And then it was... it was a disaster because he’d left a firm in Portugal, that he’d started and had never been successful, to make measuring instruments. And... Vic decided that he — because we had no money — that he was going to go there and try and run it as a business. So we up and went to Portugal and Vic became a businessman and I had to entertain all these English business people to dinner and I still went on drawing. But it was very difficult really with Vic and we got in more and more trouble... more and more trouble because it wasn’t successful. And it ended badly because, in the meantime, the wonderful revolution of ’74 — the 25th April — happened, which was we got rid of the dictatorship. It was called the Revolution of Carnations; all the soldiers carried carnations with them, it was all patriotic and wonderful and da da da.
But what happened was that it wasn’t so good for business because we wouldn’t get business from England and we couldn’t get businesses and of course the people who were employed were always having meetings and all that sort of thing. So we couldn’t, you know, couldn’t get anything done. And then they thought we was... we were getting money out; in fact we were putting money in because I’d mortgaged everything, put all the money in there, everything, even my mother’s house, put all the money in the business. My... my quinta in Ericeira was lost because of that. And at one time we were even chased because they thought... people thought that we were, we were, you know, doing crooked things with the money, but there wasn’t any money. On the contrary, there was not... no money at all.
So in any case we... Vic became sicker and sicker. I became more and more... it was horrible. I remember cooking for these Englishmen. I tell you something, I... I was cooking these lobsters for the... I was cooking these lobsters on a fire... a cooker with wood, you know, that you heat up with wood. And lob... when you cook lobsters you’ve got to tie them up, otherwise they flap their way out. Well, I didn’t tie them up, I didn’t tie them up; I must have been sloshed or something. I... that evening I spent hours trying to push those lobsters back into the boiling water and they were screaming and screaming, going urgh! Urgh! And Vic was in bed and I was alone in the kitchen with nobody and this Englishman was upstairs. And I was trying to boil these lobsters. I shall never forget that, these bloody lobsters. Finally, I put the lid on and pressed them in and they boiled, my God, sort of symbolic of... of you know, trying to crawl out of... of a pit, you know, which is what we were trying to do. Oh, my God. And that was nearly the ruination of us all in every way. I managed to make the money back to pay... to pay. From art, not from the business. From art... from art believe it or not, because in the meantime Vic had a show at the Air Gallery again, before me, because Moira Kelly was running it and he sold a couple of pictures, huge.
But he came back, he came back from this experience, could not walk properly... on crutches. He rented a large studio, in Bethnal Green one of them was, and the other one was not in Bethnal Green, but I cannot remember. It was actually in... near Shelcott Road. It was a huge factory and he had a room in there and he’d go... go there. And sometimes he’d sleep there. And he... in that condition he started painting these vast pictures, vast. I remember Alberto, our friend Alberto, died yesterday, saying, ’Who on earth is going to buy that big stuff, you know, for heaven’s sake’. But he did, he sold them. He had fantastic courage, fantastic courage. I mean, I... if it was me, I’d just walk... colour some more prints or something, but no, he went big... for the big... he went all the way. And he did that and then finally he moved to another studio and he had a residency in Cambridge, where he did more work, but he couldn’t reach the top of the pictures ‘cause he was in a wheelchair. So he had the gardener turn the pictures upside down so he could do the top of the picture down there. And he did all this and he worked really hard, and he managed to get a lot of pictures together then he showed at the Whitechapel. And it was extraordinary courage... extraordinary courage actually. And anyway, so in the meantime I was fiddling around with my own junk and... and showing it to him for his... for his, you know, he could help me. He helped me... always helped me. He was never, never nasty; he always helped me. Or jealous or envious that you were healthy? No, I don’t think so. I don’t think he was envious of me at all. Why should he be envious of me? He was much better than I was, you know, nothing to be envious of at all. Only envious that you were healthy and had a future, you know. Oh, envious that I was healthy and I had a future, exactly. Well, he could have been, but he wasn’t. No, he... he wasn’t. At least he didn’t show it. I remember that was... and then, so that’s it. And I ended up in the Marlborough, where I am today.

I began to... I began to do pictures more in three-dimensional — three dimension — and the first one I did was The Soldier’s Daughter where the... where she’s got a... a goose between her legs. The... that’s right... that’s right. That’s not right because before that... before that I did a... a series of girls and dogs and there were girls like pray, the girls were looking out to sea. There was a girl... a girl playing with a dog and there was a... a crab on its back, also at sea, and there was a series of those very chunky... very chunky pictures that I showed at Totah. And they sold... they sold. I think even the Arts Council bought one. We... we definitely bought one. You bought one, that’s right, Sleeping, that’s right. We bought one, yea. And Anne Berthoud bought one or two and... Yeah, yeah, lots of people bought them. And there was, you... you know, you made some money. And it was fantastic. I thought, God. And then it was at that point that I moved to the Marlborough Gallery, I’m sorry, but... it was a big chance, you know, and so then I started to do... Then I... it was then that I did the girls because I remember the Marlborough sent me a goose. And I opened this case and out came this vast creature with enormous wings and it was a goose. And Lila... I had Lila by then. Lila put it between her legs and held it. It was not alive; it was dead. And I drew the goose very carefully and the picture was The Soldier’s Daughter With boots and all. And then came the boot, which was The Policeman’s Daughter, which is the girl with her hand into the boot, polishing her father’s boots, you know, and there’s a cat looking up to see who’s... who’s going to come in. And... you know ‘cause she’s doing her duty, as she’s probably bullied by her dad anyway. And she became a sacrificial creature because the goose became her; the dress... the dress that had been white... you remember that drawing... that drawing that Freud did about the virgin and... and Saint Anne and the child. He did a drawing around those figures and that became a pelican, I think, a pelican or buzzard. And I thought: that’s interesting, I’m going to use this... that image and make the... the goose turn into the policeman’s daughter as a sacrificial person. And I did. She’s got a white frock and so-on and she’s cleaning his boot. Then I did... I did then... yeah, I did The Maids after Jean Genet and I did The Family, which is... which was about Vic, about the... two of the girls trying to make him come alive. It’s... it’s really... I called it The Raising of Lazarus, I remember, and I said... Miss... Miss Beston used to work at the Marlborough, came to see it in my studio, and I said, tut, ‘I don’t know what to call it’. She said ’Call it The Family, that goes for everything’. So, instead of The Raising of Lazarus, which would have been rather, you know, she said, ’Call it...’ so I called it The Family They were trying anything to get their father come alive, rubbing themselves against him and everything. And there’s a girl praying, a miraculous girl praying there as well, and again, a box with saints in and so-on.
And Vic was still alive because he was in the bedroom at home and he was working from his bed. Lila, who then became my model — was already my model — used to hold... hold up canvasses to him, mix the colours for him, give him the brush and then he’d draw. He knew exactly what he wanted to draw. He’d stay hours thinking, just looking at the canvass and then when he drew, he drew it straight out, these funny portraits he did. And so he was... he was in bed, you see, at the priors and in the evening, when I had trouble, I used to roll up my canvasses and bring them to the house. And I used to stick them up on the wall and ask his opinion and what I... should I do to it. And I remember I brought The Maids in, I painted The Maids with a lot of furniture and everything and I hung it up on the wall. And he said: ’Well, you know, you’ve got some very well-drawn, painted figures there but really, just paint out the whole of the background’, which I did, of course, and which you can’t quite understand because there’s a kind of a sky and so-on. But it’s improved it no end because the... the furniture was just a mess. And so I did. So I used to do that. And then the last picture I did, which was a kind of goodbye picture to him, was called Departure And it’s a... it’s got a boy sitting there with a... with a... a trunk, waiting to go into the army, I think, and the maid’s behind him combing his hair, getting him ready to go. And I think it was a way of, you know, he... he’s going to go away now and therefore... and I brought the picture for him to see, you know, and he said: ’That’s the best’. So I think... I think he recognised it for what it was and that’s the best. Unfortunately, it was the picture that was burnt in the fire at Momart, yea, but I’ve got drawings for it. So then that stopped; then he died.

He had his exhibition at the Whitechapel that Nick invited him and it was just marvellous because it was... it was, you know, everything coming together. It was wonderful; he was so happy, had a wonderful catalogue and it looked fantastic. And, yes. And... and then he... and then died, he just died, slowly, but he died. And we were there with him, the children and I, and afterwards... I’d... I’d already done these drawings for the dance. He... I said, ’What shall I do next?’ He said, ’Do people dancing’. Oh, that’s so difficult, oh. So I did a lot of drawings of people dancing and they were mostly girls and so-on. And I showed it to him and he said, ’Put some men in it, it’s really boring, just women’. So I said, ’You’re right’, so I put some men in there. Then he died. I did one more drawing and I spent six months, just six months in the studio, painting it, that’s all I did. One very large picture? A very large one that the Tate has and I was smoking myself stupid, 35 fags a day and working. And... oh God, it took me so long to do it, kept changing it and everything like that. I finished it. It was too late to go in the Serpentine. It was supposed to go in the Serpentine, but it was too late for the show. And... and then I finished it; it was a relief. I finished that and I gave up smoking, went to Southend, threw my fags in the sea and never... never smoked again. That’s right.

And then, luckily... luckily, Paul Coldwell said: ’Why don’t you come and do some prints?’ And I began doing my nursery rhymes and everything that had been squashed in there, all the ideas and all the stuff that hadn’t... all came... all came pouring out. There were like four prints done at a time. He said ’This is like a pizza parlour in here’. I’m holding these plates, you know, four at a time and so-on. Because it was just come... it was just such a relief because the stories, you know, were there. They were... I started by doing the ones that my granddaughter knew and I went on. I got the Opie book and I used to read a story, a... a nursery rhyme at night and then, in the morning, I’d come up with an image. And I just... they just came out and out and out and out and out and out, until it finished. And then that was that. And then, of course, they travelled around the world and you gave them to people and, you know... Oh, yeah, they’ve been everywhere, because the British Council took them round places and so-on and they were shown everywhere, they still are. They still are. Amazing, isn’t it? And I loved doing prints. I got then into the... the thing of doing... I did all my etchings with Paul and then later on I... I turned to lithography; but it was much later on.

Many years ago, I did a drawing, which was called The Angel of Mercy, which is a... a woman — middle aged women — with wings, with a bowl in her hands, scooping out something from inside a girl. It was a long time before I... before the Portuguese referendum, there was a referendum in Portugal, because abortion is illegal — was illegal — in Portugal, ‘til the 11th February this year? And there was a referendum to legalise it, and nobody bothered to go and vote. They were much too shy or scared to be seen. There was a lot of pressure from the... what they call Pro Life people there — the church actually — and I thought... and they didn’t bother to pass the law, they didn’t pass the law. And I thought, well, this is... this can’t... this can’t do... this is absolutely... it makes you enraged, because it’s total hypocrisy, it’s... when I was in Ericeira, living with my husband, the fisherman’s wives used to come and ask me for money to have an abortion, because they already had like, seven children and so on. And they... lots of them had septicaemia, and... and some of them died. They were mucked up for life. And it was a regular thing in Portugal, where you... you, you know, you weren’t supposed to have abortions, but it was the easiest place to get one; everybody had them, it was total hypocrisy. Total hypocrisy. And I thought I wanted to do something about it, so I did these pictures of girls having abortions. I decided to make them into schoolgirls, because very often, quite young women — who were still at school — have foetuses dropped down the lavatory, for instance, and so I decided to put them in uniforms, school uniforms. So I went to John Lewis, I got all these little frocks and uniforms, and so on, and we started doing a series of... of people having abortions actually, quite explicit, but no blood. I don’t...  didn’t want to have blood or anything like that, because that works against it, it makes it melodramatic. So I wanted to have it quite clinically shown, and... and I did... I did do it. I did it with Lila, it’s one of the things I’m most proud of having done.
It’s terribly important that... that women have the right to choose, very important. And important in Portugal, as it is everywhere else in the world, although now there is a campaign against it, which... which has to be stopped. And of course, there was another referendum, the government changed it in the meantime, and there was another referendum in Portugal recently. And I’m glad to say that... that some newspapers used my pictures even, it was just wonderful, as, you know, propaganda. And this time the law was passed. And now it’s not illegal anymore, now we’re going to have problems getting doctors to... to go along with it, but... in a hospital bed. But at least it’s law, it’s law, it’s not illegal, people don’t get arrested, you know, 'cause they used to arrest, not only the nurses who performed, but the girls who had it. Hmm. Exactly. Great big bodies were turning up on the beach, floating, you know, with their tummies all swollen after they’d been... they’d had these abortions done by their boyfriends, and things like that. Don’t I know it, you know, they turned up in Ericeira, like they were swollen cows, they’d sometimes turned up. Anyway, so I’m very pleased. As I... the pictures were not... I think there were about 10 pictures done, I said, ‘Well they would probably sell, and so I will do prints’. So I did a whole series of etchings, using the same... I... I didn’t copy the pictures, I reset the scene all over again, and did the plates straight from the figure, and I use those now, whenever necessary. I send those as a... as a... really, it's like a form of propaganda. But it’s important, so, yeah, you know. And I mean, and I’ve... I’ve got every right to do it, and in any case I’m a woman, and you know, one knows things like that.

Having children is... is marvellous and... and I... I find that the old saying, oh, I think it was Cyril Connelly who said: ’The death of art is the pram in the hallway’, is a load of rubbish. Because, okay, it’s all right, it’s a problem for the... for the men, really. I think for the women, they... well, it is a problem for the women, because they have to do all the house chores and everything, but if there’s some form of help, you know, or the children can go to nursery, or... or somebody can come in and help or... or something. But what I’m saying is that, having children does not in any way interfere with your imagination. You’re imagination about what you do, goes on the same as... as when you were eight years old, whether you have children or you don’t have children. And I don’t think having children does away with the imagination at all. And, you know... you know, we love children. I love my children and my grandchildren, but it’s — touch wood — it’s never stopped me doing pictures. Or concentrating or... or letting yourself...? Well once you’re hooked, you know, I mean, it’s important to get a routine. It’s important to get... to create a habit. It’s important to have... to come to work properly, you know, and... and... but... but it’s not difficult to do, once you get a... the habit. Because once you get the habit, you’re desperate to come to work anyway. So it’s not that, it’s only maybe at the beginning, when you’re not quite sure, but after a certain age, you know, you... you come to... to the studio, because what else are you going to do, except shopping? I mean, I love that too, but, you know, yeah.

I think that, first of all, you’ve got to have a subject matter. Before you start, you’ve got to have a subject matter. It’s terribly important to have what I call a story. Once... and then sometimes you have to do studies, and... and... I used to do lots of drawings from my head, to try and find out what it was that I wanted to say, and... and then I would then get models and set them up, and copy those, and put them in pictures. Get the setting... the setting which would... often would be of houses I had — like my house in Ericeira — not knowing where else to put the scenes, and then, more recently, where I have actually found that it’s more difficult to... to draw from my head, I’ve actually set up scenes in here, and built up things from props that I’ve hired, from... for, you know, for television props and all that, and I’ve hired all these things. I’ve even hired trees I’ve had in here, and then I set it all up, and... and copy that. Once you’re... you’re involved in that... well, I mean you’re desperate to... to finish it, really. And the... the transformations that it goes through are colossal. You take the most enormous risks, in the sense that, for instance, in one picture, there was a girl falling out of the window, and you’re... you’re taken with... with bizarre wishes to do. For instance, I had a bizarre wish to do the girl huge, very huge, you know... and I did it huge, and then I had to undo it, and then I did it again. And even the little — this is Celestina's House — even the little figure in front, was actually the mother holding... asking to be picked up. Well, she can’t be picked up, because her daughter’s falling, you know, it’s one of those things. And even the mother... I had to do it dozens of times, before I got the right character, the right position, the right story, the right meaning there. And it was an ambiguous thing, you see, and... so that takes a lot... a lot of changes take place in the pictures, a lot, a lot, a lot, a lot, a lot... yeah... and they... they, you know. And then, and whilst doing it, you see, you very often find out, my dear, you find out that it’s not what you intended in the first place. And that is why it’s so fascinating, 'cause you discover that, you know, you’re sometimes ambiguous about things that you didn’t think you were, you know that? Because there is a picture many, many, many, many years ago; I did a Salazar vomiting the mother country, okay, and there’s this... this horrible monstrous idiot, and I put him bending down, throwing up this... this sausage, which was his mother country. But... this was so long ago, but even doing that, my dear, I even then sadly felt, a bit sorry for him, you know. I felt... I felt a feeling for him that wasn’t allowed, and it certainly wasn’t even in real life, true. But in the picture it was allowed. So the picture actually allows you to feel all sorts of forbidden things, and that is why you do pictures, because you... you get at things that you didn’t realise, actually, and you’re allowed to do, even outrageous things and everything.

I have very few models. I have a girl I’ve worked with — who used to look after Vic— called Lila Nuñez, she nursed him, and she very quickly sat for me, for all sorts of things. And now, we work regularly on... she’s a podiatrist now, but she works for me on Fridays and Saturdays, and sometimes on Mondays, and she is essential. Not only is she essential, she knows what to do. She knows more about... as much about the picture as I do. She sits in the right position, she... she does the right thing, you know, and she knows what’s going on. It’s fascinating, ‘cause we’ve worked so long together now, okay. So I have her, and I have one or two other people. Tony comes in and sits for me if I need a bloke, then he comes and sits in, and that... but, I find lately, that since The Pillow Man and even before that, since the rabbits of the Iraq war... oh well I turned a photograph in The Guardian... it was in The Guardian, of a girl screaming. And a girl screaming in front of far... above smoke, looked exactly like my cousin, Manuela, with a bib and everything, and I thought: crikey, this is totally recognisable. And I... I wanted to do a picture with... using this scream, but couldn’t use a girl. I... I used rabbits, I used rabbits, I used a mother rabbit holding a baby rabbit, because then you... you can do damage to the creatures, without making it melodramatic or maudlin, like, you can take... the eye comes out, and all sorts of things like that. Because they’re toys, they’re animals, creatures, you can do all these things to them. So I found that I got very involved in making props in fact, creatures, which I used as if they were figures, as if they were people. They are people to me. And I find that, more and more I’m interested in doing that, you see, creating these... these creatures. And... and I mix them with people, I find it’s quite important to have a person in there, ‘cause it somehow emphasises the difference and makes it more... more mysterious, or something. But I’m... I’m very, very involved now, in making that... in making the... these creatures, yeah. I haven’t got round to doing... I once did a cat, but it fell to pieces, it was hopeless. So I’m not good at modelling, but I’d like to learn, actually, a bit more.
My... my son-in-law encourages me, and sometimes helps me, Ron... yeah, so that’s, you know, that’s how it’s... that’s how it’s going at the moment. But it wasn’t always like that, that’s quite a recent thing since I saw that extraordinary play, The Pillow Man, and that... that changed my life, really. Changed my life, that. And I’m using pastel, as well, that was another change. Using... a dog-woman was my first pastel I ever did, well, not the first, the second. And again, this time it was not changing people into animals... it was changing people into animals, but the person herself became an animal, so she squatted like a dog. That is actually... the dog is a pet, he’s fed and looked after, but it can bite, and... and how it can bite. And not... it’s not lack of gratitude, it’s self-defence, actually, in order to survive. You’ve got to learn to bite, more... more than you do... than you’re capable of sometimes, but the tendency is towards submission, rather than... than a good bite. Avoidance. Exactly, a good whack. And so therefore, this dog... this dog came from a story of an old woman who had a lot of pets, and she lived in a house by the sea — isolated — and she’d hear a child’s voice coming down the chimney telling her things. And one day the child’s voice came down, and said: ‘Eat them, eat them’. And the pets started running round the table, running round the table, and the woman squatted down on all fours, opened her mouth and all the pets went in there, and she swallowed them... all of them. And that’s what became my dog-woman, you see. And then one day, I was with Lila, and I said... just like that, I said, ‘Oh, just squat there Lila’ and she squatted. I did a sketch as quickly as... as, you know... and that was... and I thought, oh. And then I was going to put it in another picture, to... to use it up, and somebody said to me, Joáo Penaloa said to me, what you using before, it’s already... your picture’s already got enough things in it. So I thought: well, I’ll do it by itself, so I... I squared it up; I used to have to square things up to get them to fit into the canvas, you see. I don’t have to do that anymore, because the body... in front of the space, you’ve got a drawing, be it paper or canvas, is better... better... has better feeling of the proportion of things, so I can do it directly. I don’t have to square things up anymore, which is a blessing. I used to... I squared it up and I drew it on and then, I... I started using pastel, you see, and I... I’ll sit for it myself, so I bent down, and I did my knee, but of course, it’s impossible, so I had to ask her to come and just get in that position. And then I did her. I did the dog-woman, and the dog-woman grew from being a dog-woman... she was always a dog-woman, she became waiting for food, sleeping on her owner’s coat, bad dog ‘cause she’s messed the bed and she’s been kicked out of the bed, and... and all sorts of things. And they were very much things to do with my love for Vic, I think, and... good... they were good... good love, not bad love, but how things are. And they were about a very close relationship, what goes on, and that... but from... from obviously, the woman’s point of view, or rather the dog’s point of view in this case, it's equal. Woman equals dog, you know. It’s the hierarchy of things, you know. You’ve got the father, the mother then you’ve got the... the children and you’ve got the dog.

I presume I’m grounded in Portugal, although I don’t belong there anymore, you see. And I don’t belong here really, either, so I belong in the studio, and I belong in London, because I love London, really do. I like everything in it, except I... you see these violent things no, but I love... I like going shopping in Harvey Nichols, I love going to the shops, I love going to the... to the galleries obviously, and I like... I like London, and I like Kentish Town, all of it, yeah, I do. Not... I don’t know Clapham so well, more down south, but I do like London. ‘Cause I belong here, you know, I belong here. And... and Portugal as well, or course, actually, 'cause a lot of stories come from there.
I think we talked there...I... I don’t know, 'cause... when you’re working, if it’s a... if it’s on canvas, are you... you don’t use easels; you work... how do you... where do you put the pictures when they’re large like that?
I work... ... large like that. I stand on a... on a platform. I’ve got a platform that goes up and down, and I stand on the platform, and look on... on the object I’m doing or the person I’m doing, so that I can get to the top of the canvas, and then I work down, and so I start like that. That’s how I can reach the top, otherwise I couldn’t, you know; I don’t make a hole in the ground, I stand up. I did all the... all the dancing ostriches from Walt Disney’s Fantasia, I did them all standing on... on this platform, and Lila would pose down below, in various positions, longing for... to be kissed in the morning and nothing coming, my dear. And then... she’s a bit past it, you see, not Lila, but the ostrich was a bit past it, so she wouldn’t get any hugs in the morning, but there was nobody there. So if she pretended though, and she was still, you know, willing to make the gestures, and everything, do a bit of dancing, rather ridiculous, you see.

I do have to do an experiment every day, and sometimes it’s just... it’s just carrying on from the day before, really. That’s a blessing, you know, when you haven’t... when you haven’t, when... I tell you, the most blessed thing, is when you’re... you’re... I think it’s called on a roll. When you’re on a roll, and you... you’ve got a subject that you know it’s going to carry on... that you know, that you really, really want to do. It helps very much if... sometimes things that not... are not entirely personal, but political, like the abortion pictures, that was terrifically... terrific to do, and then the dog-woman and then the ostriches, and then that novel called Father Amaro, which is by the Portuguese writer, Eça de Queirós, and I started that... my father, again, I liked that book very much, it’s rather anti-clerical, about a cowardly priest who seduces a girl, and gets her pregnant, and then in the end, in the version I’ve got, which is unique, he actually murders the child himself. In the... in the usual version, he gives the child to the maker of angels, which is the woman who murders the children. Supposed to look after them, but in fact she kills them. And it’s a most marvellous, I thought... saw it as a most marvellous love story between this very insecure, pathetic man, and this equally insecure and virginal girl, who hasn’t a clue and is immensely conventional, but not enough to stop this idiocy. And the whole environment, which is so Portuguese, of the provincial kind — provincial Portugal — which is probably no longer like this, 'cause this is sort of like 19th century. But I think it probably still is very much like that. And this hypocrisy, people talking and everything, and it’s... it’s a most wonderful book. So I decided to do that, using various friends as playing the part. It’s the first time Tony — Tony Rudolf — worked with me. He became Father Amaro. I got him a costume... down the road from here, there used to be Costprop, that you could hire the costumes there to make films and plays, just going down the road, and you’d choose the costume. And he walked up the road dressed as a priest. You should see the... I mean the garage next door, Nino said, ’Hello Father’, and stuff like that. It was really funny. And they would say, ’What is she doing to you now?’ When he was Mr Rochester, or course, and I dressed him up as Mr Rochester, in a velvet coat. It really is very becoming to men to wear the 18th century costume... early 19th century costume. Anyway, he was the priest and Lila was the girl, of course, and every other... in lots of other areas. And then I had a most marvellous model called Julietta, who used to look after my kids when they were little, and she was the... the old woman, she was a marvellous model. She’s dead now.
And so it went... so it was one picture after another after another after another. It was so exciting to be able to do, and it was all done in pastel, which is like drawing... drawing, but in colour. So you can do both things at the same time, you draw... you draw in colour. And I never rub it, 'cause pastel you’re supposed to rub... rub it, or something, but I don’t... I don’t rub it. I draw and I draw and I draw, and I start like... some people start with painting, with a bottom layer done in green, and then I use pink, okay, and then... and then on... and then — for the flesh tones, and so on — and then I’ve got a very fine Conté pencil... pencil — crayon — in... in green, an olive green, and I comb the two together, so that, you... you put a line, and redrawing it at the same time. So it’s not usual, but I don’t know how to do pastels, really I’ve never learnt, this is something I... I thought... it was quite effective. And I did that over and over again. Sometimes I had to wipe the whole thing off and start all over again. And then for the materials, you just copy them quite carefully, to make the folding of... ‘cause the... clothes are terribly important in pictures. How people wear... how it makes their body seem. How the full skirts hide so many things underneath them, you see, could even be... you know, animals under there, or whatever. Killing rats could be under there, and so on. As so therefore, there is... the... the clothes are terribly important. I love clothes anyway, so you put... you drew the clothes very carefully and you do... so you... there’s very good... pastel’s very good for that, because you draw, you draw, you draw and you draw and you draw. And I found that doing this whole series was... was wonderful for me. I found it really... you could... another thing that happens, is when you’re doing a book like that, you go into the book, you’re part of it, you’re actually in there, and you can go to places where the... even the author doesn’t go into. And you can even — not exactly rearrange — but bring some justice where justice is needed. I know, this sounds awful, but there is some revenge sometimes necessary, and I can provide that.
And at the end of... at the end of the series, when Amélia is having the child, and the writer and the doctor are sitting outside, there are... there’s a description of them sitting outside, the writer never goes into that room where she is giving birth, but I can go into the room where she’s giving birth. I can go and show what is going on in there, you see. I can show the voodoo aspect of it, the hanging chicken, the blood, the... the little sheep, the symbol of, you know, Christianity and... and placid acceptance, right. Go along a bit, and the girls are all wearing bibs. I like bibs, 'cause I used to have them as a child, with frilly tops. Also, they are bibs, but they’re also like angels, because they’re all frilly up here, and I could do all that. I went in there, and I... and I showed what it was like in there, I... and then you can then do another character, which is my avenging angel, which is... she has a sword in one hand and a sponge in the other, which are the symbols of the crucifixion. And she’s an angel of redemption and... and revenge. And that’s how the story ends, really, that’s how the story ends. In... in my... in my series it ends with the angel.

There’s always periods between when you really have a strong idea, on a strong subject, then what people call transition periods, I detest that remark, because it’s always transition. When you’re not... you’re looking for something, and that’s the worst time of all. Sometimes you do the odd picture, which is actually rather interesting. And like, many years ago I did... it’s called Untitled, it should be Mary Magdalene in the Desert. With the girl, Lila, push... putting on her roll-on with great difficulty; she’s in great discomfort. The roll-on doesn’t fit, it’s too tight and she’s... it took her forever to do that picture. We started, we did it, and then we put it away — and something I never do — I picked it up again, and started all over again. And that was very difficult. But it’s... it’s a... I quite like that picture, and it’s one those in-between ones. And sometimes there’s the odd one that happens like that. Do you ever scrap a picture, and literally start the same subject? No, we... we keep... we don’t... we... we put it aside, and then start again on top of what is there. We don’t scrap it, we use the same... same stuff that’s there, and go on... and go on with it... go on with it, changing things all the time, you know. The... the limbs widen, and narrow and positions change. It’s just accommodating it in a different way, and... and the struggle within this girdle, and everything, yeah. I bought a lot of girdles and... and underwear — women’s underwear — 'cause I did a series of drawings of her, in... in underwear doing, you know, disgust, and all that sort of thing, that you feel sometimes and quite often, and all that, yeah.

I think that it would have been a lot easier doing those drawings, to have used photographs, for instance, but I’ve never, ever used photographs. You can’t see anything in photographs at all. You don’t see. And, I can… I’ve never, I’ve never used photographs. I… I used once of a… a cow, I used a photograph of a face of a cow, for one of the Virgin Mary pictures, but that’s all, but I’ve never used photographs, ever. You can’t, no. You can’t… you can’t see anything. Even if you blew it up, you couldn’t see… the form or… can’t even see the outline, it’s all blurry. I don’t like it. Do you use mirrors or anything like that, in the studio, to see the back or the side or the… or… or have you painted yourself? Have I painted myself? I have painted myself; no! I don’t like painting myself. I hate painting myself. I can’t bear to look at myself, and I have other people that stand in for me, and that’s what Lila does. She is me in lots of pictures, although better than me. I’m doing things that… that I don’t do, you know, that I think she stands in for me. But I never paint myself; I hate it. Hate it. Once I tried to do a self-portrait and it… it was disgusting, and I hope I don’t look like that, but it looked horrible. No, I never do. I did once… I did a… actually, I did do a lithograph for Jane Eyre, called Self Portrait with Grandchildren, and I did do myself in it, 'cause it needed another figure and I said I might as well, so I plopped myself in there, yeah, Lovers and Dogs, yes, I did do that, but normally I don’t… I don’t. Never.

I’ve got myself to think about, and my... my family, which are very, very important to me, very important to me. They are collaborators in a way, and Lila, and all my... my team who work with me, and Tony works with me too. But I think that, I work... I work much — I think — probably work much more now, even Amara was done after... in the last 20 years, and I’ve done more prints and so on. I come here, I work, I go home, I go to the movies, it’s... it’s, I guess it’s... it’s quite a dull life. I don’t have anything special that has happened. I’ve had, you know, I’ve been homaged, or whatever you call it, with degrees. I’ve been once to Rhode Island, which I enjoyed very much. I went there to teach, and I loved being there. They were so kind to me, and I loved Rhode Island, but, I don’t... I haven’t... I haven’t... I’ve worked, really. And be true to yourself, you’re your own best friend, that’s what... what Vic wrote to me, before he died, he said that to me. And I thought, well, I don’t know who to ask for advice, and so on, so I don’t get that either, you know. I don’t talk to anybody about my pictures, at all. That is something that I... I do... I must say I do miss, and very few people... nobody comes to look, except the people who work with me, and I find that rather... rather difficult. But, you know, it’s the way it is anyway. There’s nothing... there’s nothing, I can’t think of anything. I mean, there’s ups and downs, you know, I mean, I’m actually a... I’m actually a manic depressive person, and what they call bipolar fashionably, now. It doesn’t sound right, bipolar, does it? It sounds like, the sort of, North Pole or something. But anyway, I have got that... I have got that affliction, and sometimes I have the... the lowest of lows, which has happened to me ever since I was 14, I remember. And happened to me in the ‘60s, and it happened to me last year, really, really badly. I mean, I... it’s... it’s like being in hell. And therefore, that happens to me occasionally, so that is something that... you... you work just the same, but it’s very, very frightening. So there’s that aspect, you know, everyday life, you... you dream badly and you know, it’s that sort of thing.
Somebody might say, one of the most creative stimulus’s for your, for... stimulus’s for your art has been persistent fear, though. It’s quite a... Fear? Yeah, it’s quite a... when you talk about childhood fear, and physical surrounding fear, and abandonment fear, whatever else...
Fear... fear is... is probably the most... the most, important thing. When I was very young, and I had my first showing in Lisbon, it was said that I’d said ‘I paint to give a face to fear’, but in fact it wasn’t I who said it, it was Alberto de Lacerda, the poet who died yesterday. He said that; that I painted to give a face to fear. Well, I mean, you might as well look at it, mightn’t you, because you can. If you can... if you can and you have the courage to do it, because sometimes you don’t want to look, and... yes, it’s very uncomfortable and very, very, very scary, and your arms tingle and everything, I don’t like it, you know? Which is so different from... , because, I think internal fear is just as bad as, I’m sure, external, you know, the police state fear, or the fear that, you know, people all round the world have, that, you know, somebody’s going to come and machine gun them, or something. You know, we don’t have that fear in London, really. Well, not yet, no. That I don’t know, really. No, I was really afraid of everything, always, and it... and it abated a little bit, 'cause now I’m older, it doesn’t make so much difference, but it’s still there, in all sorts of things. I don’t know what it is, but it’s... it’s like a chemical... I think it’s a kind of chemical that lives in your brain, and it affects part of your brain, and... and that part of it goes a funny colour, and then that you’re affected... affected with... with those what you call feelings. But it’s feelings that are physical, as well, it’s a phys... it’s a physical thing, and it’s, horrible actually, that’s really horrible, yeah. And I mean one just hopes that it isn’t going to get worse, as you get older, you don’t know... you don’t know what’s in store for you, and that would be... that would be horrible.

Sometimes, when I do pictures, like Jane Eyre, for instance, which is... takes place in the 19th century. I love the 19th century, 'cause it’s like Portugal; Portugal’s like the 19th century, or was, ‘til recently. And I think, the thing about using, I mean, only thing that’s of that century are the costumes, because the rest is like today. I mean, Jane Eyre herself, could very well be a Portuguese girl, and how, and... and it could take place even now, you know. Boarding school being, you know, being badly treated by her aunt, all that. I think I see Jane Eyre, as a... very... very much like... she could be very much Portuguese, identify with her rather a lot. So the... the clothes are... are the added bonus, because you can dress them up, in these big skirts, and just doing the... the materials, is a delicious thing, that you can get all the foldings and everything, in place. And it’s delicious, really, it makes it... makes the picture more... more full. The men are good too, men... well, Tony dressed up as Mr Rochester, of course, I got a plastic horse; I had to get a plastic horse. The only trouble was, they couldn’t get a bit in it, 'cause its teeth were all clunked together, and so the bit was hanging outside, and he was sitting on this plastic horse, of course it was very slippery, and extremely uncomfortable. But he did all right, and I managed to draw a horse. Doing a horse is the most difficult thing there is really, and I couldn’t get a stuffed horse in here, so I got a plastic one, which was pretty good. It was a pretend horse; anyway, he could have been sitting on a pretend horse. It’s pretend Mr Rochester, pretend everything. And you read the book again and again. You read the book... I read the book endless times. I read Jane Eyre over and over and over again. And over and over and over again. I had... — I don’t know how many copies — one here and one at home and everywhere, and I just, yeah, I got right in there with... with her, and... and Bertha, poor Bertha. And I got the monkey; that was Bertha’s monkey when she only... the only creature she could get, so... so that she could kiss, was this monkey. And it’s... actually the monkey I bought, is from 1840, so it’s exactly coincides with the book, and it’s beautiful, that monkey. You get in there with the book, you get in there with them, and everything. I can’t make up my own, I mean, it’s either autobiographical, using animals, or then you get into some kind of story.

I would love to do… I… I very much admire folk tales. I think folk tales are… are not fairy stories, although I like fairy stories, they’re not fairy stories. They’re immensely cruel and truthful accounts of states of mind, and partic… the most interesting and gruesome ones, are in fact Portuguese fairy… fairy stories. And I’ll tell you one, which is quite interesting, which is… it starts this family lives in the woods, he’s a woodcutter, and he comes home and there is nothing to eat, there’s nothing to… they’ve got nothing to eat. So the wife cuts off her left breast and cooks it, and gives it to him, and he loves it: ‘Ooh it’s so tender, so lovely’. And then another day passes, and he comes back again, and there’s still nothing to eat, so she cuts off her right breast, and he eats it and, it’s marvellous etc, how delicious. And then the third day, she comes, and she says what… ’There’s nothing to eat today’. He says, ’What’s the matter with you? Look, your blouse is all red’. She says, ’Well I cut off my breasts to give them to you to eat’. He said, ’Oh bother, now there aren’t any more left, now we’ve got to start on the children’. That’s how the story starts. And the children hear this, and they run into the forest, and then they get help from all sorts of things. You see, and this is a true story, and how. Because it’s just a bit different from the French one, which is the breadcrumbs or another one, you know, but it’s the amputation. Amputation and of course, giving everything to her husband, so that he could be happy, you know, and even the food from her… from her chest. I thought that was… I mean there are lots of stories like that, really, and I’d like to do them, but I haven’t… I haven’t actually got round to it yet. Maybe as I… you know, in a year or two, I might do them. Are they in anthologies, are they written down by…? These Portuguese stories are collected from word of mouth, still, by scholars and so on, so they… the ones I have read are actually from word of mouth, and they have several versions of the same story. They… there are proper folklorists who… who did the same thing in the 19th century, all over the world. But Grimms is supposed to have done that, as well, although Grimm actually… there is some stories that they… they touched up, and so on, and most of the folk tales were actually, bowdlerized and censored, so that not just children, but people couldn’t… wouldn’t read these horrible things. But there they are, you know; the scholars have got them down there, it’s fascinating.

I was asked to go to the National Gallery, to be an Associate Artist, and I was…I… I liked being there. I was… I mean they were very nice to me, and Colin Wiggins was very helpful, and he took me in front of pictures. I didn't know which pictures to choose, because I… I liked The Battle of [sic] the Lapiths and the Centaurs, by Piero di Cosimo. That's the only picture I used to go and look at, before, was that picture. You know, they're biting the ears off the…. and I love that picture, but the… but there were other things that I… I copied, and then he took me in front of the Crivelli, the Crivelli’s Garden. He said, you know, you can tell what Crivelli’s house was like, what, from the garden... from the… you can tell what it was like from looking at it, because it had… it had, ah, his garden, and little niches, and little rooms, where the… each one had a saint in it, and it had the lives of the saints were sort of in it, so I thought: oh, that's a good idea. So that's what I decided to do. They asked me to do this… this thing for the coffee…coffee-house there, and I thought: well, let’s do something that's unobtrusive. You don't want to have dinner with a lot of flashy paint around, do you really? So let’s pretend they're Portuguese tiles, which are beautiful — blue and white — and discreet. So I decided to do it all like that, and then I put in the stories of all the saints — women saints — in the pictures, in the National Gallery, and I did the drawings for that in Portugal, as a matter of fact, and I did the first painting in Portugal, big painting in Portugal. And then I got to the third picture, and I got into dreadful trouble. I couldn’t make it work. And my dear friend Tilly said: ’Well, it’s no good throwing good work after bad. Better start again’. Well, I said, ’Well, yeah, you're right. And… and she's so right, you know, she knows… she knows. And so I did. I started all over again. There weren’t enough saints to go round, so I decided to put in mythological stories, and even folk… and little pictures of folk stories, with the woman, putting the baby on to the pond, on to that… fountain. So that's all covered. The whole thing is full of stories. It's just story after story after story. And I did other pictures at the National Gallery, including Rudy’s picture. And then after I left there and I went to Islington to a small… a small —belonging to Stephen Cox— in a studio there. It was difficult as well to get started again. And… and so I did a few pictures there and… and then came here.

I came to this studio in '93, which was... which was marvellous, because then here I could really, you know, do everything. I think of... almost from '93, is a whole ‘nother kind of work, too, that changed. The work changed completely. I brought... when I came in here, I brought a picture called The Barn, which is based on a painting by Tintoretto, of the Nativity in a barn, and a composition, it’s got the creatures below — cows or something below — then the...the Nativity, and then the sk..., the roof of the barn. And I put... I had just read a book by Joyce Carol Oates that I liked very much, called Haunted, and it told a story about these girls being... I can't remember the story now, but I did a picture based on that story. And it’s got a girl lying down being beaten by two girls, and I threw everything in there. Everything. The perspective was... was that. I wanted... I wanted to have to see above, and to see below, and to see across and to see over to the other side, so that you had this kind of feeling of... of depth and...and then I tucked things everywhere. I put chickens there, I even put my mother in her dressing gown, going out at the top there, and then I put a melon hanging down below, a really sexy melon, all cut up and bleeding, you know, with its black pips. And... and then next to it, I put a little doll, Portuguese doll, dressed up in a Portuguese way, and... and lots of straw, and...and that... that finished... I finished that in a year. And that's at the Berardo now. But...  it was quite...it was quite...it took me quite a long time to do that. And after that, I started Dog Woman. It was after that I started Dog Woman.
 And you got a model? For it?
No. It wasn't after that I started Dog Woman. I made a mistake. Because I did characters after that, of the girl suckling the man, giving him her... her milk. And... but, yes. And then I...then I done the... that Dog Woman. I... I brought her in here, the... the little sketch. And I... and I squared it up, and put it on a pic... on a picture, and tried to do a picture. And then that... that just...then I got... I got hooked on pastels, you see, doing it on... with pastels, it was quite, quite different from acrylic. Quite different.

First of all you didn’t have to use brushes, which is always a temptation, the brushes you’ve got. You've got the brush mark, and you've got to... you know, brush marks... are very evident. You... you look at brush marks, because you think that they're expressing something, now, don’t you? And you think that they're... they’re, you know, they... they’ve got some kind of life... that they give some kind of life to what you're doing. And the emotion comes across in brush marks, so that's... so many expressionist artists are... couldn’t do it without brush marks. And...I didn’t want to have brush marks, you see, because I... that would have taken me in a way that I couldn’t do properly, I don’t think. You never know. You never know. I didn’t. And so...I thought, well if I draw, the pastel is drawing. You draw...around the figure, and you draw inside the figure, you draw everything in the figure, you draw the knees, the thighs, the clothes, everything is drawing. You don't fill in. You draw. And painting seemed to me like either you fill in and then you’re kind of like colouring prints, right? Which is a lot easier, or then you have to consider how you're going to make the shapes with the brush, and all that, and I'd rather do it with... with the pastel — with the sticks — with the pigment sticks. Some... I bought all different kinds. Hard ones, soft ones. I preferred the really hard ones, because they gave you resistance, so you could actually push, and... and scratch with them, which was very nice, and... and draw, and... and then you'd... you'd use the softer ones for later, for the top layer or something like that. So I began... I did one, I did the first Dog Women, and then I did the second Dog Women, which is Waiting for Food. They're sitting there, in a... in a dog pound, waiting to be fed, you know, like this, oh, please. And, but you know that once they're fed they might get up and do something horrible. And then sleeping on her owner’s coat, and... and grooming. Grooming one is the really sexy one, where she's, you know, licking herself, getting ready... getting ready. And to appear for her lover, etc. She's licking herself, and that... I did one of each. I did one of each. I'd even done a drunk one. A drunk Dog Woman.

I had a very nice girlfriend of my daughter’s, an actress called Flaminia Cinque, and she came and she was a drunk... the drunk dog, and she was very good at doing that. Sloping of the... she was wonderful. Wonderful. And I did her as well, in... part of The Ostriches. I used her in The Ostriches as well. Yeah. Yeah, she’s good...  good model. Wonderful. So... then that... that, you know, I did quite a few of those Dog Women. That was that. Because... and then of course The Ostriches... you see they asked me to do...the Hayward had a show, which called... Spellbound. Spellbound was the influence of movies on art. And I was, you know, it was so... such fun. It was Philip Dodd got it together, and I think he ran the British Film Institute at the time or something, and he... oh my God, I said to Lila, ’What are we going to do?’ So I said ’Oh. Something with Carmen Miranda’, you know. Okay. Because I'm a great fan... I mean when I was at The Slade, in my last year, most of my time I spent in the cinema. I used to see three films a day. And I knew... at one time I'd seen every single film that was showing in London. Every single film. I used to go all the time. And...I've always loved film. I mean, my... as my father had a little private cinema of his own when he was a boy...a young man, in his grandmother’s basement, and he used to show all sorts of... all sorts of films there. Films he made; he made films. Also he showed, you know, Laurel and Hardy, and- Steamboat Willy. Yes? Felix the Cat that I adored. And all that, so we were brought up on movies. And as a treat he would put up a screen, and show me films. I loved films.
When I was in Portugal, I was not allowed to go to the films, except with my grandmother, and we had to take a picnic... when I grew to more a teenager, we were not allowed to, except perhaps once in a matinee, once in a while. And I didn’t see very many films. So when I came to London, the idea of coming to London was the idea that I would go to the films all the time, and have as much ice cream as I wanted. So, bliss. And, as we descended, as the plane — because in those days they had turbines, yeah — and the lights of London were under spread, down there, and I thought: gosh, this is paradise, surely? And down there are all these movies I can see, and all that ice cream. And I used to buy family block ice cream, and have it all myself. They were disgusting ice creams, you know, nothing like Portuguese santini. I never liked really Wall’s ice cream in three colours are really horrible. Anyway, I used to love that. And I used to eat a whole lot. So I used to go to the films all the time, and I saw... I saw everything. Audrey Hepburn, I saw Shane. Everybody was talking about Shane. Shane was so wonderful. It was okay. But there was one film that a friend of mine, David Wright, took me to see, in Hampstead, which was a true shock, and that was Buñuel’s... it was Los Olvidados. And it was about...it took place in Mexico. It was... Buñuel was working in Mexico. And he...it was not... the surrealism in the film was limited to the mother, the vision of the floating meat. And a bunch of real nasty boys, who were like, you know, and they treated everybody really badly. They were little thugs. And they beat up a cripple. There was a cripple that used to travel on... on wheels, you know, had a kind... not... not a wheelchair, but just, he had a cart, with wheels? That he pushed himself along, because he had no legs. And these boys beat him up. And... and I was so shocked. I didn’t know that... that... see, I hadn’t realised that people that were so hard up themselves, like the boys and their families were... could be so beastly. I had the idea that maybe people were so hard up and poor were nice and kind, you see. Some idea, some stupid idea, you see. And of course I was shocked, and I was... I was... I thought, boy, this is something. And so I became a great fan of Buñuel's. I loved everything he did. Everything. I liked his Tristana. It is not so... but of course and it was Belle du Jour, which is, you know, life story, true-life story, and then there were... there were- Nazarin... all those films. The... the script...some of them, Bourgeosie, I did not like so much. I liked more the early films. I liked the black... the black and white films. I became a fan of going... I liked... and then I went to see Pasolini as well, I liked Pasolini a lot. Theorem and that and... marvellous, and the Matthew... according to St Matthew... the The Passion According to St Matthew [sic], which I liked. I have that on video at home. And... and I saw... and I saw all the... I detested the Nouvelle Vague films. The... the person I detested most of all was Godard, Jean-Luc Godard. I loathed him. It was pretentious, it was just crap. I hated it. And then... I liked Louis Malle, and Truffaut and that... but by then film had become kind of different, you know.

The other films came later. The Nouvelle Vague came later, in the '60s. This was in the '50s that I went on my own to the flicks, all the time. All the time. Everything. It’s marvellous. You come out of the… there was another wonderful film, Kubrick’s…Kubrick’s film — oh, God, I can't remember — it was an 18th century story. 18th century with a lot of sword fighting. What is that called? Ah...it’s a famous novel. I know... It was a famous novel. It was the most magical film. I remember coming out of Leicester Square — I used to go to Leicester Square, to the Empire, to all that — and coming out, I used to go during the day, so it gives you an unreal feeling when you come out, you know, of the cinema, and it’s still light. It’s really weird. And then... but then I'd go on to another one, and so-on. In those days of course sometimes there was two films. There was the B one and the main one. And there was newsreels and I mean you could stay in the cinema all day. Nobody told you to get out. But I never did. I never saw something twice. I used to go on to another movie. And so on, yeah. I don’t do it anymore. I go too little now. Now I don’t go and see films as much as I should do, but I still love film. But I don’t like it as much as I did. I saw The Walker. Have you seen The Walker? It’s a wonderful film. Wonder... Paul Schrader. Wonderful film. But I don’t... and of course there's...there's Almodovar, whom I adore. I think he's marvellous, and all those films coming from South America are wonderful. So, I still go, but not... not like that. I don’t have time now, to do that sort of thing. Of course I wasn't doing my work at The Slade, that's for sure, but I didn’t want to.

What happened towards the end of The Slade, was that I... I didn't... I didn’t go on with enthusiasm. What happened was I actually took refuge in the print room. In the print room you didn’t have to do art, you see. You could do drawings, and then reproduce them and stories. You didn’t have to do art. And so I took refuge in there, and... and Tony Gross, who was teaching there, didn’t advise you to do aquatint, which was a mis... big mistake, he said you could do everything with line, and later on I learned with Barto dos Santos how to do aquatint, which was of course, was a new discovery, but I always found print... print making enormously good, because it gets you... it gets your...it frees your imagination, you see, and you can do as many things as you want, whilst... you can also free your imagination if you're doing drawings from your head, which I did lots of studies for The Dance, and lots of studies for various things for The Family and all those early pictures. And then later on I began to do it less and less, although I... I did do a series, from my head... when you're very intense about something, and you want to put something across, which is quite personal, and quickly, in secret... a secret, you draw it... draw it. And I did a thing... thing called Misericordia, which is about an old lady being... having her bottom cleaned and being looked after and all that. And I did that, I came in here, I did that just... just as my mother was dying. It was about her. And I thought, well, I will never... never show this. This is completely private. This is, you know, which of course it is. But then you get kind of show-offish, and then you, and then after a bit the meaning of it, and the intensity seems to... to not to be so... so private any more. And then you show it... show it to somebody, you know, close to you, and they say, well... I showed it to Alberto, as a matter of fact. I remember. Oh, he liked it, you know, and so... and so that's very, very private things. I do very, very private things. I draw from my head. Yeah. I do. But then, other things I don’t draw from my head. And I began to draw from figure, for two reasons. For giving up smoking and having to hold the... the drawing board and drawing with my... my right hand. You don’t do anything with your left hand, you draw from looking at, you see. I could never... I could never draw trees and things. I did try once, for characters... in Estoril. I went into... they’ve got very gnarled trees there. But all... The wind, all blown over by the wind, and I did do some drawings of those, which I used in the pictures. But I find it very difficult. And I did... and I... and I drew, I copied what I saw. I copied what I saw. And that happened with the pastels as well. It became entirely that. Entirely. The scenes were set up and I'd copy them. But that's how it is, even now, you see.

The picture’s called Amongst the Women. And it’s from Father Amaro series, and it was a painting I did that... when I met Tony Rudolf, and he... he wanted to sit for me, he was actually very glad to sit for me. It’s unusual that men like to sit for you. They get so bored. But he did. And so I... I got... I dressed him up, because in the story, he's a priest... he’s a... before he becomes a priest, he is... has got no mother, he's brought up by Madrinta, a godmother or something. He has no vocation whatsoever, and he's taken to the godmother’s house and there he's very, very happy, amongst the servants, who made a fuss of him. They used to dress him up as a girl, and they used to... but he was very little, and they used to dress him up as a girl, and they used to pamper him, and make him laugh, and so I thought: it’s a very, very good idea. I'll get this man, and I'll dress him up like a girl, except of course he's not a girl, is he? Because he's a man. He's not even like a woman. He's a real man. And I put this skirt on him, this... this tartan skirt on him. And he's sort of cosying up against Lila, feeling really comfortable, and very smug, and he is... he just sort of goes on like that till the end of his days, you know, leaning on... on these women, and making mischief really. And so I did... I... I set it all up, Lila’s sewing. And then I got this girl, a student, from Camberwell, who came and sat for me. I bought all these wonderful clothes... wonderful clothes. I think I bought them in Islington. And I still have the white one upstairs. I've kept that. And...and that was it. And they're just there, and he's... he’s just so cosy, you see, and... amongst the women. Where they can spoil him rotten.
It’s quite a challenge to paint a... a picture that is so much in the tradition of... of western painting, the tradition of, you know, Velázquez, and... Is it? And...you know. Well- I mean, I don't know whether you feel intimidated to talk about it, perhaps about painting such a serious... a big painting?
It was quite a big painting, because it’s a... well, it’s actually easier to do a bigger painting in pastels than just to do teeny ones is very, very difficult. And you... you have... it has bigger, more presence. I didn't think of it, as in any tradition, quite honestly, at all. I just thought of it as... what the story called for. And then it has a reflection in the... in the glass behind, which shows... which is also it appears in... in lots of paintings, obviously that’s traditional, but I didn’t think of this, I didn’t think of any other painting when I was doing this, really, just this... you know, and... and then I did the other one of him dressed, it’s called Mother. Which, he's a... which took me forever to do, because it kept changing. I wasn't sure what it was about, I just knew I had to go with it. And that in the end I'd find out what it was, but it was a right mess, and I've seen, because you know, Lila keeps photographs sometimes, of how they developed. She sometimes takes photos at the end of the day, for her own things, and she's... I saw it one time, it was much better than how it ended. And... and then there...people interpret. People who write about the work interpret it in all sorts of ways. They interpret it like how... how they want to interpret it, which is fine. I like that... that the person who writes... make... make up their own stories about pictures, it’s... it’s great. But this is about smugness, and about not growing up. To be... to be a boy, all your life, and leaning against women for comfort and for support. And... and for... for flattery. That's what it’s about, really, and... and Tony was... it was the first time I ever painted him, and it was... because he's got a very, very good head to do — very easy — and... and I didn’t even re-work it. It was done the first time... first time, which is extraordinary. And I got it. It looks like him exactly, and his feet look like his feet as well. He's got very distinctive feet. And it looks like... It all looks like him. It’s extraordinary. Yeah. So I got... I got into the habit, I mean really he is... he is a marvellous model.

I've done him several times, and later on he was actually in my Metamorphosis, that picture where he's naked, and because...who was it? Marina... Marina Warner asked me, ’Could you do Ovid Metamorphoses?’ ‘Oh, God, I can't do Ovid at all,’ I said, ‘the... the gods are so unpredictable, my goodness, there's never any...’ anyway, I couldn’t. So... so Fiona said... Fiona Bradbury said to me, ’Oh, you can't. You can do Kafka’. ‘Of course. Of course’. So I thought: well, I’ll make Metamorphosis when he becomes a creature, a kind of beetle with a carapace, and he wakes up and he's immensely uncomfortable, and... and his parents are so embarrassed by him, everybody’s embarrassed by him, you know, he only gets thrown in food in by his sister, and he ends up hiding under a chair. It's... it’s hilarious, and immensely cruel. Oh. And so I then got Tony... he's... ’Oh of course we'll do it’. So I got him... I... I had to rig him up. It was quite extraordinary; it looked like a prison in here. I had to hang ropes from the... from the ceiling to hold up his hands, and hold up his legs, and so on, because they're all... he's... he's flapping around, like an insect. He's... he is become an insect. I did two pictures of those, and drawings. He's flapping around like an insect. And... and it took quite a long time to do, because then the floor; I wanted the floor in perspective, with squares, so that it would go out of the door at the end. And that took ages to do. But it was... he was very good at... at drawing. He was very, very good. It took quite a long time to do that, because it was naked flesh. It's always much more difficult to do than clothes. So he had to be naked, because he was a beetle.

I began to do some drawings, of girls coming out of a couch... not coming out of a couch; tied up — wrapped — they were wrapped in... I bought big pieces of... of satin... satin — taffeta — great — I go to John Lewis, I buy this... these materials — great... great strips of taffeta, and tied up Lila in various positions, so that's she’s bre... trying to break out of this... of this... bound, by being bound, hands and so on. It's not to do with prison or anything like that. It is to do with psychological states of mind, and then I... I did a whole... a whole series of them, and afterwards I thought, well, I must do... I must do bigger, much bigger than this. And I will do, just... just drawings, just black and white, and I'll try and get better at drawing. Get better at it, by... by copying it as clearly as I can and as strictly as I can. No matter what is in front of me. No matter what. So then I constructed the... these figures made out of... Lila actually got a skeleton — a... a woman’s skeleton — which she then covered in cotton and silks, with stockings on top, and... and she made this skeleton woman. I made the head, which is all crumbling, so it's like a death’s head really, and... and we had various creatures and because I thought, well, I thought about the Muses, because the Muses, who, before there were Muses, were followers of Dionysus, and they were the Maenads. Maenads can destroy. And the Muses protect. She... they protected Orpheus, but he was destroyed by the Maenads in the end. And I'm very interested in Jane Harrison’s book; the... I can't say the word, but the introduction to Greek religions... there got another one. And I read that a lot before, because I did lots of pictures when I was much younger, collages on Gorgons, the Harpies, all those creatures, Greek... Greek violence and... and disruption. And I was very, very interested in that, and I thought that... that certainly the Muses as Maenads could be very interesting, because they represent a state of mind, and because of the damage they can cause, and particularly to themselves. And so, I... I started doing a series of Muses, you see, and I'm using these creatures, and dressed... putting flowers on their head, and baby poets on the ground. There's one of Tony as a baby poet in a cot, with the Muses around, and my little granddaughter putting the lemons apart.
And so... so I started doing this lot. And then it turn... and then the subject matter developed into other things. But this drawings went on the same, because, you know, the fact I was standing there, doing these drawings, and... you know, just... just... pencil. Graphite? And Conté pencil. I used... I have so much completely in graphite. And, which... more difficult to see, because they reflect the light. So I thought, well, I must get some Conté pencils, but in fact, it’s different, but not so subtle, right? But I... but you can see them better. And I started to... and I just started faithfully... faithfully setting up the scene, trying to draw it as carefully as I could. That's what they are, exercises, really. Exercises in drawing. But of course you have to have a story in order to do something, otherwise you’re bored stiff, if you just have a figure there, you’ve got to have a story. So I did the story, you know, this... like the Zurbaran thing, and... and then I made a tree... a tree that’s a Muse, and the tree has roots that squash the babies, and then there's this rather plump lady, who looks after my house, and she came and dressed up as another Muse, and behind her is hanging her husband, who hung himself, but he's also a Muse. So there was a forest of Muses, right? And... and a little girl turned up, so I put.... put her in a... in the picture as well. And... and just did the thing as I went on like this. And then that one is more difficult. That's got... got the willies in it. You know. Got willies in it. On the floor? On the ground. On the ground; she's carrying one. And... and look, do you see the one behind, with it round her neck? She... that's like the Lacoön? But it's not a lacoön; it’s not a snake. It’s something else, I know, and... and they're all... really... like, well, anyway, so...the Bacchae as well. Like the Bacchae. So that's... that's, that's it really. The drawing. It’s about drawing.

Lila and Tony were together. So that he could lean on her properly. And the other girl... I don’t think... I think they were together once, but then I... they came individually so that I could do them... I could do them with more care. But they were together at first. Yes. And... and there are pictures where... I mean there are pictures that, for instance the After Hogarth one, where Lila is holding Tony, like a Pieta painting, she's actually holding him. I mean there are lots of supports. There's buckets underneath so that she doesn’t have to, you know, so that he doesn’t hurt his back and that she... so but she's actually holding him, absolutely, in position, otherwise you couldn’t do it, could you, really? If you imagine that. And.... and these... they were together exactly. And then she came afterwards. But at one time they were all three together. But not to start with. And the two of them started with... and then she came in afterwards. Yeah. Yeah, they don’t set up the scene. And then... then... other... I have done pictures with the one that I had all the trees in here, where I had this... my house in Ericeira with a... with a... gard... with a terrace, and anybody who came in, sat for me, and went into the picture. So then that... somebody came in, they sat for me, and they went into the picture, and so on. So that was quite nice. But they... these were... these were more composed.

You have to do something new all the time, something different all the time, because otherwise there comes a... he used to say that pictures come in fours. They used to say that. Vic always said. The first one is really a mess and tentative. You don’t know what you're doing. The second one, you... you’ve kind of got it. The third one is just right. The fourth one is decadent already. You don’t need it. After that, you don’t touch it any more. You start again. And I think there's a lot of truth in that, although now I've allowed myself, very, very self-indulgently, to do more than four. So I do... I carry on doing, because I change the story and do more, but really, you should just keep it to that. You know, and then start again, think again, and so on. You can't go on doing the same thing always. You just... it makes you sick. And repellent. It's repellent what you do. You can't even pick up the sticks — the pastel sticks — that you used before, because you can't bear to hold them, you see, that's it, that's horrible actually.

The fact that I am this old, it’s the only thing is that I feel, well, then do I have time? You see, that's the only thing, do I have time to... to change again and do something else? Not, you know, in pictures, in do something else. And I've got to. I just have to. And whether I'm 70 or 80 or whatever, you’ve just got to... you’ve got to move on all the time, and there is some way now that I also have to move on, I don’t know how. But you never do know how. Never, never, never do you know how. And that's... you know, one’s always terribly insecure, actually. But providing you... you get better at drawing, then that helps as well, you know, providing you... you can... you can begin to learn to draw, and so on, that's... that’s a help. And so, you know, but maybe... maybe it will get looser again. I don’t know. I've no idea. No, going to the Prado and looking at pictures there, I always find very... very good for... for having courage, because I do so love...I do so love Spanish art. I... I don’t know, I love it... it's... it’s... I love Ribera, I love Goya of course. Zurbaran... I know El Greco is not Spanish, but he's like he was, very... rather effeminate ecstasy... effeminate ecstasy. Beautiful. And I love all that. So I go in there and I just... I can just spend a long time looking, being there. It's difficult to look, actually, properly. But you be with them, you know, with them, and that's... contaminates you whole kind of catch it. You know. You can't really look. I find it very, very difficult to what they call analyse pictures and so on. I find it very, very difficult. But they're presences. That's why they're not like photographs. They're not like in... photographs don’t have that. You know, photographs do not have presences like that. These are like people, like human... humans, or animals that are there alive. So I do like being with them.
