peter.hall

British-born theatre director, Sir Peter Hall (1930-2017), ran the Arts Theatre where, in 1955, he directed the English-language premiere of 'Waiting for Godot' by Samuel Beckett. He also founded the Royal Shakespeare Company when he was only 29, and directed the National Theatre from 1973 to 1988. He was at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford-on-Avon for two season from 1957-1959. He also directed 'Akenfield' for London Weekend Television and ran the Peter Hall Company, which has 40 productions worldwide to its name. In 1963, he was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) and in 1977 was knighted for his contribution to the theatre. In 1999, he was also honoured with a Laurence Olivier Award.

I was born in 1930, at Bury St Edmunds market town in Suffolk. My father was a very low paid railway clerk and I was the only child of my family, not only in the sense of my mother and father, but the whole family. There weren't other... any other little children, so certainly for the first 15, 16 years of my life, Christmases and Easters and all that, were surrounded by adults, adults, adults, adults. Most of my family on both sides were still connected with farms, with farm labouring and with the mechanical things, looking after tractors, things like that. I had an uncle who was a wizard with engines – great for a small boy. Then, when I was about five, we moved to Barnham which is a tiny place between Thetford and Bury St Edmunds, where my father became, for the first time, a fifth grade station master and he had four trains a day, passengers, and one goods train at lunchtime. And there was a staff of three: a signalman, an odd job man, a booking clerk and him. And I think he led quite a happy life with very little money. Our living conditions – this is in the '30s – were not good. No electricity, no gas, oil lamps, outside loo, tin bath for a bath once a week in the kitchen, and I used to travel on the train to Bury to school. So, I tell all that story because there's absolutely nothing about it which relates to the theatre or what I finally became or wanted to become. The only thing that one could say was that my father was a bit of a singer and he had sung Guiseppe in The Gondoliers in 1926 when the old Theatre Royal at… at Bury was closed. So famously in the family, he was the man who closed the theatre. This is a theatre that, when I was 14, 15, I broke into through a window in order to go and look at because it was then a… a beer store for barrels, the Green King, the brewery. It's now, thank God, a beautiful Regency theatre of 500 seats active in Bury. It's been saved, but I first met it full of beer. Anyway, my father was keen on Gilbert and Sullivan and… and he therefore, when I was about six, I was presented with a very bad piano, because they didn't have much money, and piano lessons which cost sixpence each week from a man in the village. And I started to learn the piano and I spent a good deal of my childhood accompanying my father in Gilbert and Sullivan which has induced in me an absolute hatred of Gilbert and Sullivan which lasts to this day. I think they've done great damage to English culture. They're facetious and sexless and really not very original and I think they've taken the place of opera, taken the place of drama in too many people's heads for too long. Offenbach is raunchy and sexy and somehow real. Sullivan is rather effete, beautiful tunesmith, but effete.

Just before the war, a very extraordinary thing happened. We moved to the outskirts of Cambridge because my father became a relief station master, which meant he went to other stations when the regular man was on holiday or was sick, and he covered the whole of East Anglia from King’s Lynn down to Broxbourne, which is near Liverpool Street, near London. I used to travel with him sometimes in school holidays. I went to a whole variety of stations and sat in the signal box for ages. I loved trains. I still love trains. I used to ride on the lunchtime goods train as it shunted the trucks onto the single line at Barnham, where we lived. I missed out one important fact. When I was four, maybe… four, I think, I was taken to see one of those ancient things, which still affect English theatre life and English audiences fully, the pantomime. I was taken to the pantomime at the Old Picture House in Bury, of Robinson Crusoe. All I remember of it, was… is beating drums, grass skirts, black bodies and an extraordinary erotic charge. At four I remember being actually quite sexually excited. I didn't know that's what it was. That was my first experience of theatre and it's a pretty good one looking back on it. From then on I was… and this is the cliché which so many of my profession utter – I… I built model theatres, I wrote plays for my model actors, I cut out actors and drew them and I'd seen almost no theatre but… I mean, I don't know why I did that. I was humoured in it. My father hoped, I suppose, that I would illustrate Gilbert and Sullivan one day but I didn't. And I was… I was just very interested in shows and how… how they were put together and why they were put together, and the… and the kind of excitement between audience and performer. So, I was lucky, aged eight, to be lumped near Cambridge because the next year the war broke out and Cambridge in… in the war, was the most extraordinary festival of arts, largely because so much was evacuated from London.

The BBC Symphony Orchestra gave regular concerts in the Guildhall. There was a procession of… of extraordinary productions at the Arts Theatre, tiny theatre, but never mind. I saw Gielgud's Hamlet when I was 12, I think, 1942, standing at the back for sixpence, at the back of the Arts Theatre and I was hideously precocious and I – I almost don't like talking about it because it… it sounds so full of clichés – but on my 10th birthday, I heard Mozart's Requiem in King’s College Chapel. That's what I asked my parents I could go to, and on the Monday night – that was on the Sunday – on the Monday night, I heard the Marriage of Figaro at the Arts Theatre done by Sadler's Wells on tour. I remember the Figaro quite vividly. I remember the… the elegance, the wit, the speed and the funniness. I liked all that, but I have to say the passion for Mozart and the passion for music was very largely because I was trying very hard to play Mozart sonatas. Now, Mozart sonatas are the easiest and the hardest thing in music to play. They're very, very easy to play badly, which we all do, and very, very hard to play well. Very few people can make a piano sing and that's what it needs. Anyway, I was absolutely hooked into all that and I suppose at that time if anybody had said to me, ‘What do you want to be?’, I would have said: ‘A musician’. And part of me still says that. Had I my time over again, I'd love to be that man up there with the baton because if… when the violinist says, ‘I don't feel like playing A flat’, which an actor can say to you, ‘I don't feel like saying this line’, you say, ‘You play A flat, that's what it says, now ready? Off we go’. But maybe I would have been a very dictatorial conductor and I don't think I'm a very dictatorial director. Anyway, loads and loads and loads of play-going in Cambridge, seeing amateurs, seeing professionals.

As I got older, and as the war ended and I was 15, 16, 17, one of the advantages of being the son of an impoverished railway worker was that you got a certain number of free tickets for the railway and then reduced-price tickets. So I used to travel to London quite a lot. Extraordinary to think, actually, that, I mean, I… I know I came to London by myself, aged 14, with the war still on, to go to the theatre. I had an aunt in Lewisham who provided a bed, and I used to go on the tram from Westminster to Lewisham and stay the night there. And in London I saw Gielgud's seasons at the Haymarket, The Importance of Being Earnest, The Duchess of Malfi, Peggy Ashcroft, Hamlet again at the New Theatre as it then was, subsequently became the Albery Theatre and has now become, I think, the Coward Theatre – keeps on changing its name. I saw the Olivier/Richardson great seasons. I saw Richardson play Falstaff in both parts, I saw Olivier's Richard III, I saw Arms and the Man, I saw Peer Gynt. I mean, by this time I was absolutely hooked. I wanted to not be an actor. I wanted to be a director. I don't know, I certainly didn't know what a director was at that point except I… I knew that somebody made it happen. Somebody was in charge of it in some sense, and that's what I wanted to be. So I read my Stanislavsky and I read my Gordon Craig and I tried to understand what a director was. A director then, of course, was somewhat young in the… in fashion, anyway. Directors tend to be called producers – 'the play produced by Mr so and so' it would say on the programme where, you know, now it's the director. We've taken on the film parlance. The producer's the man who raises the money, the director's the man who does the work of actually putting the… the show together.

At sort of 14, 15 I decided that's what I wanted to be and I made a plan. I knew enough about what went on in Cambridge dramatics, university dramatics, to think that that was the thing to do. And I thought if I can get to Cambridge and… and do some Shakespeare, and understand more about Shakespeare that is a passage into the profession. There were many people. There was Leo Genn, there was James Mason, there was Michael Redgrave, there was a whole slew of people from the past who'd come through Cambridge into the profession and it… it seemed like a… a good thing to do. I don't think I told anybody about this except I had one school master who had been an actor. He had actually been an actor, he had worn make-up, he had been in rep and he obviously wasn't a very successful actor because he was now with his first-class degree, teaching us history at the Perse School, which was a lovely grammar school, in Cambridge. I won a scholarship there from the elementary school when I was nine, 10, and I went there, stayed there and was coached there for a university scholarship, which, thank God, I got. I'm the Richard Hoggart generation. Richard Hoggart wrote that wonderful book, The Uses of Literacy, which tried to analyse the mobility… the social mobility of his time and of his own life, and I subscribed to that and many people of my generation, I mean, my great friend and colleague, Harold Pinter, won a scholarship to Hackney Grammar School. I won a scholarship to the Perse School. There were four of us who were scholarship boys and we were called – and it still makes me boil to think of it – ‘minor scholars’. Whereas all the other boys, their fathers paid for them and they were just called scholars, we were minor scholars because we'd managed to get a scholarship. We also were given books. The other boys had new books provided by their parents. We had rotten books, which had been handed on from generation to generation, and I remember the stamp inside. It said: ‘Perse School, Cambridge, minor scholar's book, to be returned on demand’. And inside there was every kind of abusive remark, sketch, awful calligraphies all over the page, and I… I remember my resentment, which, I suppose, has carried me through to this day to some extent. We were outsiders, but we all got inside, that generation, those of us who moved and I… I don't think it would be possible now for a me-figure… I mean, obviously, stations no longer have station masters, so, I mean, the whole world has changed in that respect, but I doubt one could actually have moved with the fluidity that I was able to do. It was scary because every examination was, you know, die or live. I mean, if… if I'd failed on any of them, that would have been it, and I remember being, therefore very nervous and very anxious and very hard working, and that I do owe to my parents because if I was reading Beano or Mickey Mouse Weekly, then my mother would make me help with the washing up, but if I was reading Great Expectations, I was excused, so I always had a supply of very earnest books in order to keep me out of harm's way. But, they brought me up to think that education was the escape, and for my generation it was… it was, no, no question. We were very poor though and the thought, once I got to Cambridge, when I announced quietly to them that I was going to go into the theatre, was absolutely devastating because they saw me as someone who was… should be a teacher with a pension and settled life. No one in our family had ever been to university and, you know, I… I'd made it and now I was going to chuck it all away, and there was that risk, of course. But I was blessed with enormous luck, I have to say, enormous luck. I became a director two weeks after I left university, and I've never been anything else. And I've also let it be whispered in a… in a profession which is very insecure, I have never been out of work in 53 years and I think I'm very, very, very lucky as a consequence.

What did I do at Cambridge? Well, I did a lot of Shakespeare because I wanted to be a Shakespeare director, rather like Harold Wilson as a boy, standing outside No 10, saying: ‘I want to be Prime Minister’. I'm afraid as a young man, I stood outside the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford-on-Avon, and said to myself: I really would like to run this place. That's my ambition. I'd just been to see Peter Brook's production of Love's Labour's Lost, which he'd done when he was 20, 21, and I remember being so jealous, thinking how on earth did he do that? I was about 15, I think. How on earth did that happen? Anyway, off I went to Cambridge, by which time I'd fallen in love and was engaged and thought maybe all the plan was silly and I'd better be a teacher or at least I'd better do something secure. But I did something, which to this day, I don't quite understand. In my first year, I booked the Amateur Dramatic Club Theatre for the beginning of my third year, to do a production just in case things changed. I had no money. I didn't know how I was going to pay for this said production, so for two years I hung around the dramatic world of Cambridge, rather resentfully, rather sulkily, acting a bit, assistant directing a bit, trying not to have much to do with it. By the end of my second year I'd broken up with the girl. We'd broken off our engagement. It didn't finally work. Sad time, but I had the theatre. There it was, and two wonderful school masters from the Perse School lent me £40 to do my first production, and the Amateur Dramatic Club found to their surprise, that young Hall, who'd had no experience whatsoever of directing, as far as they were concerned, had booked the theatre. And they couldn't unbook it, so I did a production of Jean Anouilh’s play, Eurydice – Point of Departure it was called in English. In those days Anouilh was rather the avant-garde and it was all related to one's love of French films apart from one's love of French drama. And I did it with a terribly good cast, many of whom – Tony Church predominantly and Tony White – became professionals. I… I can't… I remember very early on, an afternoon's rehearsal, which wasn't going very well, and I… I remember unknotting a problem with the two actors, so that they began to float and create, and I honestly felt like a duck must feel when it takes to water. I felt, I can do this, and this is… this is what I was meant to do, and from that moment on I was extremely happy. I did five productions in my last year at Cambridge and that was a result of the success of that first… this first play. I returned the money to the school teachers, which was a proud moment, but I did have a wonderful supervisor at the college who called me in to see him shortly after all this and he said, ‘I've just read in the Varsity that you're… you've got five productions including the one you've just done, to do this… this year’. I said, ‘Well, yeah, that's wonderful, you know, it's really happened for me’. And he said, ‘You're going to fail’ and I said, ‘Oh, I don't know’, you know, and he said: ‘But you are’. He said: ‘You couldn't do five productions as a professional in that time, let alone as a student’. So I said, ‘But this is what I want to do, and this is what I need to do’ and he said: ‘Look, I'm not going to waste my time nor yours. I've told you I think you'll fail. You've got a first in your first year, a second in your second year and this year you will fail if you do all this’. But he said: ‘Go ahead, do it. It's your responsibility. Don't tell anybody, but I don't want to see you until after the exam results come out and we'll have a drink together’. Extraordinary. He is no longer with us, alas, but he'd be fired if he did that today, I'm sure. But I was given the keys to the kingdom in some sense, so I did all those plays, and I went and had my drink with him after the results… the exam results came out. He was wrong. I got a 2.2, but only just, and had there been a fourth year, I would certainly have failed. But what was wonderful was that amount of experience. I was able to do Uncle Vanya of Chekhov, Love's Labours Lost of… of Shakespeare, a… a new play that John Barton wrote called Winterlude, John Whiting's play, Saint's Day, which developed a… a friendship with John Whiting which lasted 'til his death and many years later I got him to write The Devils for the Royal Shakespeare Company. It was a very heady time, and in those days London critics used to come and review student productions at Cambridge. So by the time I left Cambridge I had a wodge of… of notices saying I could direct, which was extraordinary.

I was recently in America with my company, doing As You Like It, in Los Angeles. We went to the drama department of the University of Southern California because they asked us if we would go and do a workshop. There were a 100 students and I looked at these 100 students and thought, where on earth are you going to go? There aren't a 100 jobs in the American theatre for you, and of course, most of them go and work in drama departments. There's a whole world there, which is very inbred and very incestuous and quite distressing in many ways. Anyway, I was there with two young actors, both of whom had been turned out of Cambridge in the last few years and we did the balcony scene from Romeo and Juliet. And they were very appreciative and then we had ‘Q&A’, question and answer, and a young man said,‘Could you tell us the secret of Cambridge drama?’ And I said, ‘I'm sorry, what do you mean?’ And he said, ‘Well, you're all different generations but the three of you all came from… came through Cambridge, and Cambridge has produced Nick Hytner and Trevor Nunn and Richard Eyre and Jonathan Miller and John Barton and Emma Thompson’ and he went on and on, and on. He'd done his homework. He said: ‘What is the secret of the Cambridge University drama department?’ And I said to this hundred-full drama department: ‘The secret of the Cambridge University drama department is that there isn't one’. The dean then said to me, ‘You have just wrecked my entire… my entire being and why we're all here’. Anyway, it's true. Cambridge drama has been extraordinarily fertile in the last 50 years because there is this ramshackle theatre and the university give the committee, who are all students, a… a sum of money each year to portion out among themselves to do plays, and you'll gather from that that if you can survive Cambridge drama, you'll probably be all right in the profession, and I think this is absolutely true. I'm a little worried now because they're refurbishing and rehabilitating the theatre and I fear it may become very expensive and run by senior dons, but I hope it will continue to be the messy thing it is, which… because that's how the… the creativity works.

I did a production of Pirandello's Henry IV which was transferred to the London Arts because they had a spare couple of weeks, got very good notices. I had a phone call asking me to go to Windsor rep to do The Letter by Somerset Maugham, and as I went off to do that, the Arts Theatre London said would I like a… a very low-paid contract carrying tea, reading scripts and going out to the reps if they wanted me so I could go and… so I could have my cake and eat it. And within a year, John Fernald who was running the Arts was appointed to RADA [The Royal Academy of Dramatic Art] and I was asked to take over the theatre. So aged 24 I had my own theatre with the responsibility of producing a play every five weeks bang in the middle of London, and as my very talented son, Edward, who is a great director, has said to me many a time, you don't know you were born, he says, you were so lucky. And I was lucky, extraordinarily lucky, because then once I was at The Arts, came a play one day, and I opened it and it said: Waiting for Godot by Samuel Beckett. I did not know who Samuel Beckett was. I had a vague idea there was some connection with James Joyce. I knew he had a play on in Paris in a 75-seat theatre. I hadn't seen it. The letter said ‘from Donald Albery’, who was a West End producer, he said: ‘No actor in London will be in this play and no director will direct it. Everybody's turned it down. I've seen some of your work so I wondered whether it would interest you’. So I thought, well, I'm clearly very much at the end of the line here, but I read it, and I don't pretend to say that I said to myself, this is the turning point of mid-20th century drama, because I didn't. But I did say, ‘This is highly original, beautifully written, very, very funny, and unlike anything I've ever read or experienced, so it's worth a go’, and Godot changed my life. I mean it… it absolutely brought me my first offer to work at Stratford as a director, Stratford-on-Avon. It brought me the friendship of Tennessee Williams and the rights of his plays in London. It brought me directing Leslie Caron in Gigi, the play. We subsequently married. It brought me a little bit of money for the first time, and it lead in a way, straight to Stratford which is the next part of the chapter. So, I mean, that's all the positive side. The negative side is if you're possessed by desire to do something, the fear that you have that you will not be able to do it, or that the world will not let you do it, is a huge price which you have to pay; so it's not all, you know, it's not all lovely success, at all. And I think if you're lucky, like I was, you're even… even more aware of how easy it is to be unlucky, if that paradox makes any sense. It's a cruel profession. It's no good being okay at it, in the middle. You have to be at the top or not at all.

One of the fascinating things about the theatre, I think, worldwide, is that practically every advance, every development of any importance has come out of a company situation. If you look at Stanislavsky's work with Chekhov and the Muscovite's Theatre, Brecht's work with the Berliner Ensemble, Jean-Louis Barrault's company, Jean Vilar's company, everybody – and I hope to say now, perhaps in small print, Peter Hall's Royal Shakespeare Company – for a certain time made advances, made new kinds of drama because of the company. Now, what is it about a company? Well, it's a group of actors that stay together long enough to know not only how they like each other, but how they dislike each other. I mean, there is a real living quality. I… I think why I do what I do is because, I mean, it's… it's not for success – I'm not quite sure what success is because it's… has many hues – it's not for money, it's not for publicity. It's because if you have the right group, the right ensemble, the right company, you achieve a creativity and a sharing with you, with everybody, which makes you think this is how a good family ought to be. This is how a good tribe ought to be, a good country, a good democracy, a good world, indeed, and you actually come out of rehearsal better than you went in, having done work which is better than you are, and that… that also goes for the… for the… the actors as well. So from the very first stirrings of my ambition, I knew about that and wanted to somehow subscribe to that and I saw it happening with Gielgud and Ashcroft at the Haymarket as a boy, and Olivier and… and Richardson and Guinness and Leighton, at… at the Old Vic which was then at… at the New Theatre. So although I was at this tiny theatre, The Arts, even then I started to try and make a group of actors linked together and I got quite a number of very talented people: Ronnie Barker, for heaven's sake, John Schlesinger, both gone now, alas. They were with me at The Arts. And although one couldn't actually form a company that had any longevity at The Arts for economic reasons, because you couldn't pay people enough – you know, it was £8 per week and luncheon vouchers – I was trying to get a group together, so when I went to Stratford for the first time in 1956 to do Love's Labours Lost I was rather appalled by what I found, because there were three kinds of actors at Stratford at that moment: there were the old guard who were very Irvingesque and very rotund and round and slow spoken and musical; there were the fellows who'd been brought up on Coward and Rattigan and they… they threw it all away and didn't want to say a line of poetry, so it sounded like a line of poetry, good heavens, no; and there were the new lot coming out of drama school in droves, saying, ‘I'm from Manchester and I don't care who knows it and that's the way I'm going to speak’. And one was trying to take these three people – lots of people – and make them coalesce into a Shakespearian company who at least sounded as if they were on the same planet. And it was almost impossible.

It was then that I thought, you know, the… the only way this can be done is by making a company and by making the way you speak and why you speak and the way you produce your voice absolutely the centre of the… of the business. So when I was asked in '58, when I was 27, if I'd take on the Shakespeare Festival, which was a huge offer for them to make and Glen Byam Shaw, then the director, I know, was very largely responsible for… for engineering that. I said, you know, with the arrogance of a 27-year-old: ‘I don't want to run a Shakespeare Festival at Stratford. I only want to do it if I can change the name of the company because Shakespeare Memorial Theatre sounds like a graveyard and we can do modern plays because I think unless you're alive to the present, you certainly cannot illuminate the past. You need to do the two things together, so I want a London theatre and I want to do modern plays as well as Shakespeare, and I want actors to be under three-year contracts and directors, designers and writers to be under contract as well, and make an ensemble, a company’. And I… advanced as a reason for doing that, that if Stratford didn't do it, they would wake up in a very few years’ time and find that there was a national theatre in London doing it for them. So that was… because Olivier was already planning the National Theatre which finally opened in '63. Anyway, the board of Stratford looked at me in horror, particularly when I said: ‘You've got £170,000 savings, give it to me and let me spend it in London and… and I'll see if we can attract a subsidy from the Arts Council because of the quality of work that we do’. So they all said: ‘Absolutely not, so sorry, no, no’. And Fordham Flower, who was the chairman – a wonderful maverick member of the Flower family who'd built the original theatre in 1876 – he said: ‘I rather like this, I think we should think about this carefully’. So there was a… a kind of interregnum, pause when nothing much seemed to be happening and during that time we went to Russia with some productions: Michael Redgrave playing Hamlet, the Twelfth Night I did with Dorothy Tutin and Geraldine McEwan. And when we were in Leningrad, as it still was then, I started talking to Fordie about this scheme and we sat up all night talking about it and at the end of it, he shook me by the hand and said, ‘You're absolutely mad, but I'll back you – let's do it’, which was extraordinary. He then went back to the Board and said, you know, ‘I'll go if you want me to, but I'd like to do this and I'd like to stay’. So, they all looked very nervous and said okay, and we were… we were off. But, you know, without Fordie, that would not have happened, and also, I mean, subsequently when we had difficulty with the censor over plays like US, I wouldn't have survived without Fordie.
[Q] He was a wonderful man. 
Wonderful chairman. Wonderful.

1959, I... was the 100th anniversary season of… of Stratford, and all the stars were rolled out and… and I did Coriolanus with Olivier and Edith Evans, and I did the Midsummer Night's Dream with Charles Laughton. And then, in 1960, I started the great adventure of the… the RSC [Royal Shakespeare Company]. And I suppose, you know, looking back on it, the company was called all sorts of things: post-Brechtian, very left-wing, dragging kings down so that they looked like ordinary men, you know, a new form of design without anything pictorial, very rough and textured, all sorts… but the one thing that almost nobody commented on or saw or understood, was that we were all speaking it in the same way, and we all knew the clues that Shakespeare puts in his verse which says: this is when you pause, this is when you go fast, this is when you go slow, this is when you come in on cue, this word you accent, you do not accent this. I mean, it's all there like a score, if you know how to read it.
[Q] Yes, it sounded wonderful. Although it was very rhythmic, it sounded completely naturalistic. 
Well, yes, it sounds...
[Q] It sounded modern. 
But it sounds naturalistic because you can understand it. I mean, you know, Shakespeare writes in lines, iambic pentameters, hideous phrase, but… ba-bum, ba-bum, ba-bum, ba-bum, ba-bum, and if you listen to ordinary speech, it's, in English… about five beats is about what each hunk of conversation comes out as. And if you listen to French, it's six beats, so it's perhaps no accident that the alexandrine in French classical drama is six beats and the iambic five beats is ours. But why did he bother? Because it's easier to write prose than iambic pentameters and he… he did it so that the audience were not overwhelmed with information. If you say, ‘If music be the food of love play on give me excess of it that surfeiting the appetite may sicken and so die’, the audience say: ‘I'm sorry, I don't know what you're talking about’. But if you say, ‘If music be the food of love, play on. Give me excess of it, that surfeiting, the appetite may sicken and so die’, you've delivered three lines of blank verse and you can understand each line. It's a… it's a communication device primarily, and that's what we were doing. We were playing it trippingly on the tongue, which is what Hamlet begs the actors to do, but we were playing it in lines.
[Q] But it was a revolution. A true revolution, I thought because I… I had heard an awful lot of the old Shakespeare with, you know, the way you were talking about it done by Byam Shaw, and the change was amazing. 
But it was interesting, it's interesting...
[Q] That's much, much quicker.
Looking at the… well, that is absolutely true, I mean, plays that lasted... actually we would… we would take 25-30 minutes off a play's running time, not by cutting it, but by speaking it trippingly and by keeping it witty and… and understandable. The other interesting thing was that, you know, by the time I left the RSC which was in '68, we could do a Shakespeare play in about a week to 10 days less rehearsal, because everybody knew what they were looking for, what they were doing. I mean, that is if we had enough of the team in it, you know, but I mean actors like Ian Holm were there on and off of 10 years. I mean I… I found very early on that the only way to create a company is not by imprisoning them with tight contracts, but by allowing them to go away. If they can go away for six months, they come back, because home is then the Royal Shakespeare Company. And I… I mean the only... I've had lots of failures and made lots of mistakes, I would, but the… but the only thing I really regret is leaving the RSC when I did. I mean I had to because I was sick of it...
[Q] I wrote to you and begged you not to.
I know, I do remember you did.
[Q] You took no notice.
I took no notice, but what I should have done is said, 'Look, I've been doing this for 10 years, I… I need a year off, then I'll come back‘. That's what I should have done.

Everybody always says that companies are… are not what English actors do, but my experience is that they… they don't do them because there isn't enough money to pay them properly and they're making a sacrifice to work in the theatre. I mean, I don't think the public realise at this moment that a great big actor – I won't mention any names – gets £700 a week at the National [Theatre], and they would earn £7000 a week in the West End, and, you know, the government's view of that is, ‘Yes, well, of course, I mean there's the prestige of the National, so –’ and you say, ‘Well, yes, would you… would you take that kind of salary drop?’ So the theatre is sustained in this country very much by people who long and love to do it and are prepared to give things up. There was a moment in the '60s when Olivier started the National and I was doing the RSC [Royal Shakespeare Company], when the wage structure was not munificent, but it was sensible, so that people could actually, you know, bring up their children and look after themselves reasonably and not have to say, 'I must go and do a television series' or, 'I must go and do a voice-over' or, 'I must go and do an advert' or, 'I can't pay my bills'. But that's been eroded, largely through Thatcherism and the… and the gradual dissolution of… of proper subsidised culture, in… in my view. But in those days, certainly, you know, people were under three-year contract and actors like Ian Holm, David Warner and all that band, they were under three years and at the end of those first three years, many of them signed on for another three years, but it was because they had security, artistic and economic, but they could go away if they felt claustrophobic or… it seemed to me, the beginnings of something. The… the problem, I think, of the… of the RSC and of the National, to this day, is that both of them are much too big. I mean, a… a real company, what I'm talking about, is about 30 strong in actors and the support system is not more numerical than the actors, and the bureaucracy now, in order to keep things tidy with the Arts Council and with the government, is enormous, absolutely enormous, you know, and the amount of people you have to employ to raise money costs a very great deal of money. So, it… it's all changed, but I… I still believe that it will regain itself and that, you know, if you… if you look at the moments that inform the theatre, when Olivier started the National, for three or four years he had a company. Same thing again. When Complicité first started, it was a company but companies get diluted and… and there's no particular reason why they shouldn't be, but they should regain and remake. They are the way. I'm… I'm convinced of that. And one of the problems of the National Theatre is that it has three auditoria: the big Olivier, the proscenium Lyttelton and the studio Cottesloe, whose… the auditoria have totally different aesthetics and to do, you know, a play in one does not mean it can be done in the other. And therefore it's very difficult to know should you have a company in the Olivier, a company in the Littelton, a company… I mean, the nearest I got when I was running the National Theatre I thought to what it ought to be is to have four or five companies, each headed by, you know, in the… in the… in that case, it was Ian McKellen, Alan Ayckbourn and David Hare that were, they each had a group of actors, and they each did a play for each theatre. That started to mean something, but it didn't mean The National Theatre. It meant the National Theatre was a sort of Harrods that had all these various wonderful companies inside it which is… which is fine, but I suppose in my paradise I would be in a smallish theatre with 30 actors and four or five plays a year to do. I'd like to do at least three of them and the other two would be people who would aesthetically have a relationship with me.
[Q] There's a difficulty of holding... holding actors together in a company, isn't there? Now, much, much more severe than there used to be? 
I think it's more severe now but I think it's largely economic. The money has got much worse, you know, and you really can't expect an… an actor living in London with children at school, can't move lock stock and barrel down to Stratford so he has to have digs in Stratford, which he pays for at a very high rate. It... it doesn't add up very easily.

I've told the story of the formation of the RSC [Royal Shakespeare Company] as if it was all roses and it wasn't. It started wonderfully because I asked Peggy Ashcroft, who I'd worked with and who'd become a friend, if she would be the first member of the company and sign on for three years, and without hesitation she said yes and I… I think one owes an enormous debt to her and to her memory and she remained loyal to the company to the end of her days. And where she led, others followed, so that was an enormous help. But there were all other sorts of problems. I mean, actors have to be respected for their changes of mood and their… and their whims. I still don't know why an actor accepts a part. Time and again it happens to me. It happens to me now. I think, well, this part he'll absolutely love to do, and you send it to him and he rings up and he says: ‘Are you mad? I don't want to do that’. That's it, the relationship of the actor to the part is so personal and so quirky and so secret, so private. I thought I was in wonderful shape because I set off to start the RSC in 1960, not only with Peggy Ashcroft, but I thought I had Paul Scofield, too. He was going to play Shylock, Petruchio and throw in Thersites in Troilus and Cressida and all was agreed, and all was signed, and all was well. And not long before we started rehearsal for the season – I think it was about three months – I had a letter from Paul, extremely courteous, saying: ‘I'm terribly sorry, I know I said I'd come, I know I said I'd do it, I know I've signed a contract but I just don't want to do it. You'll have to forgive me’. Well, one's first reaction, of course, is fury and solicitors and waving contracts, but, you know, you have to be mature enough to understand that you have that reaction and you say, I will never work with Paul Scofield again until I work with him again. And I worked with Paul many times thereafter and had a very happy relationship, so, it… it didn't sour things permanently but it suddenly meant there I was with my first season with no star. Boom! I had just been to Bristol Old Vic and seen a young actor play Hamlet who I thought was one of the most astonishing talents I had ever seen and his name was Peter O'Toole. So I thought, deep breath, let's ask Peter O'Toole to do this line of parts. He was 26, I think. He said yes. First day of rehearsal he arrives for the Merchant of Venice, playing Shylock, and this… this man who had been characterised as having the most wonderful hooter had a tiny, little nose. He'd had his nose fixed, and I said to him: ‘What are you… what are you doing?’ He said: ‘I've had my nose fixed’. I said, ‘But you're playing Shylock’ and he said: ‘I'm going to be a movie star’. So that's how we started the season. He was a sensation. A sensation, I mean, people were queuing up all night to see him and all of that and it was such a… an extraordinary thing that I managed to persuade Anouilh – Jean Anouilh – who was still with us at that time, had just written a play which was frightfully successful in Paris called Becket, about the famous martyr. I persuaded him to let me have the rights of it over the heads of West End managers, as part of our opening season at the Aldwych, because we had our London theatre at that time and it was going to star Peter O'Toole and Eric Porter. And I was thrilled to bits, and halfway through the summer, Peter came into my office and said: ‘I've been offered the part of Lawrence of Arabia and I've got to do it’. So one tried to fix that it went later, that he went later, one tried to cajole, one tried to do… Nothing worked and… and Peter went off and became a film star and the rest, as they say, is history. Fortunately, Christopher Plummer, an eminent Canadian actor, jumped into the breach and played Becket wonderfully and therefore although one tells these stories which really don't make for an equable or easy life, there is always somebody else. There always is, and if you're bold enough and courageous enough, I won't say they're often better, but they're often as exciting in a quite different way. And it happens all the time and you have to, you have to… There's a disease which directors are liable to catch, which is casting paranoia, you know, when people say, ‘I'm… I'm not going to do it’ and they think, ‘What's wrong with me? Doesn't he want to work with me?’ I wonder… I have to say that only once in my 53 years of directing, have I got the first choice of actors in a play with absolutely no problems whatsoever.
[Q] Your first choice? 
My first choice, yes. There were only four characters in the play and there was No Man's Land, Harold Pinter's play. I sent it to John Gielgud who had it one evening, rang me up the next morning and said, ‘You're asking Ralph, of course’ and I said, ‘Of course’, and I sent it around to Ralph Richardson and he said, ‘Is Johnny doing it?’ And I said yes, so then we'd got the two of them. Then we got Terence Rigby and Michael Feast and it was Friday and we were all ready to go into rehearsal in a couple of months’ time. But that almost never happens. All of us can cast plays by thinking wouldn't he be good, or wouldn't she be good, but he or she has their own views on whether they want to do it or not. And it's to do with money, where you're doing it, how you're doing it, how often you rehearse, all those sorts of things. But there's still that mysterious area, the no-go area where you simply don't understand why an actor doesn't want to play a part. I think a director also has a similar area. I mean, I… I know that if I get a new play of… of modest competence at the worse, shall we say, if I read it four or five times, I could persuade myself to do it because I… I've thought, well, you could fix that, you could do this, you could do that, you could do that – disaster. You must read the play once and if you, when you finish it, you say, ‘I would like to see that’ – then do it. And if you haven't got that naked impulse, no. May be a very good play, but doesn't matter. Nerve triggers. No, it's… it's gut instinct, actually.

I've always been terribly interested in opera, partly because of if I'd been trained as anything, I was trained musically and partly because I think opera, if – and this almost never happens – if everything is at top level and people can act as well as they can sing and sing as well as they can act, it's the highest form of theatre in terms of imaginative excitement. And this relates, you know, to my whole belief in theatre, anyway. I… I think if you… this is not to denigrate film which after all is the… is the art form of our… our century, but when you go to the cinema you believe that the camera has actually seen what you're looking at. You don't look at something and have the camera say, now, will you imagine it's something else. You look at a beautiful wall with pictures on it and it… you don't imagine something else. It's literal in that sense. Of course, it often isn't, particularly with computers, but we like to believe that it is. Theatre doesn't do that at all. A… a man comes onto the stage and says, ‘You know I'm an actor, I know you're an audience, will you believe that I'm Duncan standing outside the castle and that behind me – or in front of me, probably, I would do – at the back of the auditorium, where I'm pointing, is this wall with this castle, having a very pleasant seat and all these lovely birds all chirping in the afternoon sun’. You can't film that because if you look at the birds you don't want that man rabbiting on, and if you look at the man, you say: ‘Show me the birds’. Theatre is about presenting something credible, not true, credible to the audience. Will you make believe with me, says the actor, will you imagine? And that's where Shakespeare is so absolutely extraordinary because he has that quality of provoking an audience's imagination almost more, I think, than any other writer ever, ever, ever. But if you add to that, music, and you add to that the comment that the music can make against the action and against the character, which is opera at its best, you get something absolutely incandescent. The first opera I did was way, way back in 1957, '58 at the old Sadler’s Wells, which was a modern opera by a… a British composer called John Gardiner on The Moon and Sixpence, Somerset Maugham's book. I had a slight feeling of duck to water again with that, living in music, working in music and trying to persuade the singers not to act in the operatic sense. In other words, to illustrate the emotions gesturally, but to be still. I mean the… the greatest actor, operatically, of our time was Callas who people always thought rampaged around the stage like a tiger, a lioness. She didn't. She stood quite still and very relaxed and an orchestra of 85 people seemed to be coming out of her body and she was as eloquent as the music was. She used the music. She subsumed the music. Extraordinary. And I… I got on, I mean, that was as much a religion for me as Shakespeare's verse and the importance of text. So I'd started my foot in the water and then in the mid '60s I did Moses and Aaron, the Schoenberg opera at Covent Garden with… with Solti, which was a huge, controversial success because it had an orgy in it and all the tabloids screamed ‘wasting public money on nudity’ and things like that which was, I suppose, to be expected. That's really not what Schoenberg's Moses and Aaron is about; however, it made it sell out two years running. And I then did The Magic Flute, Eugene Onegin again, Tristan and Isolde, all at Covent Garden.

When I left the RSC [Royal Shakespeare Company] in… in '68, I was looking towards film, television and opera, you know, just to sort of widen myself a bit. I, as I've said, I… I regret leaving the RSC in retrospect. I was right to go. I remember George Devine saying to me at the Court in the mid '60s, he said, ‘It's wonderful what you're doing at Stratford, but make me a promise. When you feel the walls coming in on you, just get out, don't hang around, just get out’ and I… I said: ‘Are you serious?’ And he said, ‘Yes, I am serious. I've seen theatre kill too many people’; and of course he didn't get out himself. Two years later he was dead from a massive heart attack with the walls coming in on him. Well, in '68 I felt the walls coming in on me so I got out in six weeks and suggested Trevor Nunn, who was happily there and eager to go, and he took it over and did it brilliantly. I should, I think, as I said, said I've… I've had it, ‘Can I have a year's sabbatical? I've been doing it for 10 years nearly, and then come back’ but I didn't. And one of the things that happened to me as a consequence, was that Colin Davis was just going to Covent Garden, replacing Georg Solti, and Colin asked me if I would join him at the Royal Opera and the Board's brief to us was that they wanted us to do to Covent Garden what, they said, I had done to Stratford, revitalise it in some way. And our proposal was that we would have a very small group of absolutely top-quality international singers, somewhat young, but I mean, we were talking about Kiri Te Kanawa and Tom Allen, Ileana Cotrubas. I mean not… not nothings, and that we would do all our new work with this group who would be with us at Covent Garden like for four or five months each year, and then when the productions were revived, then the stars, the Domingos and so on and so on could come with their own costumes and not rehearse very much and… and give that side of the audience their satisfaction, but that the… again, it's the company, I suppose. And they thought that was a wonderful idea and I spent 18 months trying to get it together, and they were so nervous about it that every time I tried to settle something, they prevaricated, so in the end I resigned because it just wasn't working. And we weren't getting any nearer our… our scheme. And I happened to be at a performance at Glyndebourne a few weeks after I'd resigned, though it was still confidential that I was going, and there was Arnold Goodman, the, the Chairman of the Arts Council, and he said: ‘Oh, hello, how're things going at Covent Garden?’ And I said, ‘Well, not very well actually. I mean, confidentially, I… I've just resigned’ and he said, ‘Marvellous, you should never have gone there in the first place, you know, you're… you're theatre, not opera’ and I said, ‘Well, I'd like to be opera as well’. He said: ‘No, no, no. Are you free for lunch on Tuesday week?’ And I said: ‘Yes’. He said, ‘Well, come round to the apartment for lunch’. So I went round to the apartment and he said to me: ‘Do you know Max Rayne? He's just been appointed Chairman of the National Theatre’. So I said: ‘No, how do you do?’ We sat down, had dinner – lunch – the three of us, and they said: ‘Olivier's very ill and we don't know how long he can continue. Would you be interested in helping out and taking over?’ And I said, ‘Only if Olivier is informed’ and they said, ‘We can't inform him yet’ and it… it then all stopped for 9 months until they actually did inform Larry, but there are two things… it's boring, but there's a myth that I left Covent Garden in order to go to the National. Absolutely wrong; and… and there's a myth that I somehow engineered to get in there, the whole Larry thing was extremely complex and, hardly bears going into. I mean when he… when he was actually told that I would… would take the job, he sent me one of his Olivier telegrams about that thick, you know, ‘Dear boy, I never dared to hope that you would come and help me in this way. It's absolutely superb. Come round for champagne at one’. So I went round and we had champagne and the next day Olivier was saying to the assembled National Theatre Company with Tynan at his side: ‘I knew nothing about this. This is a man from the opposition, the Royal Shakespeare Company, and I'm very upset’. And that was the little nest I had to look after. It was not a pleasant two years. I… I loved Olivier and I also found him to be extremely changeable and disloyal, and I… I tried to look after him and failed, but I tried to get him to open the magnificent South Bank but he wouldn't. He thought, I think, he wanted to preserve his resentment, and his resentment actually was that the Board hadn't told him about me early enough, and I think that's true – they should have told him. But it wasn't for me to tell him.
[Q] But he was a sick man. 
He was a very sick man and he wasn't just king of our theatre, he was emperor, he was God, he was it, and, you know, as I'm now aged 75 I start to realise what it must mean to be told that you can't do your job any more.
[Q] Especially to a man like him. 
Hmm?
[Q] Especially to a man like him. 
To a man like him who was comprehensive, who ate the world.

I'm very proud of what we all did at the National in… in moving it to the South Bank and, you know, it certainly wasn't – why should it be – wasn't appreciated that we'd been dealing with the… the Old Vic doing four or at most, five productions a year with a small company of actors, 35–40 at the most. And suddenly we were running three theatres, doing 18–20 productions a year and with the… with the staff, well, certainly over a 100 actors and a… and a staff of five or six hundred to boot. I mean it was a huge…
[Q] You never knew how much it was going to cost? 
Nobody knew, I mean, one of my favourite stories about the National Theatre is… is, an early Board meeting when we'd just moved in, and it was, of course, about three-and-a-half years late, because there are two kinds of time as we all know, there is time and there's builders' time. Anyway, there we all were. And the first thing on the agenda was to sign the lease, and the lease was a fully repairing lease, you know, meeting all sorts of liabilities, and the Chairman Max Rayne said: ‘We're not signing this. We haven't got any money for the upkeep of the… of the National Theatre. Who does it belong to?’ And there was a lot of head scratching, and they said: ‘Well, it… it doesn't belong to the Greater London Council. They've given the site. It doesn't belong to the South Bank Board because they built it, but they have no funds. It doesn't belong to the Arts Council and it doesn't belong to the Minister of the Department of Culture’. So Max said: ‘Well, when you've decided who it belongs to, we'll consider signing a lease if you give us enough money for the upkeep of the building and if you don't it can remain as it is’. So for about the next year, nobody owned the National Theatre but we were busily playing in it. One of the most dizzy effects of bureaucracy. I mean, I think what… what was very interesting about the whole opening of the National Theatre was the profession that was against it because it was scared. You know, there was that celebrated letter in The Times got up by Oscar Lowenstein of the Royal Court, signed by everybody including some very great luminaries in the future of the National Theatre like Richard Eyre, saying that the National Theatre was going to wreck the theatre because it was going to take away all talent, all resources and ruin the regional theatre, which was, you know, such palpable rubbish; anyway, there it was, profession against it, media against it because it's more fun. I mean, anything new has to be, you know…
[Q] And extremely expensive. 
And extremely expensive and art… and art, you know – Philistines, step this way! It was… the government was against it because of finance, the Arts Council was against it because it thought it would take resources that they would like to spend. When the Arts Council was saying to the regions, ‘We can't give you extra money because we've got the National Theatre coming’ and they were saying to us, ‘We can't give you more money because we've got to look after the regions’ you know – standard negotiating ploy. So nobody wanted the National Theatre at all except the public. From day one they came into that building and they said, ‘Ah, we like this place’, and there's no question if that hadn't been so – and that's a tribute to Denys Lasdun, the architect – if that hadn't been so, we wouldn't have survived.

There was a prominent Tory minister. I think it was Heseltine who… who said that the South Bank should be turned into a conference centre because we had enough theatres and we should go to Drury Lane and… and run the National Theatre from there. So I mean, it was not a… it was not a propitious moment to be opening the National Theatre or to be doing it, and we… we had a lot of controversy. On the other hand – and you know all about this because a lot of it is thanks to you – we were very rarely off the front pages and one way and another it made the place talked about, so… And I think this… the market place is so noisy, unless you shout a lot, nothing much happens.

There I was at the National Theatre trying to persuade Olivier to open it and trying to get it going and at that moment, having left Covent Garden, Glyndebourne swum into sight. And I went to Glyndebourne in 1970 to do La Calisto, a… a baroque opera by Cavalli, and immediately found a… found a sort of home. It's interesting actually because way, way back when I just left Cambridge I wrote to Glyndebourne asking if I could be considered as an assistant to Carl Ebert who was a great German director, who was in charge of Glyndebourne at that time, and he interviewed me in a taxi going from the Ritz to Victoria when he was going down to Glyndebourne, and it wasn't a very satisfactory interview. He seemed a little abstracted and I was a bit nervous, the taxi… Anyway, I thought, well, that won't ever happen and they said, ‘We'll let you know in a fortnight’ and nothing happened. And during the next week I was offered the Arts Theatre so I said yes, I mean, who wouldn't; very little money but your own theatre. So when Glyndebourne actually came through and said I'd got the job, I had to say I've taken another one, sorry, so there was a little froideur with Glyndebourne for some years because they're rightly very persuaded about who is a Glyndebourne person and who isn't. But I've survived happily at Glyndebourne, I would have done 19 productions there which rather amazes me, and if you work at Glyndebourne, it does mean you really don't want to work anywhere else in the opera world, I have to say. That's the only trouble. Their pay is not the best but you do go on the first day as the director and there's the set, either on the stage or in the rehearsal room, full, finished. And, I mean, to work like that is something that only happens sometimes if you're lucky at Bayreuth but it certainly doesn't happen anywhere else, you know. So it's… it's a good gig. And it's the only opera house in the world where I've been – and I've worked now in many – where the drama is actually as important as the music. So, you know, in… in many houses still, the conductor is the absolute boss and the… the director is somebody who shows the singers onto the stage like the butler, make sure they don't bump into each other and that's about it.

I've always loved Mozart right from boyhood and, I mean, the… the three Da Ponte operas: Don Giovanni, Così fan tutte and Marriage of Figaro are probably the peak of musical drama that you can think of. They are Shakespearean in the sense that you go on peeling them and finding new layers. I've done Figaro now about eight times, I suppose, all round the world and there was a time when… when the Don Giovanni that I did at Glyndebourne was on year after year after year. And one adjusted it slightly to new people and all the rest. I mean, what are the… what are the qualities? Well, extraordinary humanity, extraordinary ability to express wit and pain and atmosphere through music. I always say to singers, ‘You know, worry about the words certainly but remember that the words disguise what you're actually feeling often. What you're actually feeling you can hear in the orchestra. If the horns are braying, look out for being made a cuckold’. I mean that's a crude example. But the orchestration of Mozart is absolutely the nub of the matter and you have to know that and use it, and you have to persuade them not to act in… in any ordinary sense. It's a state of… one of the problems of operatic acting is that to sing operatically you make a centre of so much tension in the throat, I mean, really enormous, that it tenses the whole body round that point. And one of the reasons why tenors tend to be not very good actors is because that's the worst of their problems and they move around that tension point. They walk, and they… the people who can actually be completely relaxed in the body and yet have that tension going are quite rare, and, you know, one can help them and I do, or try to. But the… the essence of the Mozart opera is they… they have all the elegance, humour, poise of the enlightenment and underneath them, there is such moments of pain chromatically that really herald the whole of 19th century romantic music. I mean, they are absolutely astonishing pieces and you can… you know, my… my definition of paradise would be to do Shakespeare one month and Mozart the next, just go on directing it for eternity. That would be fine for me. And… what was wonderful about Glyndebourne was that… I mean, I like the new house very, very much, but the old house, shoebox though it was, peculiar acoustics though it had, was so intimate that it was possible to do there what it isn't easily possible to do in the new house or anywhere else because Mozart's ensembles are his great contribution to opera where five, six, seven people all address the audience directly saying the same words but meaning totally different things, so as a member of the audience, you cut from one singer to the other, yes? And each singer is saying, ‘I am the only one who's telling you the truth. You know me’. And there is a real communication, so you have six different views at once making a musical harmony and dramatic chaos. Now the problem is if you… if you're in the pursuit of musical harmony you just stand there and sing gently and discretely blending together, you lose the drama, so you need to overact the ensembles dramatically and... and yet make them disciplined vocally. Very hard, very exciting though. And no one has quite followed up. Verdi's has the beginnings, or shall we say the end of that tradition in the… in the great, big ensembles; Wagner really packs it in and, I suppose, opera houses are getting bigger so the communication of the one figure to the audience getting more and more difficult. It's… you can't do it in Covent Garden for instance. That's too big. But then you look at, you know, that wonderful opera house in Prague where Don Giovanni was done and it's so intimate, you think – candlelight, you could see the audience, the actors could see the audience, the audience could see the actors. And, you know, one of the great problems now of Figaro, Act IV, is it's set at night when no one can see who anybody is and they're all disguised. So originally Figaro comes on and says to the audience, ‘It's very dark’ and he says that in a candlelit theatre that's very light. So the audience say: ‘Oh yes, it's very dark. We'll imagine that’. They then can see who everybody is, although everybody is saying they can't see who anybody is. So you can do it with candles but because we can create darkness, if you create darkness the thing doesn't work at all because you don't know where anybody is. Very difficult. Wonderful though. I must say, when I'm doing opera, I… I feel privileged, you know, to… to live inside that kind of head, that kind of intelligence, that kind of creativity, but I yearn to go back to theatre and when I'm doing theatre – I yearn to go back to opera. It's a bit like having two ladies in your life. It's… it's very interesting the way it operates.

One of the joys of working in opera for me is just being inside the music and, you know, I'm fortunate in this respect. I… I don't mean that I'm… I'm tremendously sophisticated musically but I… I can certainly read a score up to… up to Verdi, yeah. In Strauss, Salome, I start getting it quite difficult, Schoenberg I get very difficult, Tippett – quite lucid at times but, I mean, it's just the fact that you… you think of the thing as a series of notes, not as a series of words. That's the mistake that… that I think many theatre directors coming into opera make. They think that what is said is what is important, whereas primarily what is important is what is heard or what the sound is and, of course, if you talk to a singer, you know, if they come in, you say, ‘You come in that door, you look across at him and you look away’, they'll… they'll do it, but they'll… they'll do it as an imitation, whereas if you say, ‘Hold it on him 'til the A flat and then… then look away’, they're easy. That's their world, so it's… it's very useful to… to live in the music from that point of view and, I mean, I have done a… a quite a lot of operas that I'm proud of.
[Q] Do you want to talk about The Ring?
Yes, I want to talk about The Ring because I spent three-and-a-half years learning it and… and did it the first year and it wasn't very successful, the second year it was moderately successful, the third year it was very successful, the fourth year it was epic and the fifth year was, why are they taking it off? But that's pretty much the way it always happens at… at Bayreuth because you've got this insane thing that because the old man in 1876 did the entire Ring at once, they must always do it at once. I mean, when Solti asked me to do it, I said, ‘We've got to do it two one year and two the next’ and he said, ‘Oh, absolutely’ and Wolfgang Wagner wouldn't have it. He said, ‘No, no, the house, we always do da-da, da-da’ and he wouldn't budge and Solti finally said to me, ‘Oh, come on, let's do it’ and we did it, but it was killing, the most killing experience. I mean, three sessions of work a day from April until the end of July absolutely flat out all the time. Wonderful to be in that house because it's an extraordinary theatre, an extraordinary place, but it was a bit like going through a war. I can't say I enjoyed it until afterwards. And I'm very, very, very sad that having learned it and having lots of ideas about it – because it doesn't leave you – that I've never been able to do it again. I would love to have. I mean, conductors always do their repertoire more than once but, I mean, I've done Figaro and I've done Giovanni and I've done several operas many, many times, but as far as The Ring is concerned, that was it. And there aren't very many places that do The Ring, let's face it, so I don't think that will cross my path again.

The myth is that singers won't do... won't do acting, won't... won't be directed. It's not true at all. The problem with most singers is that they're too directable, you know, whereas you say... ‘Well, why don't you stand on that table over there and sing it’ and they stand up and they sing it. And then you say, ‘No, it's a silly idea, sorry’, and they say, ‘What's the matter, isn't that what you wanted?’.  And I say, ‘Look, it's not what I want; it's what you want as the performer of this character singing this music at this particular time. It's not right, is it?’. ‘Oh no’ they said, ‘It's not right’; whereas an actor would probably say, ‘Silly idea, don't want to do that’ and not do it. See what I mean?
I remember there... there was a celebrated Ring at... Covent Garden a few years ago when John Tomlinson who's one of the great Wotans of our age is supposed to be carrying a spear and he... instead of carrying the spear he appeared to be carrying a... a lollipop, one of those things that people — you know, black and white — and I said to him, ‘Why were you... why were you carrying that?’. He said, ‘I don't know, I was asked to’. And I said, ‘Yeah but it's... it's nonsense’. He said, ‘Yes I know, but you know, you don't want to be difficult’. And I said ‘Well, if I was doing a... a play of The Ring and I said to my Wotan, here's your lollipop stick, he'd say: “Bloody isn't, not for me’. Actors wouldn't do it. I mean in a sense because of that man with a stick, singers are much more biddable than actors, but that mean... gives... brings me to the... the very large question whether you're dealing with opera or plays, what is a director? Because it's a hideously inept word. I mean a director is somebody who says you are to do this. Don't argue, do it, direct. And that is so far away from what this work really is. I don't think anybody, you know, I... I remember when I was... was 27 or something... 28... people said to me, ‘How can you tell Laurence Olivier how to act?’. And I said: ‘That's not what a director does. You don't tell people how to act. You actually provoke them to act and then edit, criticise and help them select what they've acted’. It's... it's not dirigiste, it's not telling, it's not insisting... at all. The old idea that, you... you know... you go into rehearsal and you say here's your costume design, there's your wig over there and here's the set and all the actors feel we're in a revival and we're probably not as good as the original cast. They have no contribution to how they look or what the set is like and therefore you've already sold the past to some extent.
I think the best time I've ever had almost in the theatre, was when I did Antony and Cleopatra at the National with Judi Dench and Tony Hopkins... Michael Bryant; because we had 12 weeks rehearsal. And for the first six weeks, we examined each scene, tried various physical shapes for it while Alison Chitty, the designer, sketched and at the end of six weeks as a unit, as a company again —same word — we had evolved what we wanted on our stage. Now that's not to say that a director doesn't say occasionally, I don't think we should do that, I think we should do that. There is an editorial function, which gets more and more acute as you get nearer to the first night because you... you know, it may be nice but it may not be necessary. It... it may be very misleading because of its indulgence, its richness. I mean, you've got to... you've got to be the editor but... that happens, you know, if you put a group of actors into a room with no director, a director will emerge, someone that everybody appeals to, saying how do you think that was? It's very interesting. You can't do it without.

The last scene of Cymbeline has 37 anagnorisis. Anagnorisis is a Greek word first encountered in Greek drama where somebody says, ‘Well, if that is so, then you must be my father’ and then somebody else says, ‘Then I'm your daughter’; ‘Then I'm your uncle’ and it goes… recognitions. Now he's been a real buggar, Shakespeare, in this scene because I… I worked it out once, I think if you put number 36 at number three, he didn't need any of the rest. I mean he's deliberately made it so you recognize him… you recognize… go on as long as possible. The consequence is that it's dreadful to stage because you suddenly find, you know, that I'm here and my uncle's over there because I've just had my aunt here, I mean, and it… it's, so I'd worked it all out as one did in those days, you used to have soldiers on models and you'd block it out and you'd give the actors.. Monday morning you read the play, Monday afternoon you began blocking it, which is this is where you move, this is where… so you gave them moves and people wrote them down. And on Friday afternoon, doing Cymbeline at Stratford in '57, I was working with Peggy Ashcroft for the first time in my life and a great star, a really great star for the first time in my life and… Friday afternoon, I'm in the last scene of Cymbeline blocking it out and I say, ‘Peg, on that line, you walk right across the stage.’ ‘Right’, she said, and she walked right across the stage and I went on and then she suddenly said, ‘Pete, that's a dreadful move.’ I said, ‘Is it?’ She said, ‘Yes, dreadful’. And I thought what the hell am I going to do? Do I say you've got to do it because if you don't the whole scene is rubbish. It won't work. Do I say I'm the director, you must, or please, or do I shout, do I scream, do I cry, what do I do? And I finally said ‘You're quite right. Could we just all sit down for a moment’, and we all sat down, and I said: ‘We're going to start redoing this production on Monday morning and I'm never going to block a play again’. And that's true, and I never have – lie, I always do in case the actors don't – you have to have a… a fallback but if you use it, you've failed. If you've got the right atmosphere and the right understanding the play will stage itself.

It's very interesting this question of, you know... why do you go back on things? I've done a lot of plays more than once. I've done four Hamlets, four Twelfth Nights, three or four Tempests... and I don't honestly remember what I did before. People always say to me, and how is it different? And I say I've absolutely no idea how it's different. I'm different; it's a different time, different place, different audience...
[Q] Different actors.
Yes, different actors. All I can do is set off on the journey again in order to try and make this play live in some sort as the author intended. Very dangerous that, because we all hide behind 'as the author intended' when we don't actually know what the author intended. I mean, you can interpret it in many, many ways but I... I think to set about doing a classic play on the basis that I have my interpretation of it, is totally wrong and phoney and false and ridiculous, finally. I mean... you can't do a play so that it speaks for itself. No play speaks for itself, but you do know the parameters within which the man worked. I... I'll give you an example. I'm at the moment... deep in Measure for Measure, which I am about to do. I did it once in America but I've never done it in this country and I happened... just before Christmas in New York where I was working, to go into an exhibition of Egon Schiele's work – the Austrian painter – and I love his work and I love Klimt's work — that whole period — and I suddenly thought, yeah, this... this is a way in... this is the way in for Measure for Measure... Vienna, Freud, Jung, all that, sexually obsessed, sewers, all, you know, and I've spent five, six weeks really on this looking at Schiele, thinking about it, and this week I realised I was imposing something on the piece because Measure for Measure has a very simple antecedent. James I was a new king and he'd written a book about kingship and how a king should behave. He was very shy. He didn't like public... speaking. He didn't like public appearances. On December 26th 1604 Shakespeare presented Measure for Measure at Whitehall Palace to the King for its first performance. It's about a duke who doesn't like crowds who is very nervous, very anxious about his record as a ruler and who leaves in order to let somebody else get their hands dirty so he can watch because he feels he should be an Angelo and he then watches what Angelo's doing and he gets actually hooked into power. He could stop all those people's sufferings like that, just take the cowl of his hood off as a monk. Now this has got nothing to do with Schiele, nothing to do with Vienna, nothing to do... so out it all went. Yesterday it was all chucked out. Everything. No, trust the tale, not your fantasies.

I remain a kind of divided Wagnerian. I mean I... I'm in awe at what he achieves and I do find it frightfully difficult with Wagner because he probably was the most odious artist that ever... ever walked the place of the earth. And... you know, we have this sentimental and romantic idea that if an artist is a great artist and does something wonderful, he must also be a great man. This is strictly not true; I mean I've known loads of artists who are not great men who are great artists and I think Wagner is the really bad example of this in extremis. On the other hand, musically he's so fantastic. His sense of humour is almost nil and that is worrying, you know. In the Meistersinger, second act, he tells the joke and then, in case we haven't got it, he tells it again so that the act is about 20 minutes longer than it need be. And he's not a bundle of laughs... and I don't like Parsifal because I think it achieves religiosity as he approaches death in a rather sickening way, like a conversion that isn't real. And I don't know... I mean I've been asked to do Tristan again; I did Tristan once at Covent Garden with Solti and loved doing it. And then I've been asked to do it in... 2009 when I shall be 79 and my wife said to me: ‘You're to say yes’. So I've said yes but it's a hell of a task, Tristan; it's quite a big one. So there's that, there's a continuing relationship with Glyndebourne, with Albert Herring and Midsummer Night's Dream and Cenerentola, all of which have recently been in the repertory there. But most of my life now is... is theatre and my own company and the summer season at Bath where we do three or four plays that I really want to do with the people I want to do them with. So I have few complaints.

My ancient passion for running things... because, you know, nobody but a lunatic would actually... want to run an organisation with millions and millions of pounds turnover, which was a hot potato politically which required constant negotiations with Whitehall and, at the same time, dash down to the rehearsal room and direct a play, unless they were slightly deranged. And I have to admit to that; I think I did 15 years hard labour at the National. The first six or seven years were tough because we were getting something established... again with great opposition, apart from the public. The last years were very satisfying and very happy. And it is wonderful, of course, to be able to walk into your office and think I will do Antony and Cleopatra next year and have nobody saying, oh no, you won't, which is the norm of life. But the price you pay for that freedom is really, really hard work. I mean my day at the National was up at quarter to six, read yesterday's papers... business papers I mean... dictate answers to letters, do all the office work and then get into the office at half past nine, go to rehearsal at 10, rehearse until half past four or five and then have meetings and... perhaps go to a performance that evening. I mean that was the norm — day in, day out — and I did that for 15 years and I have to say thrived on it. So I don't think anybody ever dies of hard work, I really don't.
So... I mean I've... as far as running things is concerned, I have two rules: You really must delegate and delegation means trust and delegation means trusting somebody to make mistakes and not to bawl them out for doing it if they did it with well intention. And you can't do a job like that unless you delegate. And the other thing, I think, is to surround yourself artistically with people who you think are better than you. I was enormously blessed when I started the Royal Shakespeare Company that Peter Brook came and joined as a fellow director and that Michel Saint-Denis — the great teacher and wise man of the theatre — joined too and for the first five or six years I had the two of them who were senior to me and better than me and more... kind of dangerous in... Peter certainly, was always looking for new things, new ways. And that was wonderful... and it also enshrined one of the great mysteries of theatre. I've seen brilliant, brilliant directors talk complete rubbish to actors and get wonderful results and I've also seen not very good directors talk brilliant analysis to actors and get nothing. And I don't know what that's about except actually the kind of chemical interplay between two people when they're talking to each other, whether they accept each other or whether they don't. It just makes me glad that no directors that I know go into politics because it's a very dangerous area I think, but interesting. I've seen most of the great directors of my generation at work because I've been their producer, their manager. And everybody's different; everybody speaks differently, everybody works differently and in a way, being a director is part and parcel of celebrating that difference. And I don't think... I wouldn't have lasted 15 years at the National for my own soul if I hadn't been running it as well as directing plays, or if I hadn't been directing plays as well as running it. I mean the two things kind of balance each other, made it all possible. But I used to take my sole holiday at Glyndebourne which was so different and I wasn't responsible for anything except the object that I was rehearsing. And that was... those were very happy years.

Perhaps I ought to analyse a little bit more what... being a director entails because I don't think people understand really what a director is; they think of him as some sort of autocrat — which he's not. And I think the first thing to be said is that doing a play, or an opera for that matter, is very much... is very different if you're doing a modern piece in which the author is available and comes to work with you, or whether you're doing a classic of the past where you have to find out so much about the context in which the work was originally given. Well if you're dealing with Samuel Beckett or Tennessee Williams or Harold Pinter or Peter Schaffer or Simon Gray... or, you know, these are just people I've worked with and have been blessed with... Michael Tippett in opera...then you have an absolute interplay. You can say, 'what do you mean here' and mostly the Samuel Becketts and the Harold Pinters of this world say I don't know what I meant, what does it say. And they make you look and see what it says. So you actually try and figure out what they meant. And that, of course, is quite a creative act in itself, which is much better than the author just telling you, this is what it meant. Sometimes authors are very bad directors of their own work because the actor asks what it means and they're told categorically what they means and they then act a category, just something very simplistic, so it lacks ambiguity. So it's... it's very, very different. I love working on a modern piece with the author; the only thing I do absolutely say is that if you're going to come as an author to rehearsal you should be there most of the time. You shouldn't come on special days when the author is present, which paralyses everybody. In other words, he should be part of the process and he should be able to say anything he wants about what the director's doing and the director should be able to say anything he wants about the text. That's how I've done... I don't know, 10 or 11 plays of Harold Pinter's and I think it sometimes slightly unnerves the actors when they see two people arguing like we do but our argument is so... is very well intentioned and very amiable. It's not destructive and it's not egotistical. So it works and it's very creative. If you're doing a historical piece, an old piece, a Shakespeare piece, one of the first things you have to do is to try and immerse yourself in the period of the piece itself, socially and historically, and try to understand why he wrote that as he wrote that at the moment that he wrote that for the audience he was writing for. All these are great imponderables and it's a lot of scholarly work, a lot of scholarly reading, which you don't bring into the rehearsal room with you because actors are not really very interested in scholarship; they want something visceral they can get hold of. But you can create an atmosphere, I think, where you... you know, the actors really respond to their duty which I think is not to say... had Shakespeare been writing now he would have done it like this, but to say Shakespeare wrote it wanting it to mean something like this and this is what we're trying to convey to you. That's very difficult to define and, you know, you can argue over it very, very much and very often.

If he's read the play lots and lots of times and he's talked to the author — if living — and he's studied the author — if dead — then he might be in a position to enter the rehearsal room. I don't myself believe that you should design the play before you've discovered the play and I don't believe you can discover the play without the actors. Now this is not common practice because the accountants have pointed out that if you build them the model of the set well before the rehearsal starts, it can have longer to be built and will therefore be cheaper. And you say ‘Yes, but it might not be right’, and they say, ‘Well, you're going to have to make it right before you go’. Anyway, that is... that is a dispute. Mostly you have to design the set before you meet the actors. What is happy and what is right is that you design the set with the actors and in fact you design everything with the actors. You have final editorial control but in the early days, I think the first time you meet the actors, you're not saying to them, we're going to do the play like this. You say the play is... targeting this area of experience, this area of life; how can we, by reading it, discussing it, finding it together, how can we make that clear? And at that point the play is a rather diffuse object, and as you work on it through the first couple of weeks, it narrows down, diagrammatically.
Now, I now do something which is extremely unpopular with the Stanislavsky/Method brigade. I say to actors: ‘I want you to come on the first day knowing your lines’. Now if you do that, you save a fortnight's rehearsal at a stroke. Also, if you're doing Shakespeare, part of learning the lines is also learning where the ends of the lines are, where the breath pattern is, quite a technical thing. Now, it's much easier to learn lines by wandering about with a book in your hand and remembering that when you go and sit on the sofa you say this line, or when you go... But it wastes time and therefore I now expect actors to come, having learnt it, and we sit round and play it to each other, sitting, discussing. Anybody can discuss anything; anybody can say anything. And we actually find out what the life of the scene is from that absolutely mutual examination. And that can go for five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10 days and you... you start to notice that the actors physicalize slightly certain speeches. They... they move or they half get up or, after a bit, they're actually standing up and that is the moment when you need to put it into the set as whatever the set may be, and at that point, it's probably some bits of tape on the floor, gummed down, there's a door and, if you really want to make a meal of exiting, you do that and open the door and push into it. Anyway, the rough spatial relationships are there. If you've been really responsible as a director you will have staged each scene in your book so that, in the event of nothing happening among the actors, you can give a quick diagram staging. But if you do that it is a sign of failure because, at the moment when you begin moving, the actors should know so much about it from their experience of sitting round and talking and acting it and acting it and acting it, that they actually stage it very fluently and very easily out of their own instinct. And occasionally you have to intervene and say, you know, ‘Don't go over there because, if you do, you're masking him’. But they're tiny things, and if it's working well, you can stage a very difficult scene very quickly because the actors know where they need to be and they know how they need to move. And that's because of the past work, not the present work.

You can then really start microscopic work. I mean, you know… you can spend half a day on two pages, actually getting right to the nitty gritty. Now it will depend on the play… what you're doing. I mean, if it's Shakespeare, much of your concern will be when Shakespeare indicates a half line, a gap… in the text. What is that there for? Does it indicate a move, a piece of physical business? Does it indicate a moment of stillness? Does it indicate a pause, or what? So much of that comes off the page still. If you're dealing with Pinter you have a plethora of pauses and silences written into the text. When I first started doing Pinter actors would say: ‘What's this pause here and we decide where we pause’. And I would say: ‘No, you don't; that pause is as eloquent as a line and I'll show you how’. Pinter's pauses are about the unsaid but if the actors don't know what is… what is unsaid, the pause will never hold and the pause will seem rather artificial, rather camp, rather silly. And I'm sure, you know, you can very easily see Pinter that's drummed into significance by all these pauses being held by actors who don't know why they're holding them. So you have to get a subtext going so the actor knows what's going on inside himself. The pause is a crisis point about the unsayable or the unsaid but nobody after a pause is in exactly the same state as they were in when they went into it. I get people to learn pauses as if they were lines and I remember indeed when… years ago when I did the first performance of No Man's Land with… with John Gielgud and Ralph Richardson, they both of them came from a theatre which didn't really use pauses very much and didn't understand them very well. So whenever there was a pause the other one thought the other one had dried so they would say: ‘Johnny, is that you?’ or Ralph would say…and Ralph would say… Johnny would say: ‘Ralph is that you?’. And I finally had to have the stage manager rehearse them through so that they said the line and then the stage manager said loudly: ‘Pause’. And finally we got the shape, the form, which we were supposed to end up with.
Now, now we're in deep water. The tradition of Stanislavsky and the tradition of the American Method is that the actor says: ‘Who am I, what do I want, what is my motivation, what is my emotional centre, what is my demand, what is my emotional demand?
[Q] Who are my parents?
Yeah. And they… it'd go on and on and on like that and then they say: ‘Now what do I say?… to be or not… I don't want to say that'. So you… you improvise emotionally without words and then you go and look at the text. So the feeling comes before the form. I have absolutely no doubt that real, credible theatre — I use the word credible, not true, because theatre is not true, there's nothing true about standing on a stage saying somebody else's lines in somebody else's clothes — there can be something credible but theatre that is credible has to, I think, put form before feeling. Because what we've got is the form, whether it be a Mozart aria or whether it be an Aeschylean huge speech to be delivered in a mask, there is a form which sustains the piece and it's the tension between the form and the feeling which actually excites the audience. If you feel, you can't express the form. If Ophelia comes out from the nunnery scene and says: ‘Oh what a noble mind is here o'erthrown’, in hysterics, she's got 14 lines which is very like a sonnet of antithetical analysis of what he could have been and what he is. And you can't do that if you're sobbing your guts out. Inside she's sobbing her guts out and using the words in order to keep control. So the form comes first and then the feeling, and whether you're singing an aria or whether you're working in a mask or whether you're doing Shakespeare's blank verse or whether you're doing Pinter's pauses or whether you're doing Beckett's antitheses they are all formal disciplines. The mask is exactly like the form of the aria or the form of the verse, or the form of the… of the pauses and the writing of Pinter or Beckett. And that's something I've written about and tried to get down into two books about the nature of mask. Because I think mask in that sense is anything formal — the formal discipline. And I suppose that's what my whole life has been built on, that and the search for a company.

One has a responsibility as a director, and as an actor, not to mess about with the classics. I mean I don't mind people, as it were, drawing silly bits onto a classic, but they ought to be seen as foolish as they are because Shakespeare is rather good. Shakespeare does rather know better than us. Now, if you translate what we do to Shakespeare to the musical world, I mean it's the equivalent of going into the opera house and people saying: ‘Oh yeah, we don't have the overture to the Marriage of Figaro anymore; I mean it really isn't necessary. We get straight into the action, it's terrific’. I've seen Hamlet with no first scene. I mean who wants all those boring people wandering about on battlements with ghosts I mean, says the director, and cuts it. I mean it is absolutely criminal and critics, in my view, should get up and blow the whistle on people. But they don't know the texts well enough themselves and they regard it as rather with it and cool and… and rather clever to be like that. I don't think it's clever at all; I think it's a… it's a demonstration of arrogant stupidity but there you are. And then, you know, somebody comes along and, and does the full text, people say, my goodness, it isn't as difficult as all that, I can understand it. Well, of course you can understand it if you actually tell the story that Shakespeare told. But if you cut half of it you can't. I suppose that in every Shakespeare play at this moment in time there are half a dozen, perhaps a dozen lines, which have aged so badly that they really are incomprehensible to a modern audience, but there're not more. And people who hide behind the idea that Shakespeare is incomprehensible don't know how to comprehend him and that's… it's just as simple as that, as far as I'm concerned. So, you know, I'm now called an Iambic Fundamentalist by my enemies and I'm regarded as a pedant. But when I started doing this I was regarded as a revolutionary who did nothing about… who knew nothing about Shakespeare and shouldn't be let loose near him. I mean that was… when I went to Stratford and started the RSC, half the media were saying: ‘Look, this man does Cat on a Hot Tin Roof and Waiting for Godot, he's a modernist, he knows nothing about Shakespeare. We don't want him. You know, he'll be doing this and doing that and doing the other.' So one… one sees one's reputation going in waves of action and reaction, of being a boring traditionalist and then being a revolutionist and what is the truth? Well, the truth is you do what you do because you believe it's what you should do and that's all really what you can do. You can't be influenced, I think, by media reaction to you. Of course one is depressed by it, of course one doesn't like bad notices. Of course one doesn't like being misunderstood. But there's absolutely nothing you can do to trim your own sails; you have to be what you are, because if you're not what you are, then you really have no possibility of looking yourself in the mirror… I mean. So I've had my ups and downs with the media but I rather… I'm rather excited by the media as a… as an entity because we live in a terribly complex society which is so full of noise and cries and adverts and promotions and this and that, that unless you've got millions of pounds that you can spend on advertising, the only way to point out that you're doing the play is to shout very loudly to the media and hope they'll pick it up. It's a sad fact but true, so we need the media, I think rather more than they need us.

I think the interesting thing is that... there is a kind of... golden mean that you're left with, with each piece of work. It's after the public have decided, it's after the critics have decided, it's after the media has decided, it's probably after the run has finished. There is a trace which is nearly always accurate...
[Q] Yes. 
Nearly always.
[Q] Yes. 
It may have had very bad notices, but there it is because the public say no no, this is worth something.
[Q] Yes.
It may have had very good notices and not been consistent.
[Q] Yeah, absolutely. 
So I think, on the whole, we live in a... providing there's freedom of speech...
[Q] Truth will out.
Truth will out, as long as there's enough voices and they're not gagged...
[Q] Yes...
Or corrupted...
[Q] Yes.
That is a worry in this day and age that we're getting more and more nannyish... in you know, in the way we're treated.

Once you get to the latter stage in rehearsal as a director, if you've observed the form and you've generated the feeling, there's then a period which is almost practice, when the actors simply have to run the play and... and try and make an emotional journey inside themselves which sustains it and which is accurate and makes them feel comfortable. Then comes the last stage — the fourth or fifth stage — which is entirely about editing, where you say that was very nice but we don't need it, or that pause has got to go, or that isn't, you know. And now we look at the whole thing we don't need... And that can be quite worrying to the actor because bits get pulled out; cuts are very difficult always, but if they're right, they heal terribly quickly. If they're wrong they go on bleeding; you know you've got to be very careful. But none of us know in this business — actor or director — what we've done until we ask the audience. I mean when I'm directing a comedy I think I know where the laughs are, but I don't. Maybe I get 40% of them right.
[Q] And nor do the actors actually.
Nor do the actors, no, no. So that the first... the first time a group of actors meet an audience with a comedy is absolutely terrifying because it goes off like a great uncontrolled beast with laughter... muffles and distorts the next line which the actor speaks into the laugh, so you miss the next laugh because they haven't heard the payoff. Most comedic acting, you know, is... is about having a clear establishment, a clear feed. The payoff only works if the feed is really understood. That's why, if you... if you talk to people like Morecambe and Wise they say that the thing that matters is the straight man not the clown.
Clowns are of course, another... another thing altogether and a very great problem in Shakespeare because he did have clowns – two great clowns – in his company. And... I mean a clown, by definition, is someone who, when they walk on the stage, makes the audience laugh without doing anything. And you can't say it's because he walks funnily, because that's not why they laugh; it's just because he just is funny. 
[Q] It's like Tommy Cooper.
Yeah, Tommy Cooper, absolutely, absolutely. And I... I know from bitter experience that actors who try and act clowns are not funny, but somebody who is a... is a clown, given Shakespeare's texts, gets laughs when the audience don't actually understand quite what he said. Because the writing is so meticulous in order to present the audience with the possibility of laughter that they laugh. But you need to have it delivered by a clown.
So once you've met the audience and you've seen what they tell you, you then go to work again.
[Q] Arthur Lowe doing Stefano.
Arthur Lowe doing Stefano, absolutely, absolutely.
[Q] He was an incredibly funny character.
Absolutely and that wonderful guy I had last...
[Q] The fall guy.
The guy I had at Bath last year in Much Ado playing Dogberry.
[Q] Oh him, yes.
Oh, what's he called? He was wonderful because he just was funny. He didn't have to work at it. No. But the period once you've started... I mean it's something... I... I'm told I started previews, that they didn't exist...
[Q] Yes, you did. You started them at Stratford. 
Yes, because it seemed to me...
[Q] By John Barber [sic], now dead.
Yes, because it seemed to me absolute nonsense that, you know, you had a dress rehearsal on Monday at Stratford and then you opened on Tuesday. And usually there was... the critics said, you know, ‘This is rather a restrained evening, it doesn't quite work’ and, if you ever got them to come back and see the plays way on to the season, they were transported with joy to find that it was alive. I mean every... every production needs a week of running in... and work during the day.
[Q] Playing to an audience.
Playing to an audience. And it's not just simple things like how do we get a laugh here. It's just being absolutely sure that you're telling the story. The primary act of an actor standing on the stage is to tell a story to an audience, and if at any moment the audience don't understand the story or don't know where it's gone, you've lost them and that's it.

One does make mistakes. I mean I've made, I suppose, 10 or a dozen in my 50 years which isn't perhaps too many. I think that it's my responsibility if I've chosen somebody, to stick with them as much and as long as I can, but sometimes you get a situation where you made a mistake and... 
[Q] There's nothing you can do about it.
Nothing you can do about it.
[Q] Except keep their spirits up.
Keep their spirits up or replace them.
[Q] Ah.
And that's... that's not happy, for anybody.
[Q] No.
But I remember when I was running the National Theatre, almost inevitably on the Friday when a play had been in rehearsal for a week, somebody else directing it, there would be a knock on my door late Friday afternoon and the director would come in and he'd say: ‘Look, and I know I wanted him but I'm afraid it's impossible... impossible’.
[Q] So you have to get rid of them.
Yes, exactly. And I would say, ‘Listen, you picked him and, you know, we all agreed that you were right to pick him because you wanted him. You've got to try and make it work. If in the last week’... He said: ‘What?’. I said: ‘Yes, in the last week, if you can show me the play working and it isn't working because of him, then we might do something about it, but not until you've had a real go at making it happen’. And I always kept to that.... which... most of them, it... it died.
[Q] Really...
I mean most of them didn't... the worry disappeared... yeah. Yes. But it's... I mean it is 70% casting, but that's not a really accurate remark because it's impossible to make a play work if you've miscast it badly.
[Q] And yet an ensemble works so well.
Yes, but an ensemble... an ensemble casts according to talent and it's... and miscasting is... I mean... I don't mean miscasting in the sense of not the right type. I think a lot of very interesting stuff in the theatre comes out of casting people who are not the right type, who are stretched into areas which they didn't know they possessed. And that usually works — dangerous though it may be — but it's the person who just isn't up to it in basic talent or technique that we're talking about. And that... and that's the gamble. It's...It’s... I mean it's a cruel business in the sense that if a mistake — a primary mistake — has been made, you owe it surely to the author, the other actors, the theatre and the audience not to allow it to go on.

I think that... people like me are extraordinarily lucky in that we do a job that we have an obsession for. I mean I really would sooner go and rehearse a play than go on holiday, just in basic terms. When people say to me, ‘Well why do you do so much, why don't you... don't you need time to recharge your batteries?’. All those sort of clichés which are really ways of saying I do a rather boring job and I'm... I'm just longing for another holiday, which alas most people, I suspect, do. I mean I go off to work because I want to and I want to go on doing it and I get paid money to live in Chekov's head for eight weeks... to be alongside Shakespeare. I mean it's extraordinary, I get paid money for doing that. And I... I think it is an obsession — a possession — and it hasn't declined over the years, 53 odd years I've been doing it. It’s... it hasn't changed at all, that desire, that excitement and that longing to go on with it. It... it takes a heavy toll which you don't notice. I mean you don't have much spare time; you don't have much spare time for your family actually. If you're running a theatre as well, you can't have. And I think I... I've suffered for that and people around me have suffered. I've been married four times, and I still love everybody. I mean it’s... it's not... I haven't moved into the hate quotient or anything like that; I think if you love somebody that remains in some sense.
[Q] By everybody you mean your past wives.
Yes, yes. And there are... there are four people there that I am, in various ways, extremely fond of. The fact that my fourth wife has been the most — as I still live now — marvellous in every respect, doesn't go against the other three.
But it has made it, I suppose... I mean my living, my life, my obsessions, must make it very difficult to live with, I see that. And my children shrug it off rather; they... they giggle and they say, well, we, you know, we knew that's what you... from an early age we knew we didn't see much of you and that's it. And, curiously enough, my eldest son is a... is a television film producer. My oldest daughter's in PR; my second son's a very brilliant director — Edward — now coming into his prime, really fantastic. My daughter Lucy, is a stage designer; my daughter, Rebecca, is in Hollywood making a film at this moment and was a wonderful Rosalind at Bath in As You Like It and I think is going to have a superb career. And then I've got one coming up to 14 who casts her eyes anxiously and... and greedily towards the stage and towards music and towards musicals, but I suspect is going to become a writer, I rather hope, because she writes fluently and wonderfully. But, you know, none of them have I encouraged to go into the business or not to go into the business; I don't think that's my function. They all say that I appear to have so much fun they couldn't resist having a look themselves. So that's something, I suppose.
And I have, you know, it's... it’s a very sociable profession. A writer sits down and looks at a blank sheet of paper every morning; I go into a room and 20 faces look at me and say make us do something, go on, go on. So you have to. That compulsion is... I can't say I'll just go out for a cup of coffee; I have to do it and that is the pressure, I think, and the... and the excitement. So I have hundreds of friends, not friends, acquaintances, hundreds of people I've worked with, but very, very few friends. That's partly because it's all so sociable anyway and partly because of time. I've got one or two close friends from days gone by; you and I have been friends for... what, 50 years nearly.
[Q] Yes.
Yes, it's true. So, you know, no complaints on that level but, above all... such a feeling of joy that I have been able to do what I wanted to do. That sounds awfully smug. Most of the work I've done I am, by definition, not satisfied with because, to actually reveal a masterpiece and get it all right, all in its component parts, whether it be an opera or whether... whether it be a play, is almost impossible, almost. But you sort of know, as a director, after the event how near you got to it and I've often got very near it and it hasn't been recognised, and I've often not got very near it and been told I have. I mean so, the only person I can really listen to finally, in all humility, is me. And... last year I did Waiting for Godot at Bath and that's the nearest I've ever got to that play and it's also the nearest I've ever seen anybody get to that play. And I got such a charge from that. But that's only happened to me probably half a dozen times in 50 years. It doesn't mean all the rest of the work was... was... nothing but it does mean just how near did you get to the author. That's the only way I can describe it, how near did you get to what they were at, what they were asking for and what they were demanding. It's a heavy responsibility and... and the easy way out is to say, well, you know, I had this dream and I... I dreamt of a production which was really up to the minute and everyone was on motor bikes and... and you make a whole fantasy, a kind of Fellini like fantasy which ones sees all the time. And you think, well, I'm not really very interested in... in directors' subjective reactions; I'd like their... I'd like them to tell me what they think of this play, in... in much more complex terms. It's very easy to have concepts.
[Q] Or to show me this play.
Show me this play. It's very easy to have concepts; it's much easier to have concepts than to show someone the play.

[Q] Of all the work you've done, if you were to pick out four or five pieces that were particularly memorable. Which would you pick out? I know which I would.
It's almost an impossible question.
[Q] Really Peter?
Yes, yes. The…. The… that Godot that I just spoke of in Bath has to figure. I mean going… going way, way, way, way back, the Twelfth Night at Stratford with Dorothy Tutin and Geraldine McEwan, the Troilus and Cressida in the Sand, the whole of the Wars of the Roses… The Homecoming — Pinter play. The Oresteia? The Oresteia. That was new country. I've always been obsessed by masks because of this thing of, finding the form and then finding the feeling. Now, if you have the form of a mask put on you, you have to deal with the feeling.

David Warner, Hamlet, The Ring... the heart of The Ring was right, I know that and, you know, there was... it took us several years to get close in around it but it was. The Wars of the Roses, The Oresteia, Antony and Cleopatra. I don't know, I don't look back very much...
[Q] No.
 So I'm not... I was terribly... I was terribly... I mean... As You Like It has a very soft spot in my heart because I think I found out things about that play which I hadn't seen before — the dark side of it.
[Q] I don't think you lent towards it very strongly before.
No.
[Q] As a play to do.
No, I didn't. Well, it was largely because Vanessa Redgrave had been so marvellous in my early years at the RSC, which I didn't direct, that she cast a very long shadow. But my daughter, Rebecca I thought... had her own contribution to make to it.
[Q] Yes, she gave something new to it.
Oh, she did, oh she did, undoubtedly.

I've had my toe in the water of films quite often and I've done... you know, a reasonable amount of television, She's Been Away — the Poliakoff film — Camomile Lawn. And I... I love working with the camera; there are things that I've never quite felt at ease with. One is the fact that in the theatre I'm used to challenging an actor — albeit often in a very gentle way, I hope — with finding things in himself or herself for this part, you know, and we have four, five, sometimes six weeks, in order to find that, and it's quite an interesting psychological journey. If you do that on a film set you photograph the initial agony. In other words, on a film set you've got to more or less accept what people are and what they do. You can't push it around because you photograph the strain, not the achievement. And the thing that's always fascinated me about film is its ability obviously, to capture forever, we hope, the moment.
So I mean the two films I'm proudest of, I mean...I suppose, one was The Homecoming which was a Harold Pinter play which was done with the cast which had played it on... in London and on Broadway for a long while. So I mean the play was absolutely part of their bloodstream so we were able to translate it into screen terms very speedily and very lightly and I think lost very little, and I like that film. And the other film which is something absolutely different was Akenfield which was... I mean, this is a vanished age indeed, early '70s. Cyril Bennett, who was then the Controller of London Weekend Television, asked me if I'd like to do something and I said I'd just read this book by Ronald Blythe called Akenfield and it's set in Suffolk where I was born and it seemed I could hear my grandfather talking. And he said, ‘Well, think how you could make a film for us out of it’. So Ronny and I did an 18 page treatment, 18 pages only, not a script. And on the strength of 18 pages and the fact that we were going to film it at weekends, with real people in Suffolk improvising, he gave me £100,000 and said come back in a year with the film, which would not happen in these days; there would be several accountants' meetings and a great deal of carry-on but that is what we did. And for one year we went on the 06:05 train from Liverpool Street down to Ipswich; the unit was a sort of floating group of people who happened to have Saturday and Sunday off, and they... they came and we returned on a Sunday night and I ended up with about 48 hours of film and then made it into... it was all improvised on situations and it... it's magical that film can capture somebody inventing something and saying something. Of course what amateurs cannot do is repeat it and you mustn't ask them to. So whatever you get, you hold and you develop on from there.
[Q] So you had no professional actors at all?
None at all, none at all. And the other... I mean...
[Q] All local people. 
All local people and it was... it was a wonderful time for me being back in the area where I was born and... you know, I could hear all my family and that Suffolk accent. I just... it was... it was a wonderful experience. It's...
[Q]Who wrote the music for it?
Well, I was just going to get onto that because originally the music was supposed to be by Benjamin Britten who hadn't done a film score since The Royal Mail [sic] in the '30s. And he said he would do it and then alas, he had his heart attack and it never happened, he couldn't do it. But I used Michael Tippett's concerto on a Corelli theme which is a very lush, romantic, but neurotic piece... beautiful piece. And Michael was a great friend; I did The Knot Garden at Covent Garden and Ice Break at Glyndebourne. I miss him very much. And I just did Midsummer Marriage in Chicago so... Tippett's been an important influence on me. Britten, I didn't know well but that is a sadness that he didn't do that. He asked me to do the very first production of A Midsummer Night's Dream but... in 1960... but I was... I was in the midst of starting the RSC so I couldn't. But I did it much later and next year it's... this year it's on at Glyndebourne for the 24th year, I think, 24 years.

There are some great musicals which I love, Guys and Dolls, West Side Story, My Fair Lady. Rather keen on Pal Joey but now I'm running out at a rate of knots. What I don't like about musicals is that they are sentimental, they patronise the audience, they don't challenge the audience and they really don't, I think, win any converts for what I call theatre. I mean I think they're nice escapist bilge but, you know, that's fine. But I can't be expected to like them, if I don't. So I like the really good ones but most of them are worse than Gilbert and Sullivan. It's also, I suppose... it's difficult if you've been brought up as a musical snob, which I am, although I try and be broadminded but it's frightfully difficult. I mean how are you on the rock and roll time? You know... I stop at The Beatles and that's about it.

I believe strongly that we've got… how we look after culture, seriously wrong in this country. I mean it does seem to me that if you believe — which I do and I think most people do — that there should be state support for education, for medicine, for transport, for the essentials, then way, way down the list and peanuts, comes culture. And culture doesn't get its due, never has from either political party. My experience of a lifetime of arguing with Whitehall is that the… the party that's not in power is always very, very keen on culture and supremely indifferent to it once it's in power. And it seems to me that we have a very rich culture which is actually part of our educational picture; it's almost like a continuation of our education. It would help our young for culture to be higher up the agenda… not culture in the sense of highbrow, effete, elitist but culture in the sense of a bloody good story, bloody well told, in whatever medium. That's a help to life, that's a help to living and I've always believed, ever since I was a teenager and the Arts Council was founded, that we ought to pay for it and look after it. I mean if instead of spending a billion pounds on the Dome, we'd spent a billion pounds on the theatres and concert halls of the country, this country would have been transformed, internationally as well as nationally, no question. We are a supremely imaginative race, we're supremely creative. We have very little regard for our creative people and we don't nurse what we've got. And one of the worst things, of course, was with the coming of Thatcher and that insidious idea that the only thing that mattered was the market and the only thing that mattered was monetarism. The very fragile structure of subsidy was destroyed, by them forcing us to go into private sponsorship, the argument being that we live in a mixed economy, therefore culture should be supported by mixed economy. Now I… I just do not believe that. I think, if we were properly rewarded and properly backed, productivity would be much better, standards would be much better and what the nation is given right across the board, not just London but the whole country, would be much better. We're talking about almost nothing, instead of which most of the organisations now have huge departments of 20, 30, 40 people whose only job is to raise money, raise sponsorship. It distorts the subsidy levels and it really means that we're out with a begging bowl. It… it's not secure, it changes very much from year to year and it also means, I think, that you have to keep one eye on what you're doing. Now, you… because, you know, whatever happens I think the man who pays the piper, to some extent, always wants to call the tune. I'd much sooner Government be calling the tune myself, than I would all the various sponsors who are looking eagerly at the size of their advertising type and all the rest of the chicanery that goes on. I… I think that to…to look after things properly, we need… we need to believe that there are votes in the arts and of course politicians don't. They don't go to the theatre very much anyway; they're down at the Houses of Parliament and they don't really concern themselves with it as a living force. And, if they did, I think we might get some… some action. That, I think, is my single biggest failure in life that, you know, I went out on a limb, I tried very hard to organise opinion and I made a lot of noise. And my Chairman at the National kept saying to me, do shut up, you're not helping. But I believed I was and I still believe I was. I mean I don't see the point of living in a democracy if you can't say what you think.

When I was running the RSC there was still a Lord Chamberlain — the censor. Peter Brook did a show called US, which was a kind of sub-Brechtian critique of the American presence in Vietnam and this was at a time when it was still thought jolly good that they were in Vietnam. It hadn't gone wrong... this is '65, '66. I knew we had to get a license for this play and I knew that it was politically not likely to meet approval, but it had nothing morally or ethically or sexually dangerous; it was simply... it’s politics. So we got no reply from our submission for a licence until the last week, the week before we opened. I was getting quite nervous and I was rung up by St James Palace and was asked if I would go and take sherry with the Lord Chamberlain after office hours in a day or two. So along I went and I was sat down on the sofa and given my sherry and the Lord Chamberlain said to me: ‘Hall, this play US, I mean I haven't read it myself of course but my readers tell me that it's really not on’. And I said, ‘Really?’. And he said, ’Yes, I mean, do you think it right that a theatre in receipt of public money should do a play criticising our great ally with whom we have a special relationship?’. And I said, ‘Yes I do, if that's what we believe’, having thought about it and considered the question, ‘Yes, I do’. He said, ‘You know, I cannot agree with you, I think it's absolutely reprehensible’. And I said, ‘Aren’t we talking about free speech?’, and he said, ‘Look, there's no point in prolonging this discussion, drink up your sherry, that's the end of it, Hall. I have to tell you I'll be having a word with your chairman in the morning’. Fortunately my chairman was the same wonderful Sir Fordham Flower who, as his maverick act, had got me into the RSC and into London in the first place. And he rang me up the next morning and said, ‘What is all this nonsense?’. And then I said, Well, you know, that's it, they don't want us to do it’. And he said, ‘Well, do you believe in what's being done?’ and I said, ‘Yes. You can argue about it but certainly I believe in what is being done’. He said: ‘Well fine, go ahead; see what happens’. So we were then given... we said we were going ahead. We cut one or two tiny, tiny things, not very much, and we got a licence which was only for the weeks of the run of this particular play. I mean it was one of those civil service fudges so that under no circumstances could this be seen as a precedent for more anti-American propaganda. And it was done and I survived, which I wouldn't have done had I had most kinds of chairmen, I have to say. I mean a phone call from the Lord Chamberlain saying your chap is not playing the establishment game and that would have been the end of it. So, you know, I've had many years in politics, although I've been, in theory, in the theatre. And I like politics, although I despise them but they interest me and I also... I find committees and the way committees work extremely interesting. I mean otherwise I couldn't have survived all these years of sitting on Boards. There's a moment with most committees when you can reverse the decision completely if you pick it at the right moment and it's fascinating to see how people dance round that moment. On the whole I think committees come up with the positive answer, but it's...it’s quite thin ice sometimes.

One of the interesting things about the theatre is that from time immemorial it's been dying, and it's always dying, and it's always going through some awful convulsion. I mean, when I look back to 1950, '51 when I was starting, there was no National Theatre, there was no Royal Shakespeare Company, there was no Royal Court, there was no Almeida, there was no Donmar. It was the West End, the West End, the West End doing rather middlebrow, middleclass plays; the sort of stuff that you now get for free on television. And that's one of the problems that I think the West End is facing that the smaller theatres – medium to small theatres – that need plays can't afford to do plays and, if you look at the lists, you will see that most of the plays have come from subsidised theatres. And, in that sense, the subsidised theatre is keeping the theatre alive and jolly good luck to it. I think, myself, there's going to be some kind of convulsion in the theatre, some kind of new resolution... revolution. It feels to me as if it's... as if it's time. I feel we've come to the end of a curve; that may be because I'm resisting retirement but it... it certainly feels like an end. I think the beginning, I don't know where it will happen or how it will happen, but I cannot believe that theatre is in any sense threatened because, as our means of communication and our means of entertainment is more and more and more screen-based, I think the fact of going to a live performance with a live person saying will you imagine with me becomes more and more special, more and more peculiar, a bit of hard work sometimes, as compared with the way that the screen does the work for you, but nonetheless very provocative and exciting and unforgettable. And I believe that's... that's going to increase, that's going to last... that's going to last.
I hope Shakespeare will continue to live for another couple of hundred years at least but we have to recognise the fact that Shakespeare's language is becoming more and more ancient and just as Chaucer's language is ancient to us, in a hundred years time people will probably find Shakespeare quite hard to understand. At this moment they don't. If an actor understands it and phrases it correctly he can make an audience understand it, where individually they wouldn't by reading it. And that's exciting. But, if he speaks it badly and he doesn't know what he's saying, then of course it compounds the problem, it just convinces the audience that Shakespeare is un-understandable. So I think a clarification there is... is going to happen, has got to happen, because otherwise you will have audiences wondering what Shakespeare's all about... and the whole thing running down. I highlight Shakespeare because he's the best, and if you can act Shakespeare you can act anything, whereas if you can act anything, you don't necessarily act Shakespeare; it's different. I mean it's the Olympics test – Shakespeare – no question. And I think from that sense, it... it's likely to last another couple of hundred years. The theatre probably will become even more elitist and even more specialised; there's nothing particularly wrong with that. I mean a Picasso painting is elitist, it doesn't invalidate it; it's only one of them. And I think we... we're too keen on watering everything down to a kind of egalitarian sludge and I think that's a great danger which the theatre can combat. In that sense I think we might even surprisingly see theatre move slightly to the right; it's usually nestling safely on the left, but it's difficult to know what the left is now. Well there is no left. There isn't, is there? There are different forms of right. It's terrible, terrible.
[Q] Well the theatre is... it always will be and it always, except in the Elizabethan days, has been... Yes. And I don't think there's any... the use of the word. The word has got a nasty sound...Yes... but the fact is, that it will never be a hugely popular taste, never... No... I think it can be, but because of that, it's able to do all sorts of things that the other media can't do because they're up there speaking to too wide an audience. Yes, I think that's true. I think it's able to take all sorts of risks and move all sorts of boundaries because it's playing to, on the whole, a sophisticated audience...Yeah... you know...absolutely and I think that's good. I don't think anybody should be ashamed of the fact.
No, nor do I, nor do I.
[Q] But I mean, you say that to my favourite party and you're in trouble. 
Oh, I know. I know. Well... I always remember that... you know when we were at the National, and we shut the Cottesloe because we didn't have enough money to keep it open... up to that point, the GLC [Greater London Council] — Ken Livingstone and Tony Banks were there — had been very cool, not to say hostile, to the National as an elitist palace, whereas what they really wanted was, you know, a community centre in the East End where... a community centre in the East End where people could make music together and all that sort of thing. But suddenly, when we did that, I had a phone call saying, you know, ‘What would it cost to... reopen the Cottesloe?’. And it was Tony Banks. I said, ‘About half a million’, he said, ‘Well, Ken and I would like to come and see you and have a chat about this’. So they did and they gave us half a million. And we reopened the Cottesloe and they only gave it because they were just going out of business because Margaret Thatcher had closed them down, and they did it in order to spite her. That's the only reason, and I thought, you know, that's politics for you.
[Q] I didn't know that...Oh yes... I knew the GLC had given the money but I didn't know the reason... 
That was the reason; that was the reason. And they had not... they had not been on our side at all before then.
[Q] No.
