redmond.ohanlon

British author Redmond O’Hanlon writes about his journeys into some of the wildest places in the world.  His travels have taken him into the jungles of the Congo and the Amazon, he has faced some of the toughest tribes alive today, and has sailed in the hurricane season on a trawler in the North Atlantic.  In all of this, he explores the extremes of human existence with passion, wit and erudition.

For 20 years, it really helps you write. It's marvellous. You know, it's fantastic. And then, suddenly, like Mummy said, you find you're taking it more to go shopping or having to face the fuckers in the Co-op. So now I've stopped.
[Q] And then what?
What do you mean, then what?
[Q] Well, what do you do then, when you've realised that? You stop?
You stop.

Amphetamine, what a wonderful, wonderful thing. Marvellous. If you just take it, half a five-milligram pill in the morning to the Bodleian, say, half in the afternoon. Bang! You can't speak in the evening, but then you don't need to, if you've been married a bit. Magnificent. Really wonderful. It just does everything it's meant to do. Raises your intelligence, raises your capacity for interest, and as long as it's not mixed... mixed with barbiturate, you're just wonderfully involved. Interesting.
[Q] Amphetamine, this is?
Yes, dexamphetamine. Dexedrine, it used to be called.
[Q] And does it really do all these things, or does it? Is it, you know, more the illusion of it?
No, it really does all these things. But I now understand that it does all those things if you are a chronic depressive. If you're perfectly alright and normal and should be alive, probably a very bad thing to take.

My GP, who I went to school with, was a good thing, said... well, you know, I had desperate rages because I couldn't write anymore. I didn't want to be engaged with The Fetish Room and the deep unconscious and so on. He said, 'Well, I know what. Just go and see a psychiatrist.' You know, I never wanted to, but if you're... you're in your late 50s, of course you do. You just don't want to die unhappy, or more to the point, you don't want to make your wife of 40 years die unhappy. And then, when you get there, of course, it's wonderful. The attention you get. The attention you get. Every little thing is of interest. I mean, you've never felt so important.
And out it all comes, that you had no idea was there. It is... it is extraordinary. Now I should have known, having written a thesis partly about Freud and having read all his work, but I thought he'd probably created the unconscious, you know, as a wonderful literary idea. But to have little Olga, this wonderful Greek psychiatrist, jump back on her chair and she says, 'How have things been?' And you think, 'Wow'. And then you tell her.
And it helps that she's Greek, because I said to her, I remember saying, 'Well, God, you're so intelligent. Why don't you... you could write a new Greek tragedy. Why aren't you writing a wonderful Greek novel? There have been no novels.' And she said, 'My job here, is to avoid Greek tragedies, hah'. And I thought, 'You win'. There was just no... how wonderful this is. How extraordinary the National Health Service is.
And then bang, you know? So, about your mother and so on. I'd say, 'No, no, no', I think it's perfectly possibly for anybody to work by making sure that, in their own minds, they have no father and no mother. That I couldn't produce a single word if I thought of my mother and father. That's what The Fetish Room's about. You have all your really sacred, precious things from childhood, your bird books, your bird's eggs, things that bring back a rush of happiness, pre-intellectual. They can just eliminate any terrible influence from your extreme Protestant parents. And Olga said, 'Well, perhaps not, you know? I don't think so.' And I thought, 'You stupid woman'. Then she went, 'Tell me a little bit about your mother', and I... then I was telling her, 'Well, every time I cried, she would grab me by my wrist with these great hands of hers, vicar's wife, but had been an actress'. Full of bitterness. And God should not have sent a tickly tentacle down and converted her. Up the stairs, I'd be flying, so I must have been quite young, little feet not touching the floor, along the long corridor at the top of this vast vicarage, pressed down on her stool that she... well, her makeup stool, but it was very, very rough. It was some kind of embroidery. Anyway, so my little head pressed down there. And then she would beat me with her hairbrush, flat of her hairbrush, until I fainted. So I would always wake up underneath the chair.
But she'd be yelling, 'You horrible, hateful, selfish child, you. My name could have been in lights.' And sometimes, she'd add, 'Like Sybil Thorndike', but not always. That's... maybe that's it.
So you suddenly find yourself saying these things. And then I'd creep downstairs, when I did wake up, and into my father's study, maybe. And he'd be writing his sermon from a book of all the sermons that were copied out. And he wouldn't turn around. And his dog, Roger, a spaniel, who normally bit me, was... would always be there, in front of the... one of the very early electric fires. So I got very close up to the dog and Roger didn't bite me. He could see things weren't great. And my little prep school sweater burst into flames. And only then did he turn around. And then he turned back to his work, and he yelled, 'Kate, Kate'!
She came in, and then it was... she put the flames out with a cushion and I wasn't badly burnt. And then it was into her arms. 'My darling', 'my baby', my this, my that. So I'd always mistrusted the idea of love or affection. Never believed it at all.

The only good thing it got me, in the long, long term, was my wife. Because I'd arrived to see Belinda in Oxford, wearing, indeed, my father's Spitfire jacket, on a Triumph 500. Big, impressive boots on. She'd opened the door, and she'd say, 'Oh, how lovely to see you'. And I'd think, 'Right, give it five minutes and I'm off'. So that really intrigued her. I never even took my jacket off, so she didn't know I had no muscles until it was too late.
[Q] This might sound a bit odd, but I wanted to ask you, did you love your mother?
No. Absolutely not.
[Q] Is that retrospective, or did you at the time?
No. I didn't even like her smell, funnily enough, after that. It always felt violent. But very good question. Because that was the very first question that Puffin's psychiatrist, again on the NHS, when she had terrible anorexia... anyway, first thing they asked me, that psychiatrist was in a different hospital, was 'How would you feel if your mother died'? And I thought, 'Well, just a joke'. So I said, 'Well, look, I'll tell you exactly. In fact, I do know where to go to hire, for a week, a 45 Magnum. You can get one for £200. And I would also pay for two clips, and I would stand over the grave, and I'd empty both magazines into it, just to make sure.' And to my amazement, no one was laughing. They were just taking notes. And I said, 'Is this meant to be a joke'? And I thought, 'No, it's not a joke'. Nobody even looked up. So on my medical records, that's what...
And even now, with my brother, well, he insists we go and visit the grave. He stands right on top, says well, 'Mum, this is what I've been doing'. This is... he gives a whole report. I stand way back in case a disgusting green hand comes up and grabs your ankle. Yes.
[Q] This doesn't sound funny at all, your childhood.
No, but you see maybe I wouldn't have done anything but for that. It's kind of periods of crippling inaction. Well, which I still have. That's why I have Bertie the cat, because he's perfectly prepared to sleep 16 hours a day with me. I mean, that's his thing.
No, maybe not. But you see my father, really, really believed that God put the spots in a butterfly's wing. The eye spots. They're there for our delight. Everything in nature has been made by God for our pleasure and our instruction. Natural Theology, wonderful, 1802, Paley. And that's why Darwin wanted to be a country clergyman, because it was just as valuable in those vast palaces of vicarages to go out gathering a complete series of different species of earwig or woodlouse or butterfly, in those wonderful oak and walnut cabinets, as it was to go and visit your parishioners. Well, much more fun. And so, by the same token, the people who were best qualified to understand The Origin of Species and what it meant were all the country vicars and rectors. The suicide rate after 1859 just went crazy in parishes.
[Q] What about your dad?
My dad wasn't... Well, he hasn't read The Origin of Species. He really believed that. And I can't thank him enough. His father was a great friend of a guy called TA Coward, who produced the first – I'll show you – the first popular books on British birds. They're all for the greater glory of God and Reverend Morris. And I loved it, that's what began it. A real Edwardian, or actually much earlier, early Victorian childhood. And then, bang, at Marlborough, finding out about and reading The Origin, biology came alive in the most vivid way. This never left me. Still is. I can still remember the colours of the frogs we dissected and so on. And the fantastic explanatory power of evolution by natural selection. You know, there's the sparrow on the hedge. Now, that butterfly with the eye spots flashes its wings. Were those eye spots put there for our delight, or were they put there to give the sparrow the most appalling fright, so he pisses himself and falls off the hedge?
Well, I mean, there's no contest.

It's the simplest idea. As [Thomas Henry] Huxley said, 'If only I'd thought of that'. It's quite extraordinarily simple, easy, elegant. And you need a few preconditions to think this up, which Wallace and Darwin both had. You have to... you don't have to have read Malthus, but you have to know that every bird and mammal and insect produces far more children than could possibly survive. We're the only exception now, we weren't then. So what's happening? That's the first thing. An awful lot die. You know, you have two robins in your garden, they may produce 14 young, you still have two robins in your garden the next year. They may not be the same ones. What's being eliminated? Answer: tremendous pressure.
And this is why it is so offensive and why people don't remember, or want to remember. It's the central role of death. The robin story means at least ten robins are going to die. Who's going to survive? The guys with an advantage. It's simple. You can actually see it happening on the Galapagos. And they will produce more babies and that will be a different population. It's easy, evolution by natural selection. And then you have to add the thing that actually Darwin had absolutely got right, but nobody realised. Ernst Mayr, a great man who I did know, who did come stay here a lot. He realised you've got to add geography in. You can't just imagine things in a timescale without putting them into the real world. They've got to be there in... in the landscape.
Now, if a mountain range comes up, bang, they can't interbreed. You've got to have isolation. Isolation on an island, new species, isolation in so-called refugia. So a lot of the jungle dries out, a different monkey would evolve there, from the same stock, but this one, for some reason, whatever the mutation has been, this one will... will the females will find that sexy if he goes... and has a white spot on his nose. But if he's got white either side and he goes... and she's not interested if he does that. She just goes for the ones like you with the white nose and the flash.
And it's all... it's all so wonderfully... well, it's entertaining and satisfying, and then you add time. You go back 4.2 billion years, and then you're really talking. I can show you a hagfish, the earliest hag... well, the earliest fish in the sea, as far as we know. Too primitive... I'll get it.

This, the fossils in the rock, it comes in at 510 million years ago, unchanged. Astonishing thought. Now, of course, these numbers don't mean a great deal, so to put that in context, the first scraggiest, nastiest little plant didn't manage to haul itself ashore until 475 million years ago. So this thing's around when there's nothing on land.
[Q] And what is that?
And this is the... the hagfish. And you'd say, 'Well, for a primitive fish, it's quite extraordinarily sophisticated', for what I'm going to tell you, but maybe that's why it's still with us. Its jaws are so primitive... well, it doesn't really have jaws, it's jawless, but it has these opposable horny plates. And here, perhaps... or the other way around, you can see it... it has about 250 little white blobs on the side there, little glands.
Now some of them contain dried fibres and some of them contain a substance which hydrates faster than anything else we know. So the hagfish is now very interesting. Now, you're a shark, just out of primary school, or even secondary school, okay? So you're swimming along, and you see that. And you think, 'Oh, wonderful, frankfurter for breakfast'. So you home in. Bad, bad mistake.
Hagfish feels you coming, and almost instantaneously, bang, all these glands erupt, and into the water goes this mix of fibre and... well, I suppose it's sort of snot, slime, mucous. And you've got it in your eyes, you've got it in your nose. You've got it in... it's in your gills. And you shake your big head and that's another mistake, because the harder you shake, the stronger it sets. And even full-grown Greenland shark have been found floating on the surface with this snotty mucous and fibres around their heads, just like a concrete cast. You die. So that's a pretty clever trick.
And the other time they use it is when they, with their opposable horny plates... well, you know, it's not their fault, but they don't really have much taste. But if you're a drowned sailor, these things, the hagfish, it's why the trawler men hate them so. They always enter via the anus and they rasp their way up. They're after the liver, and that's the best way in, and they're in competition, because they swarm. There are hundreds of them. And to keep the other guys out, they produce a whole heap of slime. But that doesn't really work, because, as you'd say, what's the point of producing slime like that? It's going to kill you, too. It's going to set around you. No, this is the only animal on the planet, as far as we know, that's ever existed, that can tie a knot in itself and de-slime. You know, a wonderful thing to do. You wouldn't need a shower, and it passes this knot through its body and gets rid of the slime.
But this particular one is the lead guy. Up the gut to your liver and...
[Q] This is in a drowned sailor?
The only good thing about this story is you absolutely have to be dead. They're scavengers. There are other things I can tell you about, but this will only go for you if you're dead, and it goes for dead dolphins, it goes for dead whales, goes for dead anything. And very, very numerous and successful and a thing that... the trawler men just can't stand them, of course, because the sister ship of the Norlantean that I was on, she was unfortunate enough to put the nets down, go down for a mile, and got some of the bodies from that Chinook helicopter crash off the Mull of Kintyre when 45 army personnel, intelligence officers, were drowned. And they came up in the hopper and when you moved the bodies, still in their army kit, they were really swollen, and these hagfish just tumbled out, hundreds of them in every corpse.
That's part of the reason why Shetland and Orkney... the sweaters.... You know, you knit a sweater that is unlike anybody else's sweater, simply so that when your man is drowned and washed ashore on the beach, you know who it was. He's eaten out from the inside by these guys.

[Q] In  the case of the shark, who's out of primary school or secondary school,  which has this extremely unpleasant, not to say fatal experience, how  do other sharks learn not to tangle with these things?
Well,  the Greenland shark, they're very, very lazy and slow, and they're  scavengers, really, on the bottom. But they keep one eye open and they  see what happens, and I don't think there's any way that the mummy  shark... well, she doesn't, because actually she leaves the eggs they  come across... Other sharks look, I suppose. And they don't do that.  Everybody leaves these things alone.
[Q] But  that whole system, which you have to believe evolved according to this  principle of natural selection over a period of time, it's almost  impossible to believe, isn't it?
It is,  yes, but it's the only possible explanation. And given that you've got  510 million years, and they're reproducing all the time, yes, it is.  That's what I mean. It's so exciting. This... the nets go down for a  mile, okay? This was the only fish... it's not really a fish... well, it  is, but the only thing that was alive when it came up. It was looking  for a new home. There it is, on the gutting table. Damned thing crawling  across the stainless steel. Difficult to kill. So I whopped it into  formalin.

I was going to New Guinea. It was all planned. I was going with Tim Flannery, who's Mr New Guinea, and we're going into a range of mountains that were mythical, legendary. Jared Diamond, it was his report to Tim, had gone in there, been helicoptered in for three days and come out again, and he said, 'This place, it's a paradise'. And he didn't just mean the birds of paradise, he meant, as he said, 'It's quite extraordinary'. You can walk up to tree kangaroos and stroke them. They've never seen humans. You can pick them up and kiss them. Nobody even... I mean, the birds of paradise come and perch on your head. Nobody there has seen a bloke, I mean seen a human being, and so of course, as it was Jared Diamond, everyone believed him. And the reason nobody had been there, as far as I remember, was that there's a methane swamp right around this mountain. Now it's kind of... it's a plateau. I think it's about 400 miles by 200, whatever. Absolutely pristine, non-human, wonderful jungle. That's where we were going. The greatest prize ever.
But then Tim became busy which was a good deal less painful... and eventually, of course, he became Australian Humourist of the Year, and had to do... you know, take prizes everywhere. And he was very busy indeed. So I got over it. But the truth is, obviously I haven't. But a proper scientific team went. I think there were 18 of them, Indonesians and Australians, and just discovered, well, five new species of amphibians within a few days, and tree kangaroos that were thought to be extinct. Just magical, magical, ridiculous. Anyway, so quite rightly now, that's a... that's a closed area to anybody. I mean, it's just one of the last... one of the last real pristine, beautiful, beautiful places on the planet. And indeed, you can pick up these tree kangaroos and give them a kiss. They just think it's a bit kinky.
So I couldn't go because my daughter was really ill, and the psychiatrist said, 'Now look, the minute she's 18, fathers don't matter at all, but you can't go away for six months now. You might have her death on your conscience.' So I was immensely flattered. I mean, fathers don't think they matter at all, really. So this project, I could do with six weeks away, rather than six months, and then come back and then carry on.

So it  was meant to be... well, it was. I read a book about all of the extreme  north, and I wanted to work at the creels, the lobster pots and inshore  fishing, and salmon farms and herding Shetland ponies, that sort of  thing. Well, I did all that for a very long time, but the only thing  that really engaged me was the trawler, because look, it was... happened  to be the most beautiful summer the Hebrides had ever had, on record.  Beautiful, flat seas with an old man as we got crawfish and Wee Davie.  And the landladies were lovely. Nobody stuck a Kalashnikov in my  stomach. At no point was I suffering or in pain. I just became guiltier  and guiltier until I finally got on this trawler and we left in January.  Straight into a hurricane, a force 12, that's a very junior hurricane,  but tell me...
Then I  was throwing up, incredibly seasick, think I'm going to die and I'm  really happy. We've got a story here. And just standing on deck and the  scuppers are so big. And these guys, you know, you need, to stand at all  on the deck of a trawler washed by the sea, great huge waves coming  over, you think, 'Well, my thighs just aren't up to it, frankly'. You  need thighs of a different order altogether. You need thighs like  Tyrannosaurus Rex. You look around, these guys, they've got trousers ten  times... well, okay, five times too big. And they've got their belts...  it's really lashed in with a belt. But to get the thighs in the  trousers, they have to get real fat men's, top man, fat man, trousers.  And I was astonished. You get no sleep. This is happening, this is just  commercial life. You go out for two weeks and you get one... one hour's  sleep in 36, no health and safety, no nothing. And a good thing, I  discovered afterwards, or actually it would have excited me, but in  1998, the only figures I could get: 388 accidents, 26 vessels lost, 26  trawler men drowned, or fishermen. Now I now understand what an accident  is, because since leaving the trawler, the youngest... the youngest  took his thumb off. Now, that's not reported as an accident. It doesn't  count. Bad luck. And the next one up lost his hand on a hawser. They  just bound the hand up, got to sea. You can't stop fishing just because  somebody's lost a hand. That's not reported.
God, I  mean, you've presumably got to come ashore, come on board, I mean...  holding your head under your arm or at least lose a leg. Three hundred  and eighty-eight accidents. It's not surprising. I mean, nobody has had  any sleep, everybody is just tired beyond belief, the skin is peeling  off. You don't know who you are. You come ashore, you've no idea who you  are. You think, 'A drink might restore me to myself', but of course,  far too late for any of that. And then you think, well, I need to sleep.  You can't sleep. You seem to have no past at all, no future. You don't  exist as you. You've lost all sense of identity. It's the strangest,  strangest feeling.
And to think that these young men do that, you know, all their working life.
[Q] I still don't understand what on Earth you were doing in this terrifying situation. I mean, what...?
I  wanted to write about it. So I was so pleased that here is something  that, right in our own country, that no one... well, i.e. me, knows  about. This extraordinary danger, this ghastly, constant onslaught of  this violence and noise and steel and gutting bloody fish, and oh, it's  just... as good as the Congo. As good as the worst times in South  America.
[Q] As bad as the Congo?
Yes,  but it's all perverted if you're going to write about it. I mean, you  really do want to genuinely be about to die, but then survive. I mean,  the reader can really sniff it if it's... you can't possibly make a  drama out of wonderful days spent hauling out lobster pots. I mean,  maybe one could... maybe as an old man, I might be able to, but I don't  think I'll ever be able to write about happiness. It just doesn't...  nothing happens, when I think about it.

I'm a writer, but you don't want to lay claim to great things like that. Happier being an explorer, because I've never, ever, found anything I'm looking for.
No, and I love science. But not since S-level Biology. You know, that really turned me on. I simply cannot genetically do maths. Can't add up. I got out exactly at the right stage. I mean, I remember Dawkins coming into the Animal Behaviour Department to help everybody with their statistics and maths and this new thing called a computer.
Well, all those boys had done chemistry and physics. It can't... it can't be done. Well, it especially can't be done if, at O-level, you've been clever enough to really cheat and have all the... because we had cuffs, yes? Sort of public school, hard, whatever they're called... forgotten. Cuffs, anyway, white cuffs, yes. So underneath, I wrote all the formulae. If you can imagine that sort of thing. And then licked the blue on them, put them on blotting paper with as much spit as you can. Then you put the blotting paper onto the paper, and there they are. A bit rough, but there they all are. And so I got top grades in all the chemistry and physics. And I was in this... in sets... I mean, don't cheat, is the answer. In these top sets, no idea what was going on.
There was one of Maxwell's sons, I remember, who was particularly brilliant. Just people who didn't have to think. Terrible. All I remember from those classes in the lab are the sparrows outside, 'Cheep, cheep, cheep, cheep, cheep, you can't do maths, cheep, cheep'.

The older brother's six years older than me, and I suppose he's as damaged as I am, because he doesn't want to... he didn't want anything from his parents' house, you know? Just no.
But he's lovely. I mean, six years is quite a gap, and I remember him yelling, 'Please, please, please mum, don't beat him'. I mean, you're going to love a brother who yells that. And then he'd run off in case he got beaten too. But she'd never beat him. The classic... I mean, the only interesting thing about it is that it's spot in the... it's a classic Victorian upbringing. And my father, he thought that he was really liberal. He was brought up... yeah they were, multimillionaires in the velvet trade, and despite having a thoroughly Catholic name like O'Hanlon, he was... they were all unbelievably Protestant. Taliban. The Taliban of the Protestants. They were all Wee Frees. That's what he broke away from.
So my aunts, these horrible... no wonder they didn't marry. Of course not. They all had legs that sort of began under their armpits. Very long-legged aunties. I used to dream about them. I still do now and then, that they roost upside down on the curtain rail, and you hear them in the morning preparing to go walkies, going 'Quack, quack' these batwing aunties. They were just Lewis, Harris... you must never read a novel. A play is just... don't even mention it. No watching television on a Sunday, but then no watching television at all. The only programme they would watch was Basil Brush. That's fine. And absolutely no culture, which you still find in Lewis and Harris. If you're out on a Sunday and you're driving around and you're not wearing a suit and tie, people actually stop and wave their fist at you.
The Council tried to build them a cinema. You know, you need to do something in Stornoway. Buggers, they... they burned the cinema down, once it was almost ready to open. Now all the pubs there have revetments, have... have a defensive screen of concrete at head height, and you have to go in and... because otherwise, you get ram-raided by an auntie in... in a jeep. And it's very, very strange. Everyone should go there just for a couple of days to have a look.
[Q] Hang on a minute, I'm not quite sure...
This is the Protestant Taliban, in Stornoway, Lewis and Harris, the Outer Hebrides. But there are also some of them who are Wee Frees. But there are also some in Glasgow.
[Q] Because you come from... you grew up where? In Dorset? No...
Yes, I was born in Dorset and then grew up in Wiltshire.

This is a memory and why the childhood... yes, apart from the beatings and so on, was very, very happy. But the beatings made it powerful, I think, and vivid. And just me playing all alone. I mean, my brother was six years older, so he's not going to be out with me. No, I had all kinds of imaginary people in bushes. Charlie and the Boodies, a whole army that would come out to make sure I wasn't beaten. They all definitely lived there. I talked to them. But this particular day, when I was four and a half, and a mistle thrush flew over me, and dropped one half of her egg. She was clearing out her nest. You have to do that, otherwise the predators see it.
And I didn't know about the empty cosmos then, so I was convinced this was a gift, as you would, from the mistle thrush. If not from the mistle thrush, then from God, you know. So I started an egg collection. I've still got the mistle thrush half eggshell.
It just opened up the most wonderful world in the young boy. I suppose, well, you see, churchwardens were farmers, so I could go out to these farms any time I wanted, first on my bicycle with a 410 and then on a 150cc BSA Bantam and then later on a Royal Enfield 250. But I mean, the shotgun wasn't the point of it at all. That meant that it was all understandable and alright. And there were three wonderful dogs on this particular farm, Bob Henley, the churchwarden there, called them Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, who went into the fire... I mean, everything was like that. But they were lovely, lovely Labradors all the same. They'd come and sit with me. We didn't have to shoot anything. We had tremendously long, doggy talks [makes whining sound].
[Q] But did you have friends?
No. No, not around the vicarage. No, but the farmers were friends.
So when I saw all the chairs in the drawing room all in a circle, because the Mothers Union or the Young Wives were coming, I knew it was time to jump on my bike and get the hell out. No, they did... dogs were my friends. I didn't need friends.
[Q] I mean about school. I mean, you...?
I went away to prep school and you got beaten there.
[Q] The boarding school?
Yes.
[Q] Can you tell me a bit about what that was like?
Well, again, in those days, nobody knew about paedophiles and... the headmaster, Mr McCrae, he had made all his own – with loving care, beautiful carpentry – his canes, but for the youngest boy, he had a big, quite a wide, paddle, which he'd experimented with, so that meant it didn't actually rip and destroy their tiny buttocks when you're seven years old. So that was the first one, and they were all in a big rack by his desk. Then you could hit them with a slightly more damaging paddle, and then right up to big canes on the end. But that probably was what happened everywhere in the '50s. I don't know. And he'd beat you for anything. But that went on right up to public school.

My first night it happened. I was delighted, yeah, because I did seem to have friends. I mean, there were 40 little boys in metal beds in this dormitory. And I worked out that even in the dark, if you got your pillow, you could do a jump from one bed to the other and whack everybody on the head with a pillow. Bumpity-bumpity-boom. And then the light clicked on and this enormous man in his tweeds with a pipe in this mouth, and he went... and I thought, you know, maybe he was going to give me a sweetie or something. And that the first time I was beaten. So I was, what? Seven or eight? With the paddle. And he'd love it. He'd pull your trousers down to make sure you hadn't got padding under there and fondle them. Not the marrying type, Mr McCrae. Yes, neither was Mr Forte, but we all liked him, because he wasn't violent. He taught French.
[Q] This is at your...?
Prep school. This is... I think all prep schools probably were like this in the '50s. Anyway, Mr French... Mr Forte taught French, and if you did particularly well on your little world list, he would say – he was very hairy – he'd say, 'You may stroke the hairs on my arm'. So we'd stroke the hairs on his arm, knowing, you know...
And then your essay, your essay in French. You went up to his room, and they all lived in these single rooms, like monks, really, in the very top of this huge school building, Forres, in Swanage. And you'd walk around the bed with your essay, and you'd put it on a silver tray.
Which sounds fine, except that Mr Forte was lying there naked on the bed with a white and red stitched towel round his knees, with this enormous thing. You know, how does anything get that big? Which is really very frightening. But I just thought, 'Everybody in Paris is just the same'. They're all lying there and getting little letters and essays and... 'That's what French do', I thought. You know, he teaches French.
[Q] You made sense of it.
We all did. We all talked about it and decided that we weren't in the least worried, because that's what happened in France, and it wasn't until years and years and years later, when I thought, 'Maybe they don't do that in France'. You know, big pictures of the Eiffel tower and stuff up in his room.

Well, yes, wonderful friends there. And these are friendships forged under duress, as it were. And harsh conditions, which were meant to be like that. But what a wonderful place. There's the Wiltshire Downs, there's Savernake Forest, you have a bicycle. You ride a bicycle. If you get a moment, you know, out you can go. And when I worked out the way that... you know, in cricket, if you're the captain, you go in and field first, and then you get bowled out with the first ball, then you've got a lot of time. You can piss off.
That, but the real point... I mean, later, in the sixth form, of course you don't see it like that. You don't realise how bloody lucky you are. You have no distractions, no home to go home to, no girlfriends allowed, much. I mean, one in the town, but you're completely isolated, monastic life, and even if you do get nicked on your motorbike, bringing in all the things that the upper classes aren't allowed, or middle classes, like beer and chewing gum and so on.
And anyway, you get beaten for that sort of thing, and having a motorbike. But you have a key to the labs. You, a boy, have a key to the labs. Trusted completely. Go out for that prep, as it were, for your biology A-levels, S-levels, and immerse yourself. And you might be alone in this vast lab. And you put the lights on and there are all the microscopes lined up. You can do... repeat any experiment you want to. It is just fucking magical. I couldn't believe it. And then you're a bit carried away.
And it feels wicked, which is always essential, because you shouldn't really be up that late. So you put all the lights out and you do all the right things, and you put your specimens back, and then you can't go into your house by the normal door, it's two in the morning.
So you go up the fire escape and in through the window you left open. And that just seemed... well, I'm 61 and I've never fucking forgotten that. Just wonderful. Such a privilege somehow. So big change once you are in the sixth form.

[Q] What did science seem to you... what excited you about it?
Oh, it was just the deepest possible excitement, because everything that I was looking at contravened directly the extraordinarily strong, hard, absolutely unmoving beliefs of my father and mother. And it was... you know, I read the Origin of Species with a torch in my bed. That was far... Jesus, get caught with that? I don't know, well, probably Men Only didn't exist then, but that sort of thing, that's fine, you know. Even Christians do that. But to read this. That's... I mean, it made it the most... the dirtiest book I've ever read. It was... it just gave wild excitement. I mean, everything I heard in biology, I thought, 'Well, if I repeated that at home, I'd be'... well, not sent to my room by then, but probably banned from...
I mean, they really could not take it. Oh yes, and of course some writers were absolutely out. Terrible atheists. Like Conrad was the number one. And Hardy. Terrible anti-Christian writers. In later life, my old man, he liked... he liked reading Hardy, but he'd lost his push by then.
So that's why I wrote about Conrad and Darwin, probably. Which they never acknowledged. In fact, my father only... well, he's 97 now, but yes, last month, he said, to my brother, who was visiting him. I was at the festival in Ireland. He said, 'He's very sad that if he had his way, if only he could have burned all the editions, every single copy of anything that I had written, he could die happy'. So there you are.
[Q] Your father said that to your brother?
Yes, my older brother, yes.
[Q] What did you think of that?
It made me pretty miserable for a couple of days. You know, as I say, I try and keep it as a compliment. What I really want to do is tell Olga. I haven't seen Olga since...
[Q] Olga the psychiatrist?
Olga, yes. Yes. So I mean, you know, they may be his dying words. And my mother made a sort of... all my books, apparently... I never saw it, in the flat they lived in, before they went to a home. And he said he couldn't bear to go in that room with these books of an atheist in there. How could she do such an ungodly thing?

Well, I just thought it was just ordinary depression, which is a bit depressing, but then the wonderful new drugs, Fluoxetine and Prozac and so on, really didn't seem to work. Look, it's only a month ago.
Anyway, Lithium. God, astonishing. I mean, it sort of returns you to yourself. You feel you have a backbone. You feel you're not entirely empty inside. You're not afraid of suddenly having wild enthusiasms: I'll read that, I'll do this, I'll do the other, which apparently, when you get older, that's what happens. You know, early on, it's a fantastic advantage. You have three months up and you pay for that wonderful productivity with three weeks of total misery, that's all.
You just need to keep away from everybody for three weeks. Whereas it became more and more rapid, so in the course of a day you'd feel really fucking miserable, and then... Books of entirely different worlds would seem exciting, one after the other. Well, that stopped all that. The depressions, you feel that your parents were right, that you are completely worthless in every way. And that what you really should do, given that conviction, and every depressive thinks what they're thinking is true, you know, people... ordinary people, normal people, happy people just haven't yet got the truth. That's what's another terrible thing about it: your truth is a hundred times as powerful as anybody who thinks it's a lovely day and they're off to see their girlfriend. You're the only one who knows. And then you think: but this is infectious, this depression, and that's not right. What I must really do is go away, make space for other people to develop, and this would be the most wonderful, charitable, kindest, most loving thing that you could do. By going away, of course, it means blowing your head off, and it means killing yourself as soon as you possibly can. And if you don't do that, you're also a coward, as well as everything else. And this... you know, you wake up day after day and that seems to be it. Yes, I took the shotgun out down to the river and had it in my mouth. It's a long barrel, 36-inch, a wonderful BSA, actually made for the Indian army. But it's perfectly easy to pull the trigger, all that's bullshit. Of course you can.
But I never had the final conviction. So, I mean, sheepishly, I brought it back. And then I told that story on Desert Island Discs, and the Oxford... I mean, it's really impressive, they listen to Radio Four, came around and took my shotgun away. 'Where is it then, lad? We can't have that'.
[Q] The police?
Yes, and I had to give it to the gamekeeper.

He was my number one friend at school, really, and then at Oxford. And probably we were very bad for each other. He's called Martin Pullinger, but I call him other things in the book. But that was my first trip around Europe on this big BSA sidecar, and I should have known something was wrong with him. But I did, of course. But the back tyre went. And I expected him to help, and he just lay down on the grass and he went 'Ugh'. Well, that's what he did whenever anything went wrong. So I kind of should have been more sympathetic. But I was, in way. So we were very... I mean, we were great close friends, but probably not a good thing when two depressives get together, because you have... because you're male, and males compete with everything. You have this competition of whether you're more miserable than the other guy, which I can only... which I can see as funny now.
Anyhow, he was the guy who... you were remembering your rides on the BSA, and I'm in the sidecar. Well, I let him ride it once, otherwise he had to sit on the back. But I didn't tell him about this thingy, and we both came off into the ditch. Well, that was fine, because that meant that he couldn't drive it anymore. I was the tough guy. Now, when he got back, he traded in his little James 100cc, kind of a pushbike-y thing, but... for a Vincent. But not just a Vincent, because he'd come into some money, a Vincent. So I think they were 1200cc, or was it a thousand? Anyhow... the big...
[Q] The Black Shadow?
Yes. The biggest thing ever. But he had it... he took it out to Switzerland and it was made into an Egli-Vincent. So aluminium frame, right? Racing bike. The very fastest bink in the world at that time. And he'd arrive on it, and it sounded like a tractor [engine sounds]. And I realised, you know, he's won. That's why he'd got this thing. I couldn't even hold it upright. Yeah, massive. Anyway, so sadly he married a woman who was in love with... well, it doesn't matter, because I can't remember the name. Anyway, in this play, The Other Side of the Underneath, this tremendous lesbian thingy. But that upset him, but of course it wasn't really that... anyway, he took his Egli-Vincent out to Holland Park, and a can of petrol, and he parked the bike and he went up to the little lake on top of Holland Park. Scraped up a pile of leaves, poured the petrol on it, and lay down. And burned himself to death.
Now, the weird thing about it was that it was the time when Buddhist monks were burning themselves in Sri Lanka, I think. And they always moved at the end, they tried to get away. And the poor park warden who'd gone to Holland Park straight from Sri Lanka, Ceylon then, had gone because he couldn't take this anymore. And in his first week, there was Marty Boy burning himself to death. But he said, 'Well, the thing is your friend, he no move. No move'. He hadn't moved. Just lying there. And then, two days after that, his letters started arriving here, post-dated, telling exactly what he was going to do and where to get a trunk of all his possessions. And well, everything. So then I felt well... and it sounds absurd, but this, Fetish Room, you know, everything that really meant a lot to me, all his things and his paintings and his pictures, they're really powerful. I'll show you later.
And I felt that I was two people, that I could write, as it were, mostly for him. And if I manage it, the next book will be dedicated to him. But you know, I think of him every day. So of course, we don't have eternal life, but you can live on. And I'd love to one day publish pics of all his pictures. Anyway, he was, he was at Oxford, at Balliol, reading medicine, too disturbed to do it. I mean, now, it sounds absurd, doesn't it, to have a place at Balliol reading medicine and you're too... now, he'd get help. He really would get help. I mean, to have made it to that absolute top echelon. But I do think he was a genius.

The weird thing is, on these journeys, I never have... I never, ever have had depressive thoughts. And I'm terribly conscious that I can't cope with inner terror, you know? If this guy's shooting at you, somebody's got an eight-foot-long arrow, it's fantastically flattering. You exist. You know, good for him, he's taking the trouble. He really is concerned. He cares about you, for that moment. No, no, it's being at home gets me. I mean, this is all only interesting because it must happen to thousands upon thousands of other people.
[Q] But you like being on your own?
Yes
[Q] In a silent place? 
Yes. When I'm writing and I've actually got something to say, but when not, it can be bad at 3 o'clock on a dark afternoon. And you have all these habits that work when you're writing, you see. In other words, not picking up the phone, so everybody knows I don't pick up the phone, so nobody rings me when I'm not writing. I mean, when you're not writing, when you're not doing anything, no, no, no, that's just trivial nonsense. But I love...
I like the idea that a female cuckoo can fly over and the sparrow hawk comes through the garden twice a day and that we have long-tailed tits moving through. I don't think I could do without that. On the other hand, when I do go to London, it just seems exciting beyond belief. Like a teenager, it's ridiculous. But the bookshops and the fact that people are thinking... you know, the life of the mind really matters in the city. Whereas here, it's pigs that matter.

Now, when I went to Oxford, I thought, the first thing I thought, arriving in Merton, in this, you know, beautiful... Far from thinking, 'This is paradise on Earth', as it is. It's the nearest you get to a celestial city, Oxford. There is no eternity, this is the best going. I didn't think any of that. I looked around the quad and I thought, 'This is just like my public school. Any minute, these bastards are going to beat me', is what I thought.
Absurd. And sad, but at least, you know, once I'd married Belinda, it all became plain that this was the greatest privilege you can have in Europe, to be in a place like this. And I found out where the Bodleian library was and the Radcliffe Camera, and I just released into a world where, I don't know... You know, if God had existed, he would have made Oxford. It's just... there's no... nothing to compare with it anywhere on Earth. And you might say Cambridge, and not a joke, but look at the Bodleian, how many volumes does the Bodleian have? Let's go for the real thing.
[Q] Do you really think that?
Yes. I really think that. And not only do I think that, it's become far more powerful a feeling as I've got older. I get back from the Congo, and I think, 'What is this'? This is not going to last two weeks. This is the most fragile product of civilisation. How can this possibly be? How can people pay, A, pay their taxes, B, support a place like this? It's just unbelievable, and I actually kissed the stone on the Bodleian. I thought, I mean, you get into a frame of mind where you find yourself thinking: 'God, that was a magnificent building, in the'...
If you're in there for six months, probably gone. And you think, 'Wow, look at the way that rattan is holding that particular post together. That's terrific.' You get back and thought, this place, it's all stone. It feels the highest possible pinnacle of any civilisation, the greatest thing that could be achieved. It's nothing whatever to do with an individual ruler, it's nothing to do, anymore, with religion. It's to do with a real ideal that you can translate into young people's lives. Thank God, it's commemorated there in the most beautiful stone buildings in the world. It's there. This is... this is something that anybody who's interested in the life of the mind should aspire to.
I don't know. Nowadays, if I didn't live here, I'd like to go and stay in a B&B in Oxford for a week and walk around it.

[Q] You could have been an academic at Oxford?
Yes, well, shall I tell you straight? I was a junior don, an apprentice, after my doctorate in Hartford, teaching. And I taught my students the wrong century. I hadn't opened the letter. Who would have thought that Oxford would move up from 1945, or rather 1900 to 1945?
Anyway, I was teaching the 19th century, when it should have been the 20th, the early 20th. And it was terrible. So I had to leave, quite rightly. But I just thought to be removed for gross incompetence was bad. Now gross immorality would have been sexy. And it took me six months to tell Belinda that... why I wasn't teaching anymore.  I said, 'Well, I've got this biography of Darwin I'm writing, and I really can't do the two things'.
So then I joined The Times, The Times: Literary Supplement, where it doesn't really matter what century you're thinking about, as long as you're doing it with passion. And then James Fenton, a great poet, said would I like to go to Borneo with him, for a holiday, scuba diving? And I looked at the map and there's some pretty suspicious places, like Bum-Bum-Tutu. So I thought, 'No, no, we'll get this major poet up a major river and see what happens'.
So I read a great deal about it. He hadn't got time to read anything about Borneo. Because he was the theatre critic of The Sunday Times. And I discovered an ancestor of mine. To me, just known as Uncle Eggy. Now Uncle Eggy I remembered sleeping down the end of a corridor of a big flat in Earl's Court. My aunt had a four-poster bed, a massive luxury. He slept right down the end of the flat in a little cavalry bed, did Uncle Eggy. Now something must be wrong with Uncle Eggy. He was certainly not a brave man, I thought, as a boy, because the kitchen table was chalked off. That was the only part of the kitchen he was allowed to touch. Then I read, Colonel Egerton Mott, one of the toughest men I've ever met, regarded me with his steely blue eyes. And it really was above launderette, or I don't know, laundry it would be, wouldn't it? In Holborn, in the war. And he'd been a successful businessman in Shanghai with shipping and so on, but when the Japanese came in, quick training, and he was a man of great imagination and so tough.
And he actually was the founder, though I didn't know that, of Australian SAS, Special Air Service, in Australia. I mean, a sort of legendary guy, an icon. Except that nobody knew about him, because he took the secrecy to such lengths, he never told his wife. And they're dead now, so it's alright, but she thought that, because he couldn't tell her what he was doing, she was absolutely certain that he ran a brothel. That's why he wasn't allowed to touch her.
But then I read about him in Harrison's book about the Special Forces, the ancestor... I mean, you know, the forerunner of the Special Air Service, and how Harrison, you know, Mott had sent him for this training, blowing up trains, destroying bridges, parachuting and so on.
They were being trained to go behind the lines. But my uncle was actually in charge of special operations against the Japanese. He got sacked, too, I'm glad to say, just like me, because he… he planned a really successful on the Japanese Singapore Harbour, but he hadn't... hadn't told MacArthur that he was going to do this. And he said, 'Well, of course not', in his memoir, because you couldn't trust the Americans to keep a secret. Whereas Uncle Eggy went to the grave with all his secrets. I get letters now, because he's mentioned in Into the Heart of Borneo, from Australians trying to build up a picture of him. They don't even have a photograph of him. Anyway, so that was my... I didn't know this, but yes, this was my entrée into Hereford and 22 SAS, and they absolutely treated me the tops.
I mean, the major in charge of training, even though I was quite young, then, looked at me and said, 'Oh, in the peak of life lad, I see. Well, you can try the assault course.' They gave me all this wonderful equipment. And Fenton. Gave him some, too. And I was warned. They said, 'Well, lad, you know you're going with a Trot'? And I didn't know what a Trot was. I certainly wouldn't connect him with Trotsky. He said, 'But we don't believe our computers. I suspect he's an old Trot.'
So that was it. That was set, then. We had to go on this big expedition.

My intention was perfectly plain, and James [Fenton] just wanted to go back to a jungle. He'd fallen in love with jungles in Vietnam. You know, he'd been the real thing, a war correspondent in Saigon. Anyway, my... and I'd got permission from the Indonesians in London at the embassy, everything was stamped. And we were going to go up Regang and the Bali River, and then you can connect the other side of the watershed to the Mahakam and go right across the island, which nobody had done. I mean, simply for political reasons. And James didn't like the idea of that at all. He quite rightly thought that I was impossibly enthusiastic and naïve. And I produced my passport and everything was sort of going to be fine, and then he tossed his war correspondent's passport, not his ordinary one, onto the table, which was full of all the... And that was it. So the Indonesian guy... [speaks Indonesian]. 'But I got that in London.' And he said, 'And where is London?' God.
So we could only go to the central mountains in Borneo. And it had to be a comedy. Well, it was. I mean, it was very funny, all of it. But... well, I didn't know then, I know now. I mean, Borneo is a very happy place compared with the rest of the jungles I'd been to. And it's really run by the women. So the Iban, the Kayan, the Kenyah, even though they're a little stricter, but the Iban... they're honorary Irishmen. You show your power by having the largest possible party, and you all live in longhouse together, like an Irish village, but parents die, right, you're adopted by the couple to either side of you in the longhouse.
And then it would be like the races or something, but there's a whole week where all moral rules, everything goes. Relieves the tension. And all you have to do, if you're after some girl, is blacken your hands with soot and chase her. If you manage to get your two black hands on her, then, you know, whether she's your wife or not, it simply doesn't matter. So absolute mayhem. And the marriage itself is quite serious, but you're allowed ten different lovers, ten, before you get married, but one more than ten, you are an immoral person. It's very relaxed and difficult to think of them as the great head-hunters and violent, wonderful warriors that they were, except that in all the longhouses, in the middle, you're sleeping under great bundles of skulls. And they were so pleased with the... my uncle, Colonel Egerton Mott, said that just for the duration of the war, it was perfectly alright to take heads again. So they'd turn up with string bags, these rattan bags, and we were often told about the great battles with the Japanese. You know, so there would be ten Japanese going upriver and 200 guys on our side, desperate to get the head. Because once you've cut the head off, you take it back and the girls pass it around and rub the blood on their crotch, round and round in a circle. And that's really exciting. It means you're a proper man. And now, you can't do that anymore. It's awful.

But  what happens? You go to a timber camp, you go downriver, you earn a lot  of money, and you get a bloody great Johnson outboard motor, and you  take that upriver.
Now  there's nothing you can possibly put it on, they're very far, shallow by  the time you get upriver, but you put that on a big piece of wood,  outside the longhouse. You'll see all these rusting motors instead of  heads, there's these huge rusting Johnsons. And you get the girl. She's  impressed.
And  then there's another part of the story to do with outboard motors, I  can't think how I remembered, but I did. Johnson, they just couldn't  work out so many shear pins were needed in the interior of Borneo,  tremendous demand for shear pins. The pin that shears, breaks off so you  save your propeller, the motor, it whips up on a rock. And well, it's  an interesting story. Again, it goes back to, well, thousands upon  thousands of years, certainly pre-Rajah Brooke, anyway. To please a  girl, once you are too old, once you are over 20, you go down to the  river until your spear gets small, sitting in the cold water, and then  the medicine man, the shaman, though they don't really have such things,  the senior guy, the tuarum, the chief, comes. And he's got a little  auger thing, and he bores a hole, wooden, through the glans. That way  and then the other way. So you've got two holes right through the head  of the penis. And then, to begin with, it's a wooden plug that you move  around a lot until the hole is healed, and then the great day comes,  when you're fully dressed, and you put a couple of Johnson shear pins  across. And they're really good. And then on the end you put wooden  balls, so that you've got four balls at the end of your penis. And this  distends the walls of the vagina and produces the most astonishing  orgasm. Now James and I, we'd be followed by these young women, and  knowing all about this, I'd go off to pee about a hundred yards away,  just in case anybody saw that I wasn't a real man at all and didn't have  balls on the end of my penis.
But  the trouble with the steel is, like all modern things, there's always a  catch. You build up uric acid crystals and calcide, so you can have  terrible problems. Much better to stick with the wood, but the girls  don't like the wood as much.

Well, he asked me to go with him. We really didn't know each other very well, and I went as his photographer for the Sunday Times, was the idea. So I thought all that was wonderful. I mean, the height of cool or whatever one would have said then, to go to a little office window in the basement of the Sunday Times and get cash, you know. Straight out of Evelyn Waugh, going off on a scoop. So that was very exciting. But I'd been reading about Borneo and the Far East for what? Six, seven years. Writing about Conrad and Darwin and Borneo. It never occurred to me for a moment that you could go to Borneo, you could actually get there. You know, to me, it was something in a library. And let alone, once you got inland, the tattoos that I knew intimately, as it were, from the illustrations in all these books, of the Kayan warriors, would be exactly the same now. It was just exciting beyond belief. Just wonderful, I mean, of course, after the book was published, but I got... these pictures were sent to me, and on the back it says, an original photograph used to illustrate the pagan tribes of Borneo, given by William McDougall to his nieces. Now his nieces sent these to me, these two wonderful old girls. And can you see that silver circlet that... around the waist there? Well, this is Iban in fact, but still exactly the same. Exactly the same. And then somebody else left me this, just a reader, in his will. I mean, look at it. It's Iban silver. It's the most beautiful thing. But I'm feeling a bit guilty about it, now. I kind of feel I ought to take it back, give it to them.
Yes, you can see, tiny waists. And that's another thing about Borneo: they all look like film stars. The most beautiful, suntanned girls you've ever set your eyes on. And the men, if you like that sort of thing. But of course, because if they're not healthy and wonderful looking and bright-eyed and muscly, they're dead. They die of terrible sepsis and one slip with a parang, and... tough life. But very, very happy, because it's run by women. And that's just a lovely river shot, but amazing for me that these are exactly the same as the illustrations in Hose and McDougall's great work.

It was just a ridiculous privilege to be going upriver with a poet, who really does think differently from other people. We had long periods of silence, and then you know something wonderfully profound is going to happen, especially if you can see him from behind, with a great bald head and the veins would be dilating and a thought is being had. And then, God will send a poem.
And it was wonderful. We'd go into a longhouse, and I would, of course, tell everybody, 'This is the greatest poet in all England', and James [Fenton] would recite. He'd do a mime, if asked to, and it was always... he was very hungry, we didn't have much to eat.
And it was always... the mime was, now listen, this is how you prepared a leg of pork. And it would be wonderful. And by the time he'd finished this very slow, wonderful mime, he'd baste it and cut the crackling, and then, at the end of it, the whole longhouse would stand up and clap. And all the men would burp, you know, they knew it was a wonderful meal. And then he astonished me. He knew all the music hall songs. I can't remember a single one, but they would be just wonderful. Everybody could see. They'd no idea, of course, what he was singing about, but they could see how wonderful it was. I mean, a real professional performing poet. And then even his dances were rather good. And then I'd have to get up and do something. Well, I don't know any songs at all, but a dance. So you have to mimic this wonderful, graceful, warrior dance where they're all dressed up in feathers and the whole bit and the war coat. And you stalk your enemy, and then, with your parang, you take his head off. And there's all the symbolic, systematised gestures. You've tripped him over on the sand and then off comes his head, like the head of a turtle.
So I tried that, and everybody would laugh, sort of uncontrollably. I, you know, just hadn't got the grace. And James would stab me in the back. He'd say things like, 'Now, come on Redsie. Just do your thing, whatever your thing is.' And at that moment, on this particular occasion, the war headdress, it jammed over my face, so I couldn't breathe and had to be rescued. So yes, it's like... it was sort of Paradise Bar in Ireland with everybody joining in. And then you get terribly, terribly drunk on the arak, all the rice wine and rice brandy. And taking their cue from James. I'm sure we were only greeted like that because of James, there's the poet, and he said to me, 'Redsie, we've just walked into Homer. Shut up.' And it was. The verses would start. And the only bad thing I have to tell you: it was always a woman, and with a female apprentice, singing these verses, which Leon, our guide, totally wonderful, he would translate. And they'd be all about history, how they moved here, how all these decisions were taken. And then the last verse, the last two or three verses, would be about us, how there was this shambolic fat man who really couldn't pull a canoe properly in the water, and I mean, an idiot, and it was me. And then this great poet, the greatest poet in all England, and what it was an honour that he'd come here, and now forever, the great poet's visit would be recorded in whatever group it was, in their longhouse, forever. Because this had been added to the history of... the epic, the rhyming history of that particular group. I mean, the rhymes were… well every other rhyme, you know, it was just wonderful, formal, and chanted in this wonderful chant. And at the end of every verse, everybody would have a drink. So a lot of people were lying flat, because it's a very long epic. And James starring at the end of it. And Leon translated, said, 'Well, this greatest poet in all England, he... it's very strange, but perhaps that's what happens to poets, because all the hairs migrated off the top of his head and stuck itself around his cheeks. Because they don't have a beard, you know, it's the most disgusting thing. So that you see them plucking out a hair. You know, the girls don't like it.'
[Q] And you said you didn't know each other very well when you set off, but obviously by the end you must have known each other extremely well…
Yes.
[Q] So how did all that work out?
Well, I think it worked out wonderfully well, but I don't think he liked the book very much, because he has a... I mean, in public, public persona, has great gravitas, as a poet should. I shall get in trouble again. Wonderful, generous, man.

I always wanted to be a writer since I was making up stories about seeing tigers on the vicarage lawn when I was four and a half. But no, this was the real thing, because after a doctorate, seven years of it, and, you know, 300,000 words or whatever had to be cut down to 100,000, it's just such a release. I could describe things that were external, that actually existed, that were there. You know, how do you describe a paradise flycatcher on its way across the river? The answer is: just as you first thought, what you first thought it was. I mean, missing such things at the time, there is a suspender belt with… with white stockings coming along behind it. No, that was wonderful. I did it in a year. And it was odd, it was written in the daytime, and after a run around the wood, it's a healthy, happy comedy, really.
I mean, there's bound to be dark moments whenever you're in the tropics, like being taken to... because everybody thinks you must be a doctor... taken to see some old woman and a great ulcer infection on her foot, and the fluid and the infections just flowing about with mould on top. And you know she's dying, and all you've got is general antibiotics for a week, you know, a couple of weeks. That sort of thing, but that will happen wherever you are along the equator.
It's just a society that is really, through and through, happy, with as good a system as can be invented for humankind. I mean, by contrast, what I'm thinking of is the middle of South America, people called the Yanomami, which has gone the other way. Instead of women running it all, and you're told, in Borneo, we, the men, take all the major decisions. So Fenton would say, well the translator would say, well, 'So when was the last major decision?' And the big talk went on, and they said, 'Well, we can't remember. It must have been our grandfathers.' Whereas in South America, on the border between Colombia and Venezuela and Brazil, the Yanomami, they've... that's really male. And the more people you've killed, doesn't matter if they're an old grandmother or a child or what, the more attractive you are. So it's real sexual selection. It's all the girls' fault, of course. They go for guys who've killed people, who get angry immediately, who are fantastically aggressive, so the society gets more and more aggressive. A constant low-grade but deadly, lethal warfare in between their own peoples and groups. That's why they have to live in a great stockade.

Notebooks and part of the ritual is to cover them in... well, it used to be SAS camouflage tape, then I realised it's not really a good idea, because when you've dropped a notebook on the ground, it's camouflaged, but it makes you feel good. And keep it in a pouch on your belt, wrapped in plastic, because you're absolutely soaking wet and growing fungus all the time. But it's absolutely bloody essential, exactly as everybody says. You pull it out, and you've got a Biro or something that is water resistant. It doesn't matter, but you must write down what you're seeing, you know, because in the Congo, say, three or four days' walk out from a village, you may see five or six troops of different species of monkey. And you think: this is so vivid, I will remember this all my life. Do you hell. You can't remember until the end of the day. You've got to write, scribble even as you're walking. And then I don't let... I mean, I wasn't in charge with Fenton, but I don't let anybody move off until I've had an hour to write in the mornings. Or you have to do it in the evening if you've got to leave it. In the Congo, you can't hang around in the morning, because you've got to get out of camp before the bees arrive. So before sunup. The minute there's light, the sweat bees, hundreds of them, up your nose. They love mucous, and they're in your ears. But they don't sting. That's alright. But the ordinary African honeybee is all over you. Now they're just the same as our bees, no better, no worse, but the sting's not funny. So you've got to move off. And then you write for an hour before the bees arrive, when you've made a camp at night.
[Q] Notes?
No, from the notes, and it's always... a letter is the best thing. So I write my darling Belinda, and we turned south-southeast and... and then I send them off when you can, i.e., after months. And then she got annoyed that there wasn't enough love in there. I was all... so that helps. But then that's not… that's not the book. But you've got the letters, you hope, have arrived here. And that helps as a sequence of events and descriptions. But then – that's the really difficult bit – you have to get back there far more vividly than you were when you were there. You have to imagine that with more power than you could take, I mean, far more than the real thing. So I think that's why I got so ill, writing Trawler, because you have to describe the seasickness and the sleeplessness and going mad. I think that was the start of going really mad. It's the reimagining that's difficult.

You have two sets of clothes. One set is dry. You get into your dry clothes at night. Now, that's easy, get into a hammock and you've got your mosquito net round you, absolutely everything is trying to get in. You don't want the tiniest little hole. Just the noise [mosquito sound] is amazing. And you're greased with Vaseline. You've greased your hammock ropes, otherwise these bloody great... they're always big, the first ants, an inch long, come. They're after you. And they're pretty simple: they just want to bite chunks out of you. But if you don't want them to do that, then they sting you, and that can knock you out, with the Venti Quatro in South America, and these elephant ants in Borneo. Enormous things. And you don't want them marching along... I mean, you very soon learn to put Vaseline over everything, and redo it. And then, in the morning, bad time in the morning, really, because you've got to get out, take off your nice warm clothes, in your... well, the nylon wraparound bashers, and get into the very, very cold, sopping wet clothes from the day before, because there's nothing you can do. You can't dry wet clothes. You know, you've been in the river. They're dripping. You can wring them out, but there's no point, because it's going to happen again. And put those on. And also, yes, you're very sore on the crotch and everywhere. And then the best thing is: go straight down to the river in your wet clothes and get into the river. Now in Borneo, it's alright, you don't have to watch out for other things I'll tell you about. You do in South America. But in Borneo, you get... it just takes some getting used to. You go into the river and you drop your trousers and you realise that you are very, very popular. You know, some people can't bear to talk about this kind of thing. They don't like it at all. All the fish in Borneo, in every Bornean river, they are so pleased to see you. They're saying, 'Come on', and you're being nibbled by catfish. And whiskered. So everywhere. Until you produce their breakfast. The seeds is what they're after. And then, there's a big problem. You really don't know... which I never really solved. I went in a whirlpool and the whirlpools are everywhere along the shore. Do you duck or jump as everything is swirling around? And then, just downriver from the men's area, where they're defecating, the women are gathering the water. So it's not surprising that there are more species of parasitic bloodworm and gut worms. So you can get very ill.

So the  point, the really important point about Borneo, don't think you're  offending everybody: really make sure you have two water bottles, one  either side, and one of them is always brewing with puritabs, with  chlorine. Because there was a hero of mine, actually, who was at Oxford,  McKinnon, he got the very best job, the plum task, which was to go and  study the sex life of the orang-utan in Borneo. Now it turned out nobody  knew, but it was bad luck for him, that firstly, that the orang-utan  doesn't really have a sex life. They meet every five years. So his film  was full of orang going [looking around] and that would be it. And then  you'd see very slowly getting together with the female, a great moment  of film. And then slowly parting. And that was it. She'd have her  babies, you know. It was no big deal. And so that was the first piece of  bad luck. He never sold his film. And then the second was that he  thought that he had to drink with everybody... he mustn't purify his  water, he had to absolutely join in, and he came back, and he had just  13 weeks in a year when he was okay, without worms hatching from his  bloodstream, from his blood, from different organs.
And  there were... I think it was 23 papers written on all the new parasites  that had been found in his blood at the Radcliffe. Well, that's pretty  staggering. I mean, now he's more or less alright. But he couldn't do a  thing. There were just 13 weeks of the year that he could operate. And I  went to his lecture when he got back, you know, the great man, our  student hero. There he was, he could hardly hold the lecture cue. And he  was yellow. He was just this dark yellow. And then he went into  hospital. Still, I'm proud to say when I get back from these trips, I go  straight into the Radcliffe to the Tropical Diseases Department, and I  thought, how wonderful these people are. I am so grateful. And then I  thought, 'Well, hang on a minute. I've given so much blood I can hardly  bloody walk, and they haven't got the money to go out and see if these  diseases... they're just hoping that I'm going to make their names for  them. I'll just have a little blood.' And then, so you get cleaned up,  but that's the real horror about it all, is it's not dramatic things  like being... having an arrow put through you, it's stuff like Chagas  Disease, which is CHAGAS. And Rhodnius prolixus, a big bug,  drops on your head. If it's infected, its brain is full of... full of  this Trypanasona and it crawls down your cheek, swings around, bites  you, and defecates on the bite. You think it's a mosquito, and the  itchiness, and you scratch, and this puts the Trypanasones into your  system. And it's simple, but there's no cure. There's no money in  anybody researching it. You die from between a year and 20 years from  this parasite. It just eats the muscle of the heart, that's what it  likes to eat. And there was a time when people thought Darwin had it,  but anyway... And I got one of these things, put my hand up, thought it  was a mosquito, this beautiful, big, violent and black-veined bug, and I  whopped it in a notebook. But luckily, I'd felt it. It's got long, long  legs, and it didn't bite me, but that was a bad moment.
It's parasites, that's what worries you. Something that will take 10-15% of your energy, and therefore stop you being a writer.

You really must keep notes of everything as it's happening. So you cover them in tape and have them in a waterproof bag slung at your waist, with a Biro in there. And it's important just to... just to write, scribbling them as you're going along. I mean, these ones are full of little drawings and so on: how you kill a wild boar, a peccary. But this notebook is quite dramatic, because here is Rhodnius prolixus, the assassin bug, that I clapped into my notebook, having pulled it off my face. Pulled it off my neck, in fact, exactly where it injects you if it's been parasitized.
Now this must be... I'd say this is Congo. No, it's not, it's not. It's South America. It's the Yanomami compound. It's bloody beautiful. These things are everywhere. I'd completely forgotten that was in there.

We're pulling the dugout up beside a rapid. And the Iban with us hadn't realised yet that their myth was a myth, that their ancestors were giants and white, and all white people were immensely strong. Now they very soon found out, but they hadn't, at this stage. So we were expected to pull this dugout through... yes, they say a small rapid. Pretty bad. And we got up to the top of the side rapid, and we just stepped two or three paces too far to our left, into the main river. Now I'd still got my feet gripping a rock, but they'd been polished smooth by hundreds of thousands of years of rolling water. And I had James's [Fenton] hand in mine, and his knuckles were white, and he bites his fingernails, so there's nothing to grip, you know. And boom, off it went, and he span like this, sort of, pile of old clothes, and his hat came off. And I was thinking of Conrad, you know, your identity's gone. So the hat is spinning and James is spinning, or this pile of old clothes is spinning, and then boom, down... down the waterfall. And in the pool below, there he is, with his head white as an owl's egg, and as fragile, going round and round. And nearer and nearer, it seemed to me, to the rocks. Whereas this young, tattooed Iban... well, he would have been a great warrior in another era, jumps down the rocks, really fast, and then he leaps into the middle of this whirlpool with a great, long cry. And he said afterwards, 'Well, the cry is... you must cry like that to placate the spirits of the river, because the spirit's already taken James, and you're going to try and take him back, so please, you know, don't get angry with me. I acknowledge that he should be yours.' And he got him, and pulled him to the bank.
Now there was a little guy Iban with us, too, half the size. He was a very good bow lookout, but tiny. He'd also jumped down the rocks, but of course nobody noticed, you know, he's not a tough guy. And he jumped in, and after James was on the bank and being sick and gasping for breath and hyperventilating, little Ingai comes up, and in his hand, he's got the hat. He said: James, James, I save hat. And then we laughed. And then it's everything is going to be alright, then. James is sick and... yes, but it can happen very, very fast.

I'd fallen in love with jungles in Borneo. They're just extraordinary, the diversity and the richness of it all, and how you don't know what's happening in the next hundred yards. So obviously, the next one was South America, the bird continent. And eventually was always going to be Congo, but I wanted to leave that till last, having written about [Joseph] Conrad and quite rightly, as it turned out, frightened of the Congo. Anyhow, so, just with an address of someone called Charlie Brewer Carias and the Sunday Times stringer, set off to Caracas with the only person, the only friend, who would go with me, called Simon Stockton, and he was a night club casino manager. Now the most unsuitable person in the world to go to a jungle, was the joke, but of course, became less of a joke as the month went past. But wonderful, the story.
So I called on Brewer Carias, this wonderful macho, well, typical white South American politician. He, personally, with eight servants, as he called them, had invaded Guyana, because Venezuela has a claim to it. And they mobilised their air force and Charlie had to retreat. And he lost his job. Now he's the inventor of this, you see. This will just... you can get a feel of the Venezuelan army, and he was their main trainer, jungle training. Big moustache, enormous biceps. The Charlie Brewer Explorer Knife. And as Simon said, 'This is a knife... oh Slim, that's a knife that'd give Hitler the screaming ab-dabs.' So a big, tough guy, and he took me to the gym, the very first time I've ever been to a gym, because, you know, he was such a busy man, he couldn't discuss these projects anywhere, unless he was on the move. So there we are in this steam room, and I'm stark naked and feeling pretty bad about the size of these guys, the size of their penises. Just the quite extraordinary macho atmosphere in this place. And then, out of this room, there's some man lifting a bus on one side and half a train on the other, going 'hoo.' And I thought, well, if this is what it takes, we're sadly lacking.
Anyhow, and he got very excited, because his men in the far south of Venezuela, in a little place called San Carlos de Rio Negra had no job for that year, and I would employ them, really happy to do so. Because the original plan was to go right from the north of the Amazon and to the south, but on these huge rivers, which don't really look that big on a map, but as he said, it's almost like the sea, you can't see one bank from the other, whereas this project, to go through a 17th century route, to try and rediscover the link between the Orinoco and the Amazon, which [Alexander von] Humboldt had written about. I mean, it's huge, the Casiquiare canal.
But the thing about it, the wonderful thing about it, is that it crosses a watershed, and it does that simply because, and you have to go there to understand why, this vast area is a so-called dendritic delta. So all the rivers are like this, interlocking. And they are 40-feet deep, and the trees meet overhead all the way, and there's no obvious direction to take, and it's all very well with a compass, but are you really going to cut through that massive hardwood and try and follow the route to the east? It can't be done. And the Border Commission, I was very pleased to learn afterwards, they were in there, trying to set the border. And they were lost for four months.
And this shows you what's it like. This is a NASA map that I bought from Charlie. How can I do this? Hold this up here. Now this little white map... the red... it's an infrared. So that's all trees, vegetation. Massive, tight canopy. And here's this little place, San Carlos de Rio Negra, Casiquiare, and then down here, the idea was to get to Neblina. Can you see this massive mountain here? Now, to give you an idea of how wild this area is, how immensely exciting it was, this... the highest, biggest mountain outside the Andes, in South America, not discovered until 1953, by the Phelpses who came in from the north. Well, as you see, on an ordinary map, there are lot of hypothetical little rivers marked here. Well, they're not there. There are thousands of tiny rivers here, and the trees meet right overhead. As you see, you can't see it, you can't map. So that in itself is wonderful.

Well, of course, it was a lot tougher than I was expecting, certainly that Simon [Stockton] was expecting, but we were looked after. So this old Indian, Chimo, Charlie Brewer's motorman, on a sort of retainer salary, he was the big boss man, enormous. And over 70. And he said that he had, I think it was 31 children and grandchildren. Because as he's the motorman and goes up all the rivers, he can have a separate wife in each village that he stops in. And explaining how he liked to be comfortable. And every time we got to a new tributary and turned into it, it was his ritual, with these huge thighs, like a couple of pigs, you know, and he'd pull out what he called his pinga and anoint each river we turned into with the most enormous piss. Then everybody would cheer. So I loved him, really, but it was terribly important that he would look after me. You've got to win their respect or at least, be honest, make it perfectly... well, and it's always obvious that you're useless and can't do anything. Haven't a clue. But I must have made it just too... just too obvious, this time, because we'd run out of food and he'd shot a howler monkey, but at least it was a very old howler monkey. And he put the head in my mess tent. Square army mess tents. And as I drank the soup, the howler monkey's skull and the eyes came into view, in place. And he said, 'No, don't look at it like...' I can't do this deep, deep voice. 'Don't look at it like that. When we really like somebody, when we want them to become one of us, we ask them to do this thing. You must suck out the eyes.'
I was terribly flattered, so I picked up the skull and sucked, and the optic nerves gave way, and the eyeballs down my throat. And then yes, he looked like you're looking. And then he said, he said to me, 'How disgusting. How could you do a thing like that? White men will do anything to be loved', he said. 'That's the most revolting thing I've ever seen.'
I brought the skull back with me, and here it is. You see, he's very old, he's lost a lot of teeth. But this howler monkey, and this is how he howls like this: the voice box fits in there. And it's not really a howl. Every morning... well, if you're far enough away from a village, you're awoken by this [howl] and then another one will answer. And he's not much bigger than a... well, he's very... quite a big spaniel. Yes. Extraordinary.

Here  are the so-called bongos, in a creek on the Baria. Now there are two  dugout canoes, quite big. And behind them, we would be towing a little  fishing canoe, called a curiara, one man or two men at the  most. And these things... you need two, because in this dendritic delta,  there are so many snags and enormous hardwoods you have to chop  through. You really shouldn't be doing it in one dugout. You'd never get  out of there if something happened. Just quite apart from the fact that  it's pullulating with electric eels and big rays. And what would it be?  Two, three nights a month, say? You hear a jaguar, which is another  wonderful noise [coughing sound] and then you put another log on the  fire or you turn over and hold yourself in your hammock. But it's a  very, very long way away, so you need a... you need two dugouts, that's  the point.
Now,  you need a bow lookout, and that's a terrible job, because you get the  glare off the river, and you're looking for shallows and rocks and  signal either way. And all the bow lookouts I've ever had, they're  always tiny, for some reason. I suppose, like a jockey, you crouch in  the bow. And this one, a Curripaco Indian, nephew of huge Chimo, and the  kind of young man who would be in the SAS if he knew about it, men just  impressive in every way. And I have a tip for you, if you want to  choose your men properly: always go for the man who has an extra thumb.  He wouldn't eat with us, so ashamed of this. He'd eat separately. And  then, in the middle of... well, thunderstorms, but the rain. You see, I  got the wet season and the dry season mixed up here. It's got it's... a  bit complicated, but there's no excuse for that. So I actually went in  the wet season, which was difficult explaining that to Simon. So the  rain may fall continually for a week, ten days at a time. And each drop,  you take it very personally. It's definitely out to get you. They're  huge.
And  the rivers... the rivers rose 40 feet. They rise 40 feet. So we were  camped on very small islands on the jungle floor, the tops of former  little hills. And everything had gone up there to escape drowning, of  course. And I calculated that under each eleventh leaf, there would be a  scorpion. And Simon [Stockton] didn't like that, either. But I was hit  by one, and it's an extraordinary feeling. Everything feels fluttering  inside your body, like sparrows, little baby sparrows, begging for food,  or hedge sparrows begging for sex. You know, it's all... and then it  passed. And of course, I thought I was going to die of the scorpion  sting, but Juan, I'll tell you about, he said, 'No, don't make a stupid.  Here, in that environment, a scorpion doesn't have to kill something  immediately. It's not like the desert, where you need a real whop of  poison. Here, you can run after it.' Anyway, so they're not fatal.  They're not. They just look lethal.

And so, in the bongo, there's Culimacare, the lookout. And then we had to take a wonderful guy called Galvis, who was Venezuelan. I mean, they're all Venezuelan, but a white Venezuelan. And he was living in San Carlos de Rio Negro because he was a double murderer. It wasn't really his fault. He ran a little shop, and someone annoyed him, so he shot them. And that's okay. And then somebody... I forget, I think somebody tried to break in, and even though that was okay, too, really, it's just bad luck if you kill two people. So he was more or less exiled to this little town, and was trying to be the mayor, so he's coming with us. And he has this massive radio, with which he can communicate with Charlie, was the idea. Because if there was any trouble, or if Charlie thought Simon might have a breakdown, which he did... And then Charlie, you know, he would helicopter in. Of course, he told me afterwards, it's just so beneath contempt and working class to go if you're not in a helicopter to a place like that. We don't do that. That's for Indians.
So that's Galvis, and then the axeman, wonderfully strong, and sad. Pablo, he was called. And he was sad because he adored his wife, his first wife, and she was out in her curiara, fishing canoe, on the Rio Negro one day, and these fast, snap storms come up, and produce quite nasty big waves, and she drowned. And he'd never got over it.
And when I paid them all half of their money in advance for however many... four months or something, we saw him in the morning lying in the grass, holding his whole bunch of notes, and somebody had ripped them. It's that kind of society. Anyway, so we left when they all sobered up. And then a very old man called Valentini, who came along because he was related to everybody, and he had rheumy eyes and was a sweetheart, and I gave them all pipes, and this old man, he couldn't believe he'd finally got something from the Western world, as he called it. It was a perfectly ordinary pipe from Savory's in Oxford.
So that's it. And Simon...             

Yes, Simon [Stockton], he... I think probably what finally shook him to bits was the fact that your meat didn't come wrapped up in plastic, it didn't come from a supermarket. It wasn't already jointed. You know, he loves cooking, and... but again, right at the end of the first half, as it were, Culimacare, who's a great hunter. He always wanted to shoot a tapir. You're not a man until you've shot a tapir. Wonderful thing. It's like a Shetland pony with a long snoot. And I helped gut it, of course, with the Charlie knife. And that sort of horrified Simon. And by... I mean, everybody always... you go straight for the liver. Liver is the great delicacy. So we're tearing out the liver and Simon is groaning in his hammock. And I think nothing of it. And then, two days later, back in Culimacare's little village, and Chimo's sharing out all this meat to everybody, you know, a great, really great thing.
And I go for a pee in the morning, and the childhood nightmare has arrived. Here it is. My penis has gone green. It's a bunch of grapes. The tapir ticks got in up the trousers. Now, they're flat, they're big, as big as a man's thumbnail when they're swollen, but they're flat and you don't feel anything, and they'd swarmed all over me, and into your trousers, and they go for the one place that a tapir will never scratch on a thorn bush, rub itself on to get rid of the ticks. And that's around its penis... And sucks blood very fast. And the expanded skin is green, dark green or bright green, and it drops off, goes up and digests this blood meal on green leaves. Simple. So birds can't see it, or not so well. It's camouflaged. Anyway, the SAS said, you know, 'Ticks, lad. Take 'em off with Sellotape. But I'm afraid what you do is you pull them off and scream and stamp on them.' Light scarring.

Well, the simple, practical, boring answer to that is: when you arrive in a real frontier airport, or you arrive in Brazzaville, there is absolutely no way of getting your pile of wonderful army baggage from point A to point B without someone to guard it, either end. You need somebody with you. And also, you get another unexpected – it always is – extraordinary point of view from somebody in your own culture cracking up in a world they could never have imagined before, any more than I could. So you have two voices. I hate... well, no I don't, but it's difficult, travel books with lots and lots of young man's introspection in them. You know, the sort of book that says: 'I think... I thought the ice had something to tell me.' You know, this is what we don't want. And dialogue's a wonderful thing. And another point of view, and you can create characters, too, if you have a companion with you, by... simply by using their comments.
And you're going to say that it's... seems a fictional process. Well, it is, of course. Because if you're writing it straight, any travel book, it will be full of grunts and extreme boredom. You have to compress dialogue, and the minute you do that, it becomes a novel, in a way. And my defence is, of all those books, that, look, if those people had thought of that at the time, that's exactly what they would have said. But events you mustn't mess about with.
We had to cut our way through these huge trees fallen across this very narrow, but very deep, tiny, tiny, rivers. No other way through. And they were superb, even old Chimo. And you have to do this while balancing on bits of fallen branch and keeping out of the water. And while you do it, another reason why Simon finally cracked up – I mean, he had every reason to. See, one little shiver on a leaf where the hornet's nest is concealed... now they're small communities, but about 40 in most of these. Yes? All 40 come out at once, and you dive into the water and you put your hat over your head. Now Simon [Stockton], the last thing he wanted to do was get really soaking wet and dive into this black, black water, so he was always the last in. So they got him on the back of the neck. Now their hornets sting no worse than our hornet stings, but that's bad. And the beestings are no worse than our beestings, but you get an awful lot of them, especially on your back as you're diving in.
And then there are other things. If you... when you don't know what you're doing and you put your hand on actually several species of trees, it suddenly feels as if you've stuck your hand into a flame. That's why they're called fire ants. Those tiny ants, and they bite. It's incredibly painful. And then, there are big, big, ants, which also got Simon, a thing called a Venti Quatro, because it can knock you out for 24 hours, but then, you know, you can see them coming. They're about that big. And Chimo took them very seriously, and whenever we camped, he'd look for the hole down to the nest, and pour a bit of gasoline down it. Lots of that. Lots of medium-sized animals and wanting to eat you or warn you off.

He really wanted to go. We got back to Culimacare's village, and that was the last time that he could get away before we went to try and find the Yanomami. And the Venezuelan Marines, such as they are, took him away downriver. But he was very pleased to be going, and he got to a hotel, and he did exactly what he said he would do: have a wonderful meal in Caracas, and then have it again. And he had carpaccio and lots and lots of wine, and they all came to look at him out of the kitchen, because he said, 'Now, I'll have exactly the same again.' And he did. And then got up to his room, and of course, his stomach had shrunk. And there was terrible throwing up all night.

I'm worried I haven't given you any idea of how extraordinarily beautiful it can be. I mean, how really wonderful. Something you never forget all your life. I mean, you can live on it.
[Q] The jungle?
Yes, I still have some of my best dreams, or the best bits of it. So a day, for instance, I'm thinking of. Not exactly a typical day, but it does happen a lot. So the water's risen 40 feet, which is kind of frightening. I have that dream, too, of water just in every direction for always. And in those big bongos, the dugout canoes, gliding between trees, quite near the treetops, in some cases, in a short forest. Lots of different types of forest, in the Amazon. So going along almost in the canopy, gliding silently. And Chimo wanted to show me his favourite place that didn't involve women. We got into the little curiara, the fishing canoe, with Culimacare behind me, paddling. And then slid out of the trees into this lagoon. It's called the Yacuta lagoon off the Siapa Emoni river. Wow. Beautiful sunlight and in the far distance there are these giant turtles. You see the shell and then the head, the little head. And 30 or 40 plumbeous kites, these beautiful, fluttery kites hawking termites, termite swarm rising up. And he paddled out quietly, but then these guys were sort of outraged or curious, or came very, very, very close. Four giant sloths and they've got a beautiful white patch here. They're brown and look really cuddly. And they went [sneezing sound], which means: who are you? Get out of our place. Huge. And you're only in a little tiny fishing canoe, and in Curripace, I think Culimacare said the equivalent of, 'No, you go away, we're...' So they're playing about all around us, and once you get to this clump of trees, and it's the sound of old men snoring, really loud snores.
And I look up, and there's the one bird I really have wanted to see everywhere, lots of them, the chenchena, as Chimo called it. The hoatzin. Now we now know it's related to the cuckoos, but that's only recently. It was always thought that it was a direct descendant of archaeopteryx. I mean, as you know, all birds are descended from dinosaurs, and the reason why is because its chicks have a little hook. So when they fall out of the nest into the water, as a harpy or whatever, so hop, bump – you jump into the water, and then when danger's over, you crawl up the tree. And then they lose their hooks later, but it looks so primitive, this bird. You can see the light through its straggly feathers. Beautiful, buffy sort of brown. About the same as a crow, a bit bigger than a crow. And anyway, we got right in amongst them. And they've got a punk, sort of, crest like this. Bizarre. And their faces are bright blue. And the eye is bright, bright red, scarlet. And they're leaning out of the tree going [squawking] and I think that means 'piss off' in hoatzin.
So those sort of days set you up for a month, you know. That's... it was just extraordinary. And then you creep away, and you haven't done any damage. I mean, it's all happening there right now.

I was scared of... same as everybody is, the two myths, except they're not really myths at all, it turns out. And the one, the obvious one, is: don't go for a swim in the river because of piranhas.  Now it turns out that Caribe, these big piranhas, they're actually what you eat. But for them, you'd starve. I mean, you put in any bit of blood or gunge or... and you just pull them in. But they're big and delicious. And wonderful. But don't go for a swim in the rivers. And certainly not if you've been bitten or... or there's any trace of blood on you, yours or something else's.
And to illustrate this, there was a Royal Geographical Society expedition run by Hemming, my friend. And everybody bathed in the river and thought it was just silly, you know. It's full of piranhas, that's fine. Until... one theory is, you know, it depends on the season and what prey is in the water and so on. Anyway, one of these young scientists, just bitten on the back of his ankle. Took out a perfect triangle, like an absolute surgical incision. So he thought, well, he better go see the nurse. I mean, they had a nurse. A posh operation. And when he was halfway there, the artery went, and the blood spurted absolutely everywhere. Now, he'd be dead in... he really would be dead in seconds. That's how that happens. So that's not a myth.
And the other thing that I talked about before these scientists went out on this big expedition, well, in fact I talked about it on Wogan, thought it was a joke. I really wasn't enjoying the thought of... you know, mustn't pee in the river, because this... a good beer and you dive in and take a pee. And there's a little tiny catfish, and it locks onto your stream of urine and it goes straight up the urethra, and it puts out six spines on either side, and does a half-turn and hangs in there. There's nothing you can do. You have to get to hospital, which in my case is about 600 miles away, and in your best Portuguese, you must ask the surgeon to cut off your penis.
So I now know that in one month of the year, the Yanomami know a particular fruit which you have to eat green, and this is so acidic that not even the candiru can take it. You can piss it out. But then, I mean, you're badly damaged. So I thought all this, of course, was a myth. But these guys were... they called it the Wogan fish, and put tiny nets across the river they were studying, and sent me... this was the first one to reach Europe, and I had it rebottled by the Natural History Museum just now. That's actually a pregnant female. It's far too big for me, but it'll probably fit you fine. It's not a joke. And a lot of work being done on these now. And yes, indeed, that will happen. It doesn't want to be in your penis. It's looking for the cloaca or the gills of big, big catfish. And it has energy stored up. It's got this once chance in life to go wham, and then that's it, like a battery. And it can indeed swim up a stream of urine. Not only that, but in the lab, they've swum, right up, a stream of uric acid into a tank. So if you are peeing into the river, it is possible. And then the story gets less interesting, because there are hundreds of different species that don't bother with any of that classy stuff, they just go and bore straight into your leg.

I was really worried about this fish, the toothpick fish. So I thought, well, we'll deal with this. So I went to see my friend Donald Hopkins, who makes prostheses in the Radcliffe. And we'd got a cricket box and we put a tea strainer on the front, and when I produced this in the Amazon, Chimo fell around. He said, 'So you all wear that in England, do you, when you go for a swim in the river?'
But it would work, this, but then the thing is, I then discovered, just too awful. They're not that particularly... they're not classy. They don't mind if they can't get into the penis. Women, swimming, just pull them out. They don't just come in ones, either, you know. You can pull them out, but it's very painful when they're in the anus.

Simon [Stockton] left, went downriver, and one of his last remarks was, 'I can't stand it here. These people. I can't stand the poverty. They don't own anything', he said. And I said, 'But look, you've got to come with me to the Yanomami. That's the whole point of this.' And he said, 'I don't want to see no people who whack each other over the head with poles.' He'd had enough. Which they do. It's always a fight over women. Formalised duels. And you bare your head and your opponent takes up to three blows with these ten-foot-long poles. And then, if you're still standing, you do the same to him. And then if it goes to the next stage, you turn your pole around and there's a spear on that side. And then once that starts, everybody begins to join in, and then arrows start to fly, with man-killing points on them.
But again, you might think this is a myth, but when we did get to the Yanomami, well, a wonderful guy called Jarivanau... and they're very proud, and with this sharp grass, they shave the tops of their heads to show where the skull has been fractured, these great canals in the top of the skull where it's been hit. Anyway, we met this extraordinary-looking man, Jarivanau, really because Chimo was determined to do the best for me, not for me, but because his reputation had taken a knock, because he hadn't managed to find this river, the hidden river in the delta.
We'd came... a terrible moment, when we'd come, in fact, in a circle, exactly as everybody says. We had come in a whole circle. My first thought, when we saw this enormous hardwood cleared on the river, I thought, 'Oh God, Hanbury-Tenison's got here first.' And then said, 'You idiot, it's us.' We've come in a circle. So that was about a month. Anyway, but we did get to Neblina, but we didn't get down this river, so Chimo felt bad, so he agreed to take me to see this group of Yanomami that he'd never visited, way, way, way, away up the Siapa and Emoni rivers.
Now the Yanomami are terribly well-known and I know Chagnon quite well, but the point is that they live in these disparate groups and they're in low-level warfare all the time, so this was quite genuinely scary. And a very impressive stockade, it's a defended oval in the middle of the jungle. And Jarivanau has our single-barrel shotgun, but because the virtue that is valued the most highly in Yanomami society is, indeed, fierceness, toughness, extreme masculinity, he fires into the air. So on this peaceful afternoon, this bang and the egrets shatter up. And he runs, gets down on his knees, and pulls a little door open in this hatch, and goes through it. Well, I'm running along behind with this big pack on, so I have to really crawl through and stand up... or at least I don't stand up, I'm still in the squatting position. I look up, and I see these two men have their penis tied around their waist by the foreskin, flat against the stomach. So they're dressed for dinner, you know. I think, 'My God, these are the real people. No nonsense with a loincloth, or...' and then I look up and see these six-foot-long arrows pointing at me. And the tip, I see, the tip, that's exactly right. That is the man-killing tip that Chagnon describes. I remember the diagram.
And then I look up into these guys' eyes, and they're completely impassive, massive muscles. And then, certainly then, I think, 'My God, they're going to kill me.' So your fear arrives, the real fear comes in a little packet out of nowhere. And then an old woman bashed me. She waddled over and slapped me in the cheeks. Then I stood up and she slapped me in the chest. And then I thought, 'I'm going to lose the lot.' Actually, I managed, I got my hands over my genitals before she could really hit those, and then everybody's cracking up with laughter, everything's fine, then.

And then a genuine big privilege. Invited to join the man, the shaman, a party, a Yanomami party. And stuff called yopo.
And  there was the shaman and the elders, and they're the ones who keep the  entire community free of evil spirits. Now I didn't know it, but at the  time, all the young men in the community were out on a long hunt. So not  a lot for old men to do once they really can't hunt anymore. And by old  men, I mean late 30s. Now I'm beckoned across the shabono, an oval,  open space, which is strange in an entirely enclosing jungle. In fact,  it's so odd that above it, there's constant thermals, the heat. So  always over you in the shabono, are these beautiful king vultures  catching the sun in their white wings, way up. So beneath the king  vultures. Of course I go, terribly flattered.
Now  I'd wondered, I mean I'd seen this happen before, and I'd always  wondered why, when somebody's given a blast of yopo... Well, perhaps I  better tell you. I mean, I'd just join a queue. I mean, I'm the  absolute... the nothing and the nobody, of course. And indeed the  Yanomami, throughout their range, their word for a foreigner is exactly  the same as their word for one quarter of a turd. Not even a whole turd.  They're the first created people. We can't speak properly anymore.  We're degenerate. I'm afraid when you're in their territory, that's  exactly what it feels like. So I'm waiting in the queue, and the shaman,  the big man, he, his deputy, takes this long tube. Well, about  four-feet long, and it has a pierced bean, a legume poddy thing on the  end, and tips in their only... they've got one bottle, because glass is  sacred. Bottle, you know, sort of spices jar from somewhere, traded up  for hundreds of miles, probably. Tips this brown powder in, takes it to  his mouth and goes [blowing sound] and the shaman: 'Aaah!' And puts his  hands sort of back of his head like that. And then he gets another blast  up the other nostril. And then, I now know how special this is, two  more. Now, no man can take more than two unless you're Superman and the  shaman. And then he sits there and brown snot pouring out of his nose,  and then he's horribly sick. And then he gets up and he does this  stamping walk. And he's holding, like this, he's holding something  really heavy. And I now know he's holding the world, making sure that  everything will be alright for everybody on the next day. And then after  this wonderful, insanely fit and emphatic dance, he sits down, or  rather he crumples.

So then it comes to my turn, eventually, and it's Jarivanau giving me mine, so at least it was a friend. And then I realise why everybody does this. You are convinced the back of your head is coming off. The pain in the ear, nose and throat system is so intense. Well, you can't scream. In fact, you can't breathe. You think you really are dying, for whatever fraction of a second it is. You can't raise oxygen anywhere. Your whole... your lungs are filled with grit, and you really think somebody's hit you on the back of the head with a small log. You're in awful pain. And then, bang, you're just so happy. This cleanout, all the mucous from all the sinuses, everything is running out of your nose onto the ground. I mean, you've no idea you had sinuses that could possibly produce that volume of liquid, mucous, snot. And then, I'm afraid, then... but it happens so fast, it's almost alright, you're sick. It's more like seasickness. You just projectile, boom, bang, and then it's over. And it's all right in front of you. And then you sit there, and this place is the most peaceful, beautiful, lovely place in the world. You could live here forever. That mountain, Leapopuei or whatever I think it was called, there never was a mountain so lovely. Extraordinary peaceful feeling. And the Yanomami women, I'm sorry to say, look beautiful beyond belief. I'm an old man, but you want to lick them all over. I mean, you're absolutely gone. And there's a matchstick girl, and got these sticks, and you think, sticks are just so lovely. Why don't we all do it?
And then, many hours later, you come to... In fact, Juan Saldarriaga, this Colombian ecologist, who was... and I forgot to mention, he was such a powerful presence in the bongo. He picks me up and says... he was telling me not to do this thing because it damaged the brain and everybody and Chimo was saying, you know, 'We don't really want you with us after this, because you will be crazy.' And that has worried me since, a bit. I mean, I took several blasts. If I had been brain-damaged, by definition, I wouldn't know, would I? Absolutely everybody tells you, 'You fry your brains with this stuff.' And look, it's okay. It is not a drug that is going to catch on. You can't administer it to yourself, and maybe the pleasure is... I've never had such facial pain. Brain-pain, as it were. Sinus pain. And then it suddenly goes. And that's the real kick. I am not dead. I am not in pain.

It's two or three vines, the extract. But actually, in fact, it's packed with tryptamines, which just knock you out. It's a massive tranquiliser, eventually. I think probably the trick... the good deal is that the way of administering this drug that leads to such appalling pain... it's as if you'd taken a whole pepper pot, straight. Finely ground pepper, straight up your nose. That's what it's like. I don't know.
[Q] But you've done it more than once?
Yes. I like to be loved. Yes. And the effects were the same.
[Q] Well, you were joking, saying I like to be loved, but you mean this generates respect, does it?
You become... that's the way you become one of these people. I mean, of course, at many, many removes, you're sort of like the sub... well no, you're not the postman, but you're... well, you belong. You belong. And Chimo laughing about the monkey's eyeballs, but you take this stuff and they're not going to kill you. Chagnon, the great anthropologist, never did, you know. All these Americans don't do such things.
[Q] You're quite, sort of, bold, aren't you? Quite brave?
I don't think so, no. I think desperate. I think you spend half your life in bed and of course you're going to take yopo, won't you? No, not bold. I think the bold people can deal with life in Oxford at three o'clock on a grey afternoon. Or they can deal with getting up every morning to go to work. Though actually, maybe not, because when you get to work, it's lovely and there's low-grade sex and there's pheromones in the office and lots of things going on and... but yes, that's it. That's what... bold. Bold is to hold down a regular job, not to swanning off to jungles. That's what I really think. But how awful to think that I might die in my bed, a slow decline in some wonderful Indian summer, terminal goodbye people's home. There's one down the road in Titletown. And wouldn't it be classy to go with a six-to-eight-foot long Yanomami arrow. These things have enough kinetic energy, they hit you, they pick a big man up, pin him to a tree. Wow. Classy.

They're after the girls. They've come back from hunting, absolutely everybody knows who's done what, who's picked a spider monkey out of a tree from 200 yards with this arrow. And the entire thing, there it is, it seemed to me. There's theatre, there's the play, there's literature. They are in the centre of the shabono, telling everybody in this chant about what's happened on the hunt. Now that night, I'd got into my hammock, passing out. Well, the yopo, you would, wouldn't you? Tana, tana, tana, argh... And then I flipped my torch on, well I assumed that was alright, but here are these warriors, these young guys, with their feathers up and well, you'll never see people that fit. Not in the Olympics. And they're chewing. What the hell are they chewing? They are chewing plantains, and they're marching around the shabono, and each boy is gobbing it out, and it's a symbol. It's a metaphor for his sperm.
And the girls are lying in their hammocks, gorgeous. And he has to get it onto the mount of Venus. He's deciding, you know, he's just telling them who he really admires and fancies, the girls. So there are shrieks of laughter. And these guys... it's such a violent society. You know, they probably aren't being very kind to people who are already married, you know. Fights, warfare. So that I liked, but also I loved the idea that a woman has the sex charm, really does. It's not ecstasy, but she's got these herbs all mixed up and everybody knows what it is, and she creeps up behind the boy that she really fancies and whops it, from behind, into his nose. And he inhales this and then he just can't help himself, it's boom, always behind a bush. And after this, an evening like that, they were back from the hunt, the girls collect the sperm of the hero or the man who's been most fierce, the bravest. The guy with the shortest fuse, the most dangerous, the best hunter, too. And they drag him off behind a bush, like those hedge-sparrows, and they gather his sperm, and his genes pass right through the society very fast. So it becomes more and more and more violent as time goes on.
[Q] How do they gather his sperm?
Oh well, they get him to make love to them behind the bush, when everybody's out, into the jungle. And like the hedge-sparrow, at the end of the season, the number one boy is very, very likely to die. Because A, he's exhausted, but that's not really it. B, he has the shortest fuse. He's going to get killed. He goes off fighting to bring back his reputation by killing somebody in, you know, a group of Yanomami, 20, 30 miles away through the jungle. He just wa  its and hides outside the shabono. Doesn't matter who, you know, a child, a grandmother, anybody, as long as he can bring back a bit of the body.
[Q] What an extraordinary society.
He... he will be sexually selected. Chagnon's done so much work on this. I mean, the figures are astonishing. He came here and gave a little lecture, just for us and Dawkins. He... I forget the figures now, I'm going to ruin it, but it was... ah, wait a minute. If you've killed somebody, you're five times more likely to breed, etc., etc. I mean, it's as crude sexual selection set of figures as you'd get from lions or whatever.

The one thing that the Yanomami fear... they will go hunting peccaries, these... well, they look exactly like wild boar, but they're evolved differently. Convergent evolution. But these guys, 40 of them, you wound one, the whole lot will turn on you. And you whizz up a tree if you're lucky enough, and with their tusks, they'll cut this tree down and kill you. I mean, this is piggy, piggy behaviour. So you need a lot of people with a lot of arrows. They don't mind, then. And they're not frightened of the jaguar. Well, as Chimo said to me, 'He would like to be a big male boar peccary, with those huge balls.' Well, actually, Chimo needn't worry, but he's really brave when he meets a jaguar. And I said, 'Well, what happens when he meets the jaguar?' Chimo says, 'He lets all his women and children, his young nephews and nieces and brothers and cousins, run off. And he faces the jaguar.' And I said, 'Well, then what happens, Chimo?' Chimo said, 'He dies like a man.' I thought, wow.
But the only thing absolutely everybody, including Chimo, is frightened of, really frightened, is the anaconda. Now, as Chimo said when he was out in his curiara, his little fishing canoe, twice he'd been bitten by an anaconda. Each time he'd had his son or his brother or somebody else in the canoe. And the bow watch, the guy in the bow, always has the machete next to them. And you turn around and my God, you've got to be fast, and you can cut the head off. And then Juan laughed, the ecologist, and Chimo dropped his trousers. And there, indeed, on the big pig thigh, two horrible scars. And he said, 'All you see in the brown water, if you're lucky enough, you see what you think is a brown rat. You think it's a rat, an agouti or... it's that shape and size. Now that's just the head of the anaconda, and its jaw, it can open its jaw, it dislocates its own jaw, and got you. And its anchored ashore, onto... its tail is wrapped around a root. And it only has this muscle, but that muscle is just about the strongest there is, so it can do that, and you haven't a hope. You've got to have its head cut off or sever the nerves behind the head.'
Anyway, so I really wanted to see, of course, an anaconda. And again, because Chimo is feeling bad that he thought this terrible failure... it didn't bother me, but he hadn't found the river. So he suddenly pulls in, and there, right there, I mean, that far away, here is an anaconda. But he's brown and greeny, kind of... he's very, very young. They go black when they're really big. But nobody tells you these things. Alright, so he was only eight-, nine-feet long. Well, sod it, he probably just hatched or something. Nobody tells you the speed they move. When it woke up and saw the bongo alongside [hissing], and the water really did go white and boil. And you thought, you're going to have no chance at all. The speed! You know, no snake should move that fast.

20- to 30-feet long, the largest snake in the world. A constrictor, though, but living in the river. Only dangerous when its tail is anchored, because it only has that. So all those Indiana Jones pictures, all the movies, people wrestling with anacondas, and Charlie Brewer's got one, you know, really big anacondas, they're helpless as long as someone out of shot is holding the tail up. The minute he lets go and it gets hold of anything, you move fast.
The anaconda is the very, very worst. And once it get into your imagination, it's horrible. Because on the Siapa, these dark brown waters... the Rio Negro you can see into, full of tannins. But you just don't know what's there. And lots, you've got to remember, lots and lots of vegetation floating down. Lots of things look like the top of an anaconda's head, and to know it's no bigger than a rat, but behind it is 30 feet and it's that thick. They're not very sensitive, probably. No good sort of pleading for yourself.

Writing is... takes more energy than anything else, seems to me. You've got to be far more fully engaged than when you're doing anything else, certainly than when you're actually travelling. Not at all sure I want to go through any of that anymore.
[Q] So the writing, not the travelling, is the difficult part?
Oh yes. Anybody can travel, but you have to absolutely imagined back where you were travelling, and feeling things far more powerfully than you did then, otherwise what's the point? That's why I wrote at night. You can't be doing with a knock at the door, and so on. I mean, you're there, seeing the anaconda.
And you plan it, of course, like a novel, before you go. You know what you want your beginning and middle and end to be. But your characters are these bastards: they get up and walk right out of your plot. You can't control anything. And you're ridiculous, deluding yourself, if you think you're actually able to change things happening or stop things happening or... well, especially somewhere like the Congo. Can't be done. But it was wonderful. Incredible, unexpected life. But when I was four years old, I wanted to write. I had a big block of paper and I'd put on it what I thought were letters. The story always ended with this tiger in the garden that nobody else had seen.

Well, I really missed him. I mean, months later, when I did get back, I rang him up to go and see him. I was so pleased at the thought of going to see old Simon. And I rang him. You see, all day, on these rivers, there's a thing called 'the screaming piha'. Now it's a bit bigger than a thrush, and it can drive you mad. It's something to with music unfinished. This or that or the other, it goes [whistling] all the time, never changes. And Simon would go: 'Bloody bird!' And then at night, just bad luck. Again, nobody told you about this, there's this thing bigger than a turkey called the nocturnal curassow, and it gets very, very sexy. And the male, in the season, which this was, all night long, without a break unless the girl arrives, he goes [grunting]. And Simon said he can't sleep with that bloody bird. So when I... he picked the phone up, Simon here, and I said [grunting] and the phone went down. But it's alright, I'd see him now. But he couldn't... he still can't watch nature programmes on the telly. He said if he sees a tree, he wants that turned right off.
He couldn't go back to work for a bit. He put his hammock up, weirdly enough. Wouldn't move from his hammock, but he finished his reading of Dostoyevsky and he read all of Tolstoy, and he couldn't drive a car, he couldn't join in urban life again for a month. And he got tunnel vision and serious treatment. But the treatment came to an end when, I don't know, the psychiatrist said something he thought was offensive, and he told him if he says that one more time, he's going to jump over his desk and bosh him one. But he's alright now.
[Q] So that's the Amazon.
Yes, that's the Amazon.
[Q] You wouldn't have missed it, then?
God no. No, the idea, when I was a boy, was to go to all the big jungles in the world, but I never thought you actually could. It was Fenton, to Borneo. But then, you see, after the Congo, the last one was going to be New Guinea, but I'm far too old now.

This was in the Congo, the port at Brazzaville. They wouldn't know. These are open barges, and here people are setting down for the night. Now it's the most extraordinary sight. There are 3000 people, men and women, on these barges, with a big power block either side, tugs. And little balineers, fishing boats, getting a ride upriver. And 3000 people and no guardrails, no safety, no nothing anywhere. Big gaps between the barges, and as the captain said, 'Well, what can you do? Babies will roll over in their sleep and we lose two or three each time, going upriver.' And the other thing, perhaps, you out to know, is that there are 3000 people and two lavatories, or three, but one of them was locked by the purser, because that's where he kept his crocodiles, in there, to sell when he gets to the town upriver, and Brazzaville, when back in Brazzaville.
Yes, an education in itself, that was. Wonderful.

Now here's my companion on this trip, as it were, a photographer, a wonderful man, Lary Shaffer, a professor of animal behaviour at New York University, and he was Nico Tinbergen's, the Nobel prize winning animal behaviour professor at Oxford, he was his film cameraman. And so this time I got some wonderful pictures. I don't always say whose they are, of course. Now, the first thing you do, as you should, when you go to Brazzaville or Africa, you go to visit a feticheurs, a sorcerer, to see... pay your respects, really. And she casts these cowrie shells across the mud floor of the hut. And then became very agitated and looked at us, and she said, with her eyes shut, 'One of you is very ill right now.' Now, that's a very sensible thing to say if you're a feticheurs anywhere in the Congo, because where two people are gathered together, sure as hell one of them will be ill. But Lary really reacted, covered in sweat, this super-rational scientist, tough guy. And he said, 'It's me, it's me. I have this thing. It's called multiple sclerosis and I lost my sight for a time, but I'm alright. I've just cycled across America, coast to coast', he said. West to east. And he said, 'Well, look, looking at me, well look, all I can't do, I can't run. That's all.' And of course, wherever we went, people would say, when such and such happens, you run. He was immensely brave, and apparently, when you've got MS like that, you're in pain all the time, and he never, never complained. And he was a very good foil for me, because old decadent European, given up on moral judgements, really, but Shaffer was appalled that people were routinely seeing other women just because the wife was pregnant and so on. He just couldn't deal with it, and a very practical man, he's built three houses for himself in his life, so that was good, too. He'd look around this great clearing, these villages, and say, 'Good God, there's more grade one timber than the whole of New York State. Why don't they get themselves a proper house?'

Now this is way upriver, beyond Impfondo, we're going up little tiny tributaries now, when life always gets exciting. And this is two days' walk from a little village. And here they are. Here are, I think, the most wonderful people on Earth, really. Pygmies. These people call themselves the Babinga, and here you see... Larry, for some reason, really admired their engineering. They don't own anything, they can just relocate whenever they want to.
So that's it, the little beehive hut, and I made the mistake, which I always do, but you have to really, of giving away all my nineteenth century trade goods, so these are the jubilee necklaces that I got in London. Anyhow, they're very beautiful, and humorous. And I love that, of course, wonderful ethno-porn. She's very beautiful. And tiny, 4'2”. Now he's about eight-years-old, and I tried... this is a hunting net, and I tried to pick it up and couldn't. They may be small, but immensely strong. And here are these spears. And the hunting net is interesting, because it probably goes back at least 60,000 years and it's fairly probably that fishing nets were derived from hunting nets. Now the great thing about a net is it takes about three, four years to make one of these things. They're really special heirlooms. And each family has one net. And I think that's probably just social. So everybody, everybody in your little group of, at most, 40 people, or probably 20 or 30, has to bring a net along when you go hunting. And you can stretch these nets, put together... they're not very high, about that high off the ground, and you peg them down into the... with these pegs, into the mud, and sling them around trees to hold them up. But everybody has to cooperate, so you can't have people who're not speaking to each other. Can't be done. And also, I think, why, as we'll see in a minute, wonderful dancing and laughter. And the punishment for somebody who's really done something outrageous is to swing his hut around, block up the entrance which faces everybody else, and he has an entrance into the forest. And no one will talk to him. And apparently it never lasts more than two days. That's it. He's a broken man. He's received back into... but what a wonderful child he was. And you wait behind these nets, very carefully, well, hidden in the bush. And the water chevrotain and the duiker, the antelopes, whop into it and you spear them. And they have lots of little hunting dogs. Odd things, they don't bark.

And  that's the men waiting with the net here, hung up, very precious, with  the plantain leaves on top to keep it dry. And you're always told this  myth about the pygmies that they can make themselves invisible, they can  assume another state. They can make themselves into a forest elephant,  just shape-changing. Everybody just talks about it as if it's a  perfectly obvious and natural thing to do. The pygmies can do it. Well,  walking along, deep in the forest one day, and I didn't know but there  was a pygmy standing right by the trunk of a vast tree, completely  still. I mean, you couldn't see him. In the shadows, he was. And then he  saw a friend of his, Muko, who was my guide, as it were. And so he  yells, 'Hello, you horrible old fat pig', or whatever. And I just  jumped. I mean, there's a lot of truth in it. And amazing, astonishing  hunters. I mean, to us, a very strong smell, but it seems that  chimpanzees, monkeys, antelope and forest elephants, that the line is  they really cannot smell a pygmy.
Now  there's an awful lot of time left over in a Babinga day, because getting  protein, getting meat and your vitamins in the blood in the meat, very,  very efficient. So you've got enough food for at least two or three  days from one hunt. And in the evening, this happens. No televisions, no  Christopher Sykes productions, but absolutely a huge repertoire of  different dances. Now this is part of the Dance of the Dead, though  these girls, as you see, aren't taking it very seriously, but this old  woman really is. And apparently, that's the size of her child when he  was killed by a leopard.
Now  this is the Dance of Death, and he's the master of the dance, a young  man who'd been way over to another group of pygmies to learn the secret  of this dance. Very artistic. And it was, indeed, astonishing. He  gyrates up and then right down, and seems to disappear into the ground. I  mean, you've got to remember they're just Olympic fit. That's what they  do all day. But it's only with this flash picture that I realised he's  wearing a gorilla skull. See, his head's probably about here. Well...  And after that, we were only allowed to take two flash pictures. It was  absolutely not on. They'd never seen a flash go off before. And here is  the old man. There's no sort of chief system. It's all very democratic.  But he's the eldest, and the minute you're that age, you are really  rare, you know. Death around 30 at the most, 25. And he's leading the  spirit of death. And the basic story is that you invite Death for your  palm wine party, but then you make sure that you get Death very, very  drunk. And he falls down and you pick him up and you chuck him out into  the forest. And then you don't have to think about Death until the next  dance. Terrific.

Now look at this. I'm afraid you've guessed, of course, Lary took this picture, and the one of the hunting with the hunting net. And this is the old healer. Now one of my companions, or bearers, except he wouldn't carry anything because he had a bad back, little Manou. There's Marcellin, who was the real guide, you'll see in a minute, who was his cousin. Now he had a... he was complaining of this terrible bad back all the time. So I told... there was about three language barriers, but got the idea I had somebody who had a really bad back. So they got little Manou and hit him 15 times across the top of the shoulder blades with the only little bit of iron they'd got, and then rubbed soot and salt into it. I mean, that must have hurt. And then 18 slits, I think it was, at the bottom of the back. Now to keep his mind off the pain of the incisions, they whopped him on the back with a long pole. You'd be amazed. It worked. He never, ever complained about back pain ever again. And I'd also tried it on. I said to Emze, who was the other one, a wonderful guy with eyes that went in different directions, which meant that he definitely was spiritually powerful and could see into other worlds. But I knew he'd got syphilis and had been trying to cure him. So I told them he had a disease in his penis. And Emze, having seen what had happened to Manou, ran off. We didn't see him again for two days. He was out in the forest. And he said, 'Well, Doctor, I didn't want them to cut me up down there', he said.
And you hear a lot of laughter, quite odd in a pygmy camp, and it seems friendly, happy laughter. And again, I think because you all have to cooperate.
Oh, I just like this picture, because I look so thin and macho, and, as you can see, I'm neither. This is Marcellin, who is in charge of the protection, conservation of waters and forest in the People's Republic of the Congo, the Marxist-Leninist. And his uncle – the first thing he did was take us to his uncle, and I have some pictures of the uncle sitting there between two enormous tusks. He's the number one poacher for elephants. His ivory goes straight to the president's wife and floating off to Japan. You know, that's his uncle. And the maternal uncle, the maternal uncle is absolutely the boss of the entire extended family. So you can see there are problems that you don't really hear about in conservation plans.

Anyway,  we were deciding, there, to go across... I've always wanted to do this.  Go right across a watershed, I mean leaving the dugout canoes, and  expect to find another one. But it so happened, and it took about a  month, the walk was a long walk, wonderful, right through this very,  very wild jungle forest. But the village we were going to was called  Berenzoca, which means the elephant hunter's settlement. And they didn't  fish. They only had one dugout in the whole place. So it cost me a lot.  But look...
[Q] How do you mean, it cost you a lot?
Well,  to hire it. I mean, I could see it would. That's Muko, and the minute  that the Babinga pygmies are in a village with the Bantu living along  the rivers, they immediately become non-people, slaves, really. So we  were staying in a hut, and this man, well, Muko is my pygmy. I own him.  And so he's in the master's shoes and shirt and unhappy about it. And  the weird thing about this picture, if I hadn't got this picture, I  would swear to you that it was just a nonsense about Babinga, about  pygmies being small.
Because  in my dreams, still in my dreams, these guys are immensely tall. I'm  the one who's shrunk because they know what they're doing. They've been  doing it for 60,000 years and you are just, well, worse than useless.  Well, he looked after me. In every way, extraordinary. An amazing  hunter. And he would... we would hear him calling up duiker, these  little antelope, he would put his fingers up his nose and he would  [sound effect]. Terrific. And it worked, it's a mating call.
And  now... This is Larry's gone by now. We've really fast-forwarded here.  But back to Impfondo and then off to as it was a gateway to Lake Tele as  it was an extensible high tail of this expedition. To go and find this  Sauropod dinosaur that was meant to be living in this lake. Now, here's  the chief of the village of Boa, the guardians of the lake. Now this  place was in some ways very unpleasant but reflects the way that the  Congo was set up once it became a Marxist-Leninist state. The government  had money from Russia then, not now. And they set up a people's  vice-president of the village committee. Now these are all labelled men,  nobody knows exactly everybody's ancestry forever. Almost always  descended from slaves. I mean, slaves taken in battle one group of Bantu  fighting another.

So he gave us his blessing, and what was it? Five days, I think, the walk through swampland. But then, this. Wonderful, sudden, extraordinary feeling. I think because, for months, I had no rest for the eyes, no wide, wide spaces. Marvellous, suddenly coming across this. And almost a perfect oval. And only what? Eight miles across or so, but magical. And impossible to tell distances. And indeed, river cormorants flying past, look like pterodactyls. And there's a huge bat, Hypsignathus monstrosus, I think. Anyhow, big snooter and an enormous wingspan, and you hear [sound effect] and you think if you're going to have a monster surviving from the wipe-out of 67 million years ago, this would be the place. But there were bad things about it, like Doubla. I'll show you, introduce you in a moment. But when his spear went into the lake, he's very, very strong, so set go... it went... it was eight feet long, and give it a foot into the mud... well, it was obvious that this lake, you know, it's four-feet deep, so probably very flat dinosaur, you'd think. And... So that was a bit of a disappointment. I was so proud of this picture. And then my wife, Belinda said, 'Yes, well it's fine, but it could be in Switzerland', she said to me.
Now, this is the chief's favourite, Vicky, and he loved flowers. But there was always screams coming from his house in the evening. And he said to me, 'Well, Redmond, it's because I have a very young wife and she needs correction.' And one day, well, I was absolutely lost in the forest and I was very pleased that in the evenings he... she'd scream, and some real volume, because then I realised which direction the village was, and I could get back there. And I was saying to myself, 'Please, please keep beating her.'
So... and ah, well. Yes, I'll tell you about Lake Tele after this and show you some filthy objects, but this little guy I fell in love with, a baby gorilla, and he'd seen his mother speared in front of him and cut up into steaks. And I got him, refused to pay anything for him, I just... I do that. And I had diarrhoea and he had diarrhoea and we slept wrapped up together in a tarpaulin, and he was the kindest person I met in the Congo. He was consistently lovely to me at all times. And once I'd worked out that, of course, he'd be hanging around his mother when he wanted to defecate, so he'd make these little squeaks and I'd get down on all fours, and then there was no problem. Well, just on the floor of the hut, but not on me.
And now look. You see how small he is? But even at that... oh, this is the schoolmaster's hut, and they'd actually got some bricks, and they'd... that's got mango and the rest of our powdered milk and pineapple in it. And when he'd... nothing I could do. He thought it was really funny. There would be some left in the bottom, and he'd grab it, and his legs were really powerful, and then he'd face that way as if he was going to... and then bop, drop it all over me, and then go [panting], which is... that's the gorilla laugh. But if you jiggled him up and down and kissed him right on top there, he smelled of fresh leaves, just on the top. And then I got him out, eventually abandoned everything, really, got him out to Aspinall's orphanage in Brazzaville. And I've had a wash and this is the reunion. And I sent him postcards and nappies. And he's wearing a nappy there. You can't see it, but that was a great improvement. And the trouble is, they... they're like us, but only... perhaps more sensitive. He was the first gorilla in there, got all the attention, and then other baby gorillas came in and they were all equally traumatised, and he just couldn't take the social competition. And he died of a burst ulcer, you know, just like us. A duodenal ulcer from anxiety. Yes, pretty sad. But beautiful.

It's not something that you could possibly capture in photographs. It's something that you capture in dreams, and it goes into your unconscious, and you've more or less had it, it stays there forever. A great moment when the nightmares cease. Okay, now you may think I'm absurd, so just imagine, going with me.
This is a village called Boa right at the... Macao, right at the head of this little waterway. And everything is stacked with emotion, and I don't really know why. Now Marcellin, as I told you, the head of conservation in the People's Republic of the Congo, Water and Forest, he, a very handsome man, and said he was blacker than any man he knew, which meant that he had a greater desire, and a need, a physical need for sex, than any other man he knew. And that I should pay him double, because not only was I making him ill walking eight hours a day in a jungle and all his ulcers had opened up, but I was also forcing him to sleep alone in his tent at night without a woman. So this was hanging in the air.
Now, there was a very beautiful schoolmaster's wife in the village of Macao, and I say that because we all went down with the women to bathe, to wash every morning. And they'd collect the water and so on. And she was staring at Marcellin, and then her long wraparound, but reaching under it with a bar of soap, which is a precious thing, and soaping her breasts. It was just erotic beyond belief. And Marcellin, of course, pretended not to notice. Anyhow, so he sleeps with her, of course, and I'm more or less sleeping next door, but not actually in the same cabin, going downriver, which happened, when I had to wrap a shirt around my head. The noise was...
Anyhow, so I've asked for a fetish from this great, very spooky, very powerful figure, all in black, dressed in black, with a great, floppy goitre, looked about 90 years old, but he couldn't have been. And that's another little parentheses. You see, the only old people you see in that part of the river, that far inland, are sorcerers and their wives, because if you sleep with a sorcerer's wife, you're dead on penetration. So that more or less stops that. And if a sorcerer sleeps with an ordinary man's wife, everybody will know, word will get around. He will not be respected again. He will lose his powers at once. So Doku, this old man I'm going to tell you about, he had a wife of, I should say, about 70. One, maybe 40. A 30-year-old and then, the latest girl, which I think she was probably 15 or 16. And all disease-free. Now I said to him, 'Look, I really need a fetish, because... for my own protection, because I have lots of enemies in Oxford.' You know, the only reason he'd give me one. And then I thought, 'Well, firstly, that's a rotten move. Now I'm starting to worry if I do have any enemies in Oxford. I mean, I want to be loved by everybody, including the milkman. Doesn't matter.' So I'm slightly anxious already, anyway. So Marcellin takes me. We go to this hut, bigger than any of the other huts, much more impressive, at midnight. Everything is at midnight, not that anybody has a watch. And we knock on the door and Doku opens it, dressed in black, and half-shadows of a fire, and gourds hanging from the rafters, which look like skulls. It's a terrific atmosphere. And every sorcerer has to be a showman. But the powerful thing is, of course, that I think they believe it themselves.

So there we sit. And I pay, it seems, an enormous price. I pay 15 chickens, equivalent. So then Doku goes into the back room, and he comes out with this something, which he puts into my hand, and it's warm. And it's exactly the same as the three little furry... look like dead mice, which he has around his neck, half in view all the time. And before he puts it in my hand, he takes it like this, and he says, in the language of power in all the Bantu areas, because their voices are so deep, it's high-pitched, and my God it works. It really does raise the hairs on the back of your neck if they're not too sweaty. And he said, 'Mr Redmond, this is a fetish for your protection only. There are no conditions apart from these. Your friends may look at it. The three closest hunting male friends you have may touch it. But if your wife washes her private parts with it, it will lose its power at once.'
And it was such a powerful presentation, it wasn't until about three days later that I could see that it was even remotely funny. And, as he said, 'This fetish contains the finger of a child. The finger of this child is to keep your dreams from becoming old and to keep your actions fresh and young. The finger of this child will protect you.' And I thought, 'My God.' Now it has been X-rayed. It was bad luck on the girl behind the machine at Heathrow. So she put this through, because it looked so odd, and she screamed. She knew exactly what it was, and up on the thingy there is a digit of some sort. I mean, I like to think it's a monkey finger, but actually, it's not as bad as it sounds. Everywhere you go, you're told ever family, each family has to give a child to the sorcerer. Now when you remember the mortality rate is so absurdly, obscenely high. So say you have six children. You can be absolutely certain that three of them will die before they're eight years old, so those are the big, big fears waiting for you.
Another thing to do with sorcery and the fetish and fear. I thought to myself, I thought I really could not work it out, why torture yourself like this? Why do these Bantu, why do they live with perpetual fears? You know, the pygmies make use of it. They say, 'If you walk that way into the forest, past that particular tree, your testicles will drop off.' Now, that works. That keeps all the Bantu out of there, and just beyond that, that is the path to the very best hunting areas that the pygmies want to keep for themselves. The pygmies are good atheists, you know. Their line is that God is the forest, the forest is God. That's it. Humour. None of this nonsense. No sorcery. So I wondered. And then I thought, well, look, whatever happens to you in life, you're going to have these really terrible, terrible things. So I think perhaps you anaesthetise yourself against the really big fears, the death of your husband, your children, your sister, your... it's Diseaseville. And that helps you to cope with it, this... get rid of the barrier between the objective and subjective world. You can live with your ancestors, your ghosts, for a start. Positive thing. And you can, as it were, inoculate yourself against the big, big fears that are coming, by making all these little fears for yourself.

The  protective animal of this village – every village has a protective  animal – is called Samale. Now, Samale is part man, part gorilla, part  whatever. He has three claws on either hand, and he rips you down the  back when you're a young man. They've all got, all these young guys...  it's a leopard sect, in other words, but of course it's done by Doku  with his machete. He's drugged them with this unbelievably powerful dope  out in the jungle, and they're cut, and they join the sect. But Doku  and his three apprentices, every other day... I think that's right. I  may not be right. Certainly every week. Anyway, they surrounded the  village and they look at their watches, except they haven't got any. So  say it's three o'clock, whatever. And then they all roar together  [roar], and it's scary. And everybody dashes into the hut, and so did  we. And the deal is: if you look out through a crack in the hut wall and  you see Samale processing, you're very unlikely to live out the week.  But if you sit quietly and never even dream of trying to look, see  what's happening, you'll be absolutely fine until the next procession of  Samale. You'll have a wonderful time. And it seemed to me that that was  dealing with, helping you to deal with this kind of life. And your  soul... not that there is a soul, but your whole personality is sort of  diffused into the forest and the surroundings, and you belong. It's the  wonderful way that human beings and their imagination and their films  can make you part of something vastly bigger than you are, and relieve  your anxieties, at least until the next time Samale is coming past. I  thought that must be it.
But  meanwhile, of course, Larry, the great rationalist and New York  scientist, is sitting there with his head in his hands, taking it all  far too seriously. And saying to me, you're meant to talk, saying, 'Oh  Jesus God, I haven't talked to anybody sensible since God was a boy.'

I wanted a fetish because I wanted to get right in there and deal with... find out about sorcery. I mean, everywhere you go, you're told that the day may begin to the white man, but the night belongs to the African. And people would say, 'Look, I've just flown to Paris and back in my plane, and there's a wooden plane model. And it's resting now because it's daylight.' If it goes on like this for six months, you really do begin to lose it. I mean, the other part of that, you see, the fetish, was that Marcellin was really angry with me. He didn't want to have a fetish, or anything to do with this. He was shaking, and very angry. And he was all worried, anyway, anxious that night, because he'd lost his wedding ring. And after Doku had given me this, and of course I didn't matter to Doku, but I realised that for some reason, Marcellin mattered terribly to the old man. And we'd been drinking palm wine and red wine that I'd bought. Terrible stuff, but absolute luxury beyond luxuries by the time it was a month or two upriver. So Marcellin was quite drunk, but I think he probably... you know, he needed that to be able to take the psychological strain of all this.
So there he is, he's sitting on this log, and he says to Doku, who's got this fetish. And Doku says, 'I want you to have this for your protection for Lake Tele. The lake of the spirits, the most dangerous place from here to Senegal.' And Marcellin backing off: 'I don't want it! I don't want it!' And then Doku took... it was a much better fetish than this, this fetish in his hand like that, like this, and giving it to Marcellin like a heron mantling a fish. He was right over Marcellin, and then he tilted his hand, and there, on the neck of the fetish, was Marcellin's wedding ring. And he explained: 'Oh Marcellin, I knew you were coming, long before you came in a bodily way, I knew you were coming. And I spoke to her. She has a husband, but he's not from here. He's a Teke from the plateau. I said, you can give him a son. I want a son for Samale.'
And it turned out that Doku had saved her, because she'd had twins before. Now that's terrible. That's like the animals. You know, there used to be twins, both killed. But now the placentas are stuck on a post outside the village. You see this dried up blackened meat in the sunlight, on a post. And so he, Doku, had made her socially respectable again, as it were, with his protection. So she felt she really owed him whatever Doku said. So... but of course, once she'd seen Marcellin, there was no problem. Did she want to seduce him? Of course. So Marcellin got the fetish and the wedding ring, and he's probably still angry with me that he'd entered the world of the spirits again. And I said, 'Well, what's wrong? Why? What's all that about? Why's it so tense, Marcellin? What's up?' And he turned to me and he said that I was so slow understanding, he said, 'But you really don't understand, do you?' And I said, 'No, I don't.' And he said, 'Doku, he's my grandfather.' Wow. And then he didn't talk to me for two days.
So that's what it was all about.

Everyone should have a fetish room. Think about the paintings in the caves, 30,000, 40,000 years ago. Why are they in a cave? Why not somewhere public? These were not... nobody was living in these places. Of course not, it has to be special. You have to go to it, it has to grow in power. Well, maybe churches and mosques have the same function. Somewhere you don't go to too often. Now in all these villages, there is a fetish house. Now indeed, these were genuine fetish houses, so we certainly would have been killed if we were even seen loitering around it. A little... a miniature hut. I'm desperate to know what was inside it. I mean, all I know is from 19th century anthropology, when they probably shot their way in, but there would be the statues and everything to do with the immortality of the tribal group. But the thing is, it's difficult to assemble, but it's very simple. You get objects which convey to you, in ways that no word or picture could, the pleasures, intense pleasures, the very, very best bits of childhood which you need to remain in touch with if you want to be a writer or an artist or anything else. That's the deep pleasure, and so easy to lose it. So in my case, it would be a collection of bird's eggs and so on. All the best bits of childhood.
[Q] So you have this room which is a collection of images?
Of things that are really powerful, associated with childhood, people I've really admired.
You have to take it slowly, you can't put... you know, everything has to be exactly right. And then, I realised, at 61, it's also very important to somehow update it, to keep it fresh, otherwise you're going to be stuck as you were when you were 30, say. And the other great thing about it, the real point, in my case, I grew up in a vicarage. Now, no books, apart from the Bible, really, everything really very strict. And if I had the image of those people in my mind before I'm about to write, I'd never be able to do anything at all. I would have to be writing for the parish magazine or some ghastly guff. So they have to be excluded, the parents, utterly, as if they don't exist. And that's the way to do it, to pretend you are actually mentally in this space. Then you can create. And also, then, of course, you don't have any anxieties about the people or readers or nothing. You're just focused on the emotions that give you pleasure. The things that are full of life and imagery. I don't know. What would be a cliché of that? Yes, well, life in 1920s Paris or something. We all have a... I mean, that particular one's not for me, but that would be the sort of thing. In our age group, it would be imagine the excitement of being a courtyard away from Giacometti and Picasso and Matisse is down the way, and André Breton and the whole Dali and the Surrealist movement. We have this sort of schoolboy idea of constant creation and excitement. That's what you want.
[Q] Look, in... just in practical terms, I mean, just to help... assume I don't know anything about this. What do you have... I mean, in your case, explain whether it's a room in your house or where it is. What is it and where is it? And what's in it?
It must be separate. It has to be separate. It used to be a cork-lined room in the house, which was always locked. I only visited it. And then Belinda, my wife, said, well, look actually, she happened to have her daughter, now. Puffin had been born. And needed a room. So then it had to be a tremendous upheaval, but alright, because it's still lined with cork and it's dark. You mustn't have any windows or input from the outside world.
That's what you're escaping. You're going into the unconscious. So it's a hut outside, and it really works. Until you get old and feeble and fetish room or not, you just want to spend your life in bed with the cat.
[Q] But if one has a fetish room, does one go into it on a regular basis, or work there, or what?
Oh, you must never work there. Good God, no. No, you visit it. It depends how intense your work is at that time. I mean, you may go in once a day when nobody else is about and just sit there and be quiet, very quiet, and remind yourself of what matters to you. You know, the first time you saw a kingfisher or the... I said, 'The mistle thrush that dropped the egg in front of you.' That's what you're desperate to hang onto somehow.
[Q] So we must imagine it's like a collection, like a cabinet of wonders or something?
Yes, it's a cabinet of childhood wonders. The rest of the house is a sort of cabinet of wonders, or used to be. Now it's got out of control.
[Q] So everyone should have a fetish room?
Everyone should have one. I like to think this is my invention.
[Q] I've never heard of it.
Well, there you are, then. It must be entirely original.

I told you I'd show you some horrible objects. Well, this really is horrible. Doku would have one of these. And it's why you need a fetish, a powerful fetish. Your fetish will protect you. It's for your own protection. Against what? Well, against this kind of thing. Now you can see it's really functional and powerful, and especially when you see, look, here, the wood has been scraped. A lot of the wood has been scraped. Do you see? Now that, scrapings and wood shavings from that, Doku would do that and then mix them with herbs and then dry it, so it's a dry powder. And this... he'd have all kinds of dolls, but this one is a hanging doll. This is if you particularly want your enemy to hang himself or herself. And Doku's wife, one of his wives, after this... so Doku's client would come and say to the old, old man with the goitre, 'I want you to do this thing. Now it will cost you a year's salary', as it were. A lot more than getting a fetish, I'm glad to say. So, say, half your earnings from your work in the plantation that entire year. It's all in chickens, so the number of chickens. So it's got to be serious. You've got to really, really hate somebody to do this thing. It costs you.
Now she goes around and says, which is always the message, she will say to the victim, 'Your palm wine has been tampered with', and then she'll drop a message, 'You're going to hang yourself.' And then she'll tell three or four of his friends, everybody in the village will know. And not even your closest friends, the people that you've done tasks for in their plantations. You know, you grew up with them, as it were. There is no school, but you went to school with them. And you've known them all your life. Well, that makes it even worse, because a curse is really infectious. Your friends won't even look at you, walk straight past you on their way to tend the plantains. If you're very lucky, your youngest wife might be brave enough to feed you. No one will look at you, you're totally isolated. And Doku said, you know, 'You die within three to four months.'
Well, when I got back to Oxford, much later, I checked out one of Anthony Storr's friends, said, 'Yes, that's about right.' That is what happens with acute reactive depression, and that kind of thing happens when, I imagine, you know, you go into the office and the boss says – and you love your job – says, 'Now just come in here a minute. Now look, you see, thing is, you stink and we can't bear it. But that's no grounds to make you redundant or sack you, so we've come up with another option, which I'm sure you'll like. Everybody here has contributed, each one of them, a lot of money to send you away so we don't have to see you again in the office. Alright? Oh, and sorry, I almost forgot, but your wife's just phoned, I told her this and she said, yes, she'd like to contribute half of her life's savings, too, so that she need never see you again. Oh, and yes, and she said your children, they're so happy until they hear your key in the door, and then they are miserable beyond belief. They know that Daddy has come home.'
Now that would do it. It has to be work, family. It's got to involve all your life. And it takes four months. Well, they die in four months. Same. No wonder. Sorcery really works. It's social pressure. And this doll I got, I got for two chickens, because somebody'd got a more powerful fetish, been to a more expensive sorcerer, or paid Doku more or something. He won't give a damn when told that he was going to hang himself. 'Up yours', he said, he was fine. But look, it has worked, though. I think there are 12 knots. Each knot is a success. So there are 12 on this. So 12 hangings, probably over a long time, but all the time, and then it didn't work anymore. Nothing wrong with the theory, he's got exhausted. So I get him for two chickens. Ahaha.

I had no idea what would be really offensive to my parents and what wasn't. So I was, what? I suppose 13 or 14, well, when I first read Origin of Species, I knew that was... that had to be read underneath the covers and shoved under the pillow with a torch at night. But oh yes, I must have been a bit older, because War and Peace I read up on the Wiltshire Downs, and I had a 150 BSA Bantam, so I must have been 16, then. Pop-pop, two stroke, and kept the books hidden in the saddlebag. So imagine the power that still lives with me of reading Tolstoy on the Wiltshire Downs, when you thought that if anybody found you reading this thing, that would be... I don't know, caught with the worst sort of porn or something.
It made it all really vivid and here's the copy. Now that, you see, that is the sort of thing that you'd have in the fetish room. But just recently, this great honour, I mean to me, it's like winning a Nobel Prize or something. It just couldn't be better. A Nobel Prize could hardly touch it. But imagine the Penguin, or Publisher of the Year, or something of the kind, anyway, they were celebrating their 60th or 70th anniversary, and they took 50 books, I think, maybe. And one of them... one of them was Congo Journey, in the same format. Now that, you know... lots of stripy penguins in the fetish room, but to have one made in reality is just ridiculous pleasure.

South America. All those people feel very, very different, and of course, especially in South America, the Yanomami. They, like we all do, left Africa at the very, very most, 200,000 years ago, so probably 10, 000, 70,000, spread out. So the ancestors of the Yanomami go out of Africa, turn right, go right up, and then they go north, they get over the land bridge, they come right the way down to the middle of South America. So all those different geographical pressures, it's hardly surprising that, when they look at you in that impassive way, you really have no idea what they're thinking. There is a big, big theological gap. In fact, their creation myths, they do fit into the same kind of layers as the Christian creation myth, but you've got to learn it. You have to learn it all. Whereas, in the Congo, absolutely everything feels deeply and spookily familiar. You seem to know why people are laughing in that uneasy way. You respond at once, unconscious, in full power, to this huge, deep drumming. This... this tremendous assertion of real power and life and sex and the drums, God. They're taller than this room, some of them. And sorcery needs no theological introduction. We all know what it means to put a spell on somebody. And of course, because we've only just come a few miles north. You know, it's no journey at all to get here out of Africa. You go back there, you feel everything's familiar. It's just terrifying.

Well, it sounds very selfish, but the first thing to say about Belinda is that I would certainly have committed suicide at least six times. I would have killed myself six times, but for her. I owe everything to her. She supported me through the first book. She just... well, I don't know. Not to be sentimental about it, we're in love. But always marry a farmer's daughter if you can. They have already seen it all. They've delivered calves, they've had their elbows deep in blood. You know, they're the kind of girls you want. Nothing you do will surprise them.

Well, it's astonishing. Du Chaillu gorillas, you know, these huge mammals. They weren't discovered until 1871, by Du Chaillu. And this here, let me show you, this is a wonderful book. Everybody laughs at him, but I love it. This is the very first etching, illustration, of a gorilla. 1871. It's just so recent. And the okapi and so on, even more recent, their discovery. It's the most wonderful place, if you can take the pressure. But look, you see, the gorilla's penises were always hidden. Now Du Chaillu cut them off, because he knew that his bestseller would have to have a gorilla bending a rifle in half, and these terrifying beasts that carried women off. It's the beginning of King Kong. And rape them in the most pleasurable way behind a bush and up the tree and, you know, the gorilla's got one arm around the girl, woof.
And with this massive penis. The fact is that a gorilla's penis is about that long. They are tiny. That's why Du Chaillu cut them off, because he thought no one will believe him when he said how frightening and vicious and what a beast the gorilla was. Well, actually, the gorilla's really peaceful, and that goes with the size of his penis, and he lives with his wives until he's thrown out when he's too old, as a silverback. And yes, the gorilla does charge and beats its chest at you. But you have to forgive Du Chaillu for not realising that he would actually stop ten yards away. How was he to know? And yes, you do hear stories about when you run away, the gorilla bites a man's calves out of his legs. And, you know, thinking of King Kong and so on, why would he do that? Because you have got to imagine him coming after you on two legs. Well, no, he's scooting along the ground at tremendous speed. And he'll only do that if you've wounded him. They are really sweeties, sweethearts. A bit like the Babinga, the pygmies. You know, there's absolutely no record of a pygmy, any kind, killing anybody, except in direct revenge for some cruel Bantu killing or whatever, and they always make sure they get just the bloke who killed the pygmy. Anyway, gorillas. Wonderful, but naughty Du Chaillu, cutting off their penises.

'It all makes just as much sense as your white man's superstitions. What about the fetish you all wear around your neck, your little crosses? What about those beads you all finger in your pockets and mumble spells over, eh? And what about your unspeakable rites? What about your cannibal symbols? Tell me, do you or do you not eat and drink the body and blood of the big white chief of your tribe once every seven days? Just as if it's a proper and reasonable thing to do. Oh no, you've no right to laugh at us, at old Bobe, at Africans, no right at all.' 'I apologise. And anyway, I've told you, I'm not a Christian. I don't believe it. I don't wear a crucifix and I've never said a rosary in my life.' 'Said a rosary', mimicked Marcellin with a yap of laughter himself. 'You have your little words to disguise it all, don't you? For us you say it's a fetish or a juju or a gris-gris, but for you, oh yes, it's very dignified, it's quite different. It's a rosary, is it? It's a crucifix. So that's alright, is it? That makes everything okay.' 'I've told you, I don't believe it.' 'Believe it or not, my friend, it's in your head. I've been thinking about it. I've been thinking about it ever since that night with Doku. You tell me it's normal, you call it a part of your culture, and you think you're perfectly reasonable. You think you're a people of reason and science, that the daylight belongs to the white man and the night to the African? And I agree, you make motorcars and outboards and aeroplanes, and we don't. But what about your three gods in one, your big holy ghost that can go anywhere, your thousands of spirits with wings and with light shining straight out of their heads? What about your evil animal with feet like a goat and a long tail that divides into two at the end? Tell me, why sneer at the African? How is all that superior to Bolo? What's scientific about that? And what about your other god, who became a man and let himself be stuck on a piece of wood and speared so that he could save you all? What could it possibly mean? Where's the sense in it?' 'There is no sense in it. It's a matter of faith.' 'Faith means saying goodbye to reason and science. That's what faith is. When you get faith, you throw the switches, you blow a gasket, you deliberately go soft in the head. It's more comfortable that way.' Marcellin ignored me. 'No wonder we were frightened of the white man when he came here with his guns and killed us, and talked about eating his god all day long. No wonder we thought you were cannibals. And there's another thing: your god who never had a woman. Look, no one could be blacker than me.' He shone the torch on his arm. 'I'm the blackest African I know, and I have the strongest need for sex of anyone I know. It's genetic, it's in the skin. I think about it all the time. All the time. If I don't have a woman every night I get ill. I'm ill now. You should pay me double for making me risk my life for you in these forests with these people, and then you should pay me double again for making me walk all day and then sleep in a tent, all alone without a woman at night. And for months on end. You white men. We don't know how you breed. You have a god born without any sex. And then he never had a woman. And what about the god's mother, in those fetish statues you have everywhere, a woman who'd never had a man, with that idiot smile on her face and a baby in her arms. If that's not just plain silly, if that's not stupid, I don't know what is.'
A fierce drumming began suddenly, fully-fledged, from the far end of the village. Marcellin was silent, then: 'Love your neighbour as yourself', he said, his torch waving wildly off the path and into the cactus hedges to either side of us. 'Love your neighbour as yourself, what hypocrites you are.' His voice rose to its highest pitch, a falsetto shriek of indignation, a real temper. The dog turned and bolted. 'Love your neighbour, and you come here with guns and break up our families and sell us into slavery, husbands and wives and little children, it made no odds to you. You white men burned all the Jews just in a year or two, a mere six million. You say that was a great crime and so it was, but what about us? What about our Holocaust? From the Congo alone, you sold 13 million of us into slavery. What about that? It went on for centuries. For centuries, no man knew if he'd live to see his children grow up, to see his sons learn to hunt, to make new gardens with his son. Tell me, will you, what had we done to deserve it? You white men say sorcery's a great evil, and so it may be, but tell me sometime, what kind of god lets you torture us like that?'

We got  into camp beside Lake Tele, finally got there. And got into Doubla's  fishing canoe. This man, I really liked him, because he was somehow on  my side, but he was called Doubla because he'd murdered two people,  which is actually not a very good score. So he was Doubla. And Vicky,  who was the other man with me, the chief's favourite, both very big and  powerful, but Doubla wiry, and once you know why he's called Doubla,  looks like an obvious killer. So we're paddling in the lake, and already  in the early morning, insufferable heat, because remember this is the  first time there's been a horizon, a rest for the eyes, open space.  We've been under tree cover for months and months. And I'd forgotten how  fierce the sun can be. And it's all reflected back from this very,  very, very beautiful lake. And there's gorilla's on the shore, and small  pythons called ball pythons, and very odd sight, in the jungle: trees  in flower everywhere, because there's no flowering season: they all  flower when they feel like it. But here, beautiful reds and yellows and  bushes. Part of it looks as if it could be... the bank could be from  some ornamental garden. I mean, absurd. And then you look up, and the...  well, in this case, there was a mother gorilla with her baby, looking  down at you.
And  it's quite shallow, this lake. There was a big commotion ahead, and  there was a beautiful big antelope, called a sitatunga, with wonderful,  curly horns. And they have adapted hooves, really feet with webs, for  going over marshland. And this thing sprinted away from us, Catherine  wheels of water coming out. And looked as if it was being just lifted up  off the surface of the lake by the sunlight, and into the vegetation on  the bank.

And anyway, eventually, practically up at the other end of this lake from the camp, so what? Six miles, something like that, and we heard the sound of chimpanzees [chimp sound] and Doubla and Vicky really quietly paddled the little fishing dugout onto the mud, and then we covered ourselves in mud. I mean, I was taking instructions, absolutely caked with black mud, and then went forward on our stomachs, hoping not to meet a python on the way, and eventually got right underneath an enormous... well, they all seem big, chimpanzees. Very, very old chimp, perfectly obviously. I mean, apart from the fact that he was black, he looked very like James Fenton, because he was bald. And they have surprisingly, sort of, mobile lips, and very slowly, he was going and eating leaves. And then awful effort of law, eating a leaf the other side. And I thought, 'God, I'd be terrible as a scientist in animal behaviour.' I was really bored after. And moved. And then he looked down and we looked at each other, and he obviously thought this was the most disgusting thing he had seen in all his many years.
And he put a hand up over his face, just like James does. And then he thought. You could see he was thinking, and he got to his feet on the bough, and grabbed a couple of... what would they be called? Those saplings coming out of the bough, and he went: [chimp ululation] and I thought, wow. And then, the signal sent, I suppose, he just peed right on me. You feel very unwanted. And then he swung around and defecated. Now, that sounds sort of civilised, but no. It was a shotgun blast of little fruity dropping. Well, pellets. And then everybody else joined in: [chimp ululation] and they were big, these guys. And young males. Instead of rushing off, as the story would have it they do, coming closer and closer, climbing down the tree, and this maelstrom of noise, incredible noise. I thought, this is a very, very impressive display, sort of in a patronising way. And then I remembered Jane Goodall's story that actually, a chimpanzee's idea of a really good day out is to go and grab a monkey of any kind by the ankles, bash its head against a tree and eat it. A meat stick. And it was frightening. I thought, no wonder socially insensitive leopards turn and run. These young guys, with their enormous long arms, were gathering, some of them, behind us, and slapping the ground, boom, with such violence. And not before time, I thought, Vicky and Doubla stood up, and with their machetes, they wacked the boughs of the trees. And gradually, I mean they didn't run off, they ambled off, still very angry being disturbed in their eating of these boring leaves. And tremendous, unbelievable noise. I've never been surrounded by... well, I've never been pissed on by so many people.

The strange thing is, once you've written a book, it's as if you'd never been there. Thank God for the photographs. It really is, once you've written it. Now I lie in bed, depressed, and I don't remember being anywhere, as it were. So no. And also, of course, I think that absolutely anybody could do these journeys. Writing about them is difficult, but perhaps. Oh, I'm just so pleased to be home and to see everybody, is the truth of the matter.

Well, the trawler. It was a great idea, seemed to be. A typical writer's idea when he's getting overweight and so on, at a desk in Oxford: go out at the very worst time of year on a trawler. Let's see how bad it gets. You know, you want the full experience. So it's got to be in January, preferably when there's a hurricane coming in. Now I just thought you could go and get on a trawler. Well, it took me a year to get permission to go anywhere near a commercial trawler. So I had to... well, I did a scientific cruise on Her Majesty's Research Ship, the Scotia. And that was a very, very bad preparation for commercial trawling. I didn't know, but she has the most sophisticated U-tube stabiliser system in the world at that time, because actually she'd been built to listen to submarines beneath the thermocline, where the warm current's coming up and cold current's coming down. It lowers that sort of James Bond, and can listen to submarines while pretending to be a trawler. So you need it to be absolutely stable, and this thing was stable. So I thought, well, Force 10, no problem.
[Q] Why is it difficult to get on a trawler?
Because there's no health and safety, it's fantastically dangerous. You go overboard, the skipper's not going to stop fishing just for you. And so on. It's absolutely out of bounds. No passengers, no civilians allowed anywhere near it. You're meant to know what you're doing. And of course, I didn't. But at least I went, as it were, as a scientist from the Aberdeen Research Station. But actually I went on the lowest possible civil service rank. I was assistant to a student. That's what got me on board. Wonderful man, Luke Buller. But yes, as I'll tell you, that was far more frightening than anything. After all, to die with an eight-foot-long Yanomami through you, pinned to the side of the tree in the middle of the forest. How classy is that? You couldn't really get any better. And to get a poison arrow from the Babinga, I mean, again. Even to be ripped to bits... actually, you wouldn't be ripped to bits, you'd have one bite to the head from a leopard, that's kind of one-on-one, isn't it? It's personal. Whereas when this hurricane did come in, the violence of it, the unremitting, ghastly force of it, the fact... the fact that it was so inhuman. Nothing one-on-one about it. And also, at the back of one's mind, you think, well, so many trawlers sink, go down, I mean, you get... You might get a whole page in The Orcadian, or The Shetland Times, and a little tiny bit in London. I mean, what kind of a death is that? Horrible. Yes, ghastly.

The skipper of this, Jason, owed £2 million to the bank. So the bank doesn't care what the weather is. He had to go out, no matter what. And when we got to Scrabster, the entire fleet was in, the Scottish fishing fleet, north of Scotland. And we left. And I'd never seen clouds like that. They were purple, white underneath. Anyhow, I was quite right to be slightly worried.
This is for the girls. Here's the first mate, incredibly handsome. Robertson. Viking. And interesting, because everybody said 'He cannot dock, he's near river, he's near river. Brian ashore, forget it. Brian at sea, oh do you want him. You want him. You want him. You want him on the rail when you pitched your bung overboard. All you'll be wanting to see is Brian O'Reilly, he'll save your life.' Big, strong, silent man.
Now here we are. This is the first, up in the fishing grounds, and Jason said he'd drown me in a wee bucket if I ever told anybody where his fishing grounds were. All I'd say is we're way, way north. But actually, he's fine, because I've no idea how you found out what your fishing grounds were.
Now look, this is the...
[Q] This is the North Atlantic?
Northeast Atlantic, yes. So we're way up beyond Greenland now. Anyway, so this coming board and this is the Scottish system. You swing it around and it comes in on the beam. But it's much, much safer than the rear system. You need more crew for this, but it's safer. You couldn't be out in these rough seas if everything was done on the rear ramp, because if you get a following sea suddenly, boom, you had to stop the engines. And everybody drowns.
[Q] So that's a net full of fish dragged up from...?
Yes, a mile down. And it's swing over the hopper.

Now  this was an extraordinary... you can tell I took these pictures. You  can't see much here. But this is the... only the second specimen of a  sea bat, which is a deep sea octopus, caught in Scottish waters. And the  two of us, we could hardly lift it. Immensely heavy and transparent,  and a great big beak in the middle. And rather wonderful. It just tells  you, only the second specimen. This is a new fishery, full of the most  exciting fish coming up. Things that, if you took all the LSD there was  and tried to draw your imaginary fish, you wouldn't come anywhere near  the reality down there.
We  think this thing just drifts along the bottom, eating Crustacea. And as  it's absolutely vast, it must have quite a lot to prey on, and be very  successful. But the real answer is that the second specimen ever  recorded, is that, of course, all these things are just bunged  overboard. They go down the chute. For all we know, trawler men are  catching them all the time.
Oh,  now, this is really fascinating. This is the black butt, Greenland  halibut, and the fish that now, and only now, you can find in  fishmongers in this country. Now look, you see, I don't know if you can  see, but it's weird. It was a proper flatfish once, but now the eye is  making its way back over. We think it swims on its ventral edge, like  most fishes do, so it's evolved one way, and living at up to a mile  down, it's decided that it doesn't want to be a flatfish anymore. And  you'd say, well, that's crazy, how could it possibly prey on things with  wonky eyes? It can see alright that side.
But it  must do, because it's the main commercial fish south of this  magnificent undersea mountain, called the Wyville Thomson Ridge. And  it's very, very successful.
But  again, it's exciting or sad, depending on how you look at it. We've no  idea where they go to breed. You don't find young ones. It's a mystery  fish. And when you eat it in your fishmonger, like all these deep sea  fish, the flesh is very, very watery. Well, it has to be, because water  is the only thing that can withstand the vast pressures of living  beneath a mile of seawater. So of course it's watery. So the main market  for all these fish is Paris, Madrid and Berlin. It's fish soup and  paella. It doesn't matter how watery it is. So our housewives, just fish  and chips. You know, they've ruined the fisheries.

This guy, the smooth-head, we caught to the north of the Mountain Ridge. So this relict population must have been trapped there cause it's meant to only live in the south. So they were trapped when the Mountain Ridge came up. And this guy, the rough-head, well, doesn't that look prehistoric? Wonderful. And they're called rattails. You can't call them rattails on board, because if you mention rat or salmon or grass or minister or pig, you have to touch cold iron once. Same superstitions as in the Congo, really. And why? It tells you why you need it in the Congo, and why you need it in the North Atlantic when a hurricane is coming. If you wear green, something terrible will happen if you're wearing green. Even green Y-fronts. So if you drown, well, of course, he was wearing green Y-fronts. Now what does that tell you? It tells you that there's a god, there's a spirit, there is an entity that not only cares about you, what you say. You say rabbit, you're a goner. He cares about your dress sense, makes everything personal. It completely takes your mind off the fact that this great, indifferent, terrifying ocean couldn't give a damn about anybody, let alone their green Y-fronts.
The other interesting thing about these is that they're both adapted for life at great depth, perpetual darkness. Now they've gone one way, having very large eyes. Actually, that's almost life sized. Well, actually, no, a bit smaller.
Now that eye there, I cut it out, one of them. Let's see. Can you see the eyeball? It's vast. And it can see, that fish, in dim light, 220 times better than we can.

Again, you can't call this by its name on a trawler. It's called a rabbitfish, because of this jaw. And again, huge eye. Now it's called the king of the herrings, because it moves inshore to spawn at about the same time as the herrings come in. But it lives at great depths, and although it's got a big eye, it's taken another route. Do you see these pits here? These fantastic electroreceptors and all along the median line. And that... it can pick up fish moving close to it and at a distance. It can judge distance with these electroreceptors, and whether there's prey there. Everything gives off a weak electric field. Indeed, in the early days of laying the cable across the Atlantic, poor half-educated, illiterate sharks, you find them stuck into it. They'd home in on this weak electric field, thinking, definitely something to eat. And it was the cable. So it's a whole... all I'm saying is that there are other senses that fish have that we don't. I can't eat that. It really tastes revolting. Ammonia. And again, if you were an inexperienced shark, which presumably often happens. You're just out of secondary school, and you haven't been to university, and you see this thing. It can only swim very, very slowly over the bottom. East crustaceans. But you see this? This marlinspike here? Massive spike, and really hard. And here, there's a poison gland. Terrific. It's a syringe, just waiting. And as you know, sharks almost always approach from the head end. And you get that into the roof of your mouth, if you're a young shark. And the pain, presumably, is spectacular. And you run home to Mummy, just crying all the way. And you never, ever bother one of these again.

The Arctic skate, and we caught quite a lot of those. And they're... you get a good price for these, in Shetland and Orkney. Because, if you imagine it. You know you're beautiful, you know you're a beautiful girl, and you're living on your croft, your farm, and there are no boys around. I mean, there aren't. But two crofts over, quite a few acres away, there is this handsome young guy and you really fancy him. There's nothing else to fancy. And what are you going to do, because he's got a 1947... he's got a grey Ferguson that he polishes every day, and he tends to the farm. And he probably... he's also got a Massey-Harris, and so that's his pride and joy. That's all he thinks about, and he oils them. So what you do is you buy some of these and you make a soup. A soupe de poisson, only it's not quite. It's a soup and look how fertile this guy is. How potent. You cut off both penises, has two penises, wow, how useful that would be. And you chop them up and you make a fish soup. And you've invited him to supper. And he's not that bright, but you're not after intelligence, are you?
And only when he's eaten all of his soup do you tell him that it was made entirely from the penises of Arctic skates. He may not twig at once, but eventually he's going to think, what have I...? And that's it, you've done it. And these poor bloody tractors just rust away. Wonderful things. When I did biology at school, we were told these were claspers, to hold the female. I mean, ridiculous. No, they're the real thing.

Now these, these are redfish, Sebastes, and you can see they've come up from a big depth. They have got big eyes, but the eyes have popped out. Now unlike those fish we saw, marlinspikes, huge median line receptors, so on and so on, these have gone for a speed and a bit of protection, defence. That's their strategy. Three different species, Norway haddock. They've got scales, for a start, so that's... it's a pain to eat scales, so that helps them. And they're fast. They're rigid. They really can move. But they pay a price for that, because on these scales, these terrible things, these copepods, can get a grip. And on some of these fish, the parasite streams out behind them. And the head is in the fish. Massive, fruiting bodies coming out. And you just get drained away. I mean, what can you do? You can't reach around with your hands and pluck the thing out. You've had it. So it's easy for parasites to get into scales, is what I'm saying. But you've got speed.

These, the wee beasties of the ocean floor, amphipods, they're actually that picture, a bit bigger. They've lost their colour here in the formalin, but they are... they're big in comparison. Their nearest relatives on shore are the little sand hoppers underneath seaweed. These guys, you put your mackerel in the bait for lobsters or whatever, these are the guys that strip it clean, so there's just a skeleton, as if they had been treated in acid. Now they eat you from the outside if you're drowned, and do an extraordinarily good job.

Now this is my favourite fish. It's actually 510 million years old. Now to put that in perspective, the straggliest, most unimpressive plant only came ashore 425 million years ago, and that rabbitfish we saw, fossils almost identical to it that's only 300 million years ago, and the rabbitfish now is a living missing link, as far as you can have such a thing, because it's a real intermediate between the fishes that are... the teleos and the bony structure, and those on a... that are made from cartilage, like the rays and the sharks. So this is, as it were, almost old beyond belief. And very impressive. Impossible to kill. These things would come up from a mile down, a bit fazed by being in the net, presumably, but here he is, already sniffing out a new home. Now when you're drowned, they love liver, hagfish, and I'm afraid the quickest way in... they always enter via the anus. Not their fault. Not your fault. And make their way to the liver as fast as they can, with these rasping, rasping, no, not teeth... they evolved way before teeth evolved. Their opposable horny plates, like this.
And actually incredibly sharp and they make their way up the gut and they swarm, so there's one after the other, so there's a panic for them to get to your liver. And I'll show you in detail in a minute, but the reason all trawler men detest them is because if you are unlucky enough to get a body in your trawl, say, a drowned trawler man, or in the case I'm thinking of, 45... I think probably they were SAS men, anyway, helicopter crash during the troubles off the Mull of Kintyre. And the Norlantean sister ship, in her trawl, 30 corpses.
[Q] In the net?
In the net, yes. Come up into the hopper. Luckily somebody got to the hopper first, otherwise not a single man in that crew would ever have gone to sea again. And they were in their uniforms, but distended and absolutely flapping with these things. They were just full of hagfish. So there's a nasty story for you, but this... it is a most remarkable animal, and, I think, terribly sophisticated, given the fact that it's so old. You know, what was it preying on, as it certainly was? I don't... you probably can't see, but there are about 500 little white glands, as it were, that you can see along the dorsal, the ventral, fins, such as it is. It is like a hedge. Now some of them are full of a substance that is fascinating. It hydrates faster than anything else known on Earth. Powder, white powder, boom, and it fills with the surrounding water, and makes a gooey, slimy, filthy substance. And some of those cells have got little tiny threads in them. They also expand. And the threads and the goo mesh together. And again, if you're a shark who really should've stayed on at school a little longer, and you see one of these, this is a frankfurter for breakfast. As you come in, it picks you up with these massive receptors here, and almost instantaneously, 500 glands open, boom.
And it's surrounded in a great ball of slime. And it's in your gills, it's in your eyes, it's in your mouth. And you do what you'd think you'd do: you shake your head. And the more you do that, the tighter it sets. It's nightmare stuff. And Jason said he'd quite often seen big Greenland sharks, okay? Slow-moving bottom eaters, dead on the surface, strangled with this slime set around their huge heads. Don't mess with this little frankfurter. Astonishing. How you evolve a defence like that. One theory is that actually they do it... they put out a lot of slime the minute they find something dead on the sea floor. I mean, it can be a dolphin, it can be a fish, it can be you or me. And that keeps the other... the competition off. Not your fellows, you know, they don't mind the slime, but other nasty... all the amphipods, all those... you know, the lesser beings. It keeps them off. And then you say, well, that's all very well, but they're going to strangle themselves in their own slime. Well no, this is the only animal, as far as we know, on Earth, that can tie a knot in itself. Puts its head around in a knot and then passes the know down its body, see? Never needs to take a shower.

When I came ashore, I mean, you just don't know who you are. You seem to have no past. You have no sense at all of a whole human being with memories. And of course, therefore you have no future. You're just, as it were, all in bits. Well, I suppose you are. But you can't get a grip on anything that will give you meaning. And the only thing you think is what normally works when you have that, sort of, very passing feeling in ordinary life. This is terrible. You think, well, if I have a drink that will put me back together. Well, you're far too far gone. It doesn't. You can drink great pints, and you still can't sleep. You can't sleep, because the brain's gone past the opportunity to sleep, and actually what happens, same with rats. If you deprive rats of sleep, their... eventually their fur falls off in clumps. And these guys, their skin goes red and starts to fall off. They look terrible. And I looked terrible. And I thought, well, at least I participated, but then that didn't seem to have no point to that.
And you can't sleep. And what they do... I mean, I don't blame them. Not Brian's wife, she's wise. A wise old trawler man's wife. But these young married, the youngsters... well, there's nobody over 25 in the crew apart from Brian and... they want to...they come ashore, they've got cash. They want to take them shopping, instantly. Don't even let them get out of their boots and gear, as Robbie was telling me.
So now the Co-op in Stromness, they used to have their baked beans up in pyramids. Well, not anymore, because when the boat is in, for some reason, a pyramid of baked beans really attracts a guy in your sea boots, and something cracks and he puts his boot into it, and it's tremendous, the way it'll fly through the air at the Co-op. And the moment there's a boat in, now but there's the little police panda car parked outside the Co-op. They don't understand. No judge understands, nobody understands the violence of a trawler man ashore. He's got to go to bed and you need to sleep for 36 hours plus. That's it. And then after a week or so, you've got to go back and do it all again. And no wonder it's dangerous. I couldn't understand the figures before I went. 1998, the figures were quite difficult to get from the Fisheries Ministry. Now the 26 vessels lost, 26 trawler men died, just a freak of statistics, but in that year, there 388 accidents. Now I now know what an accident means. After I left, the youngest crewman, Sean, he cut his thumb off on the gutting table. Now, you don't stop for that. That's not an accident. You don't report that as an accident. You just bandage it up, the thumb. And then, a few weeks later, the next youngest, Jerry, the cook, but everything else as well, he caught his hand in a hawser on deck. Just took off the thumb and all the fingers, so nothing left there. Now it's cold, nothing goes septic. It's very, very cold. So you bind it up and it heals surprisingly quickly, big first aid kits on board.
But you don't stop fishing for that. That's not reported as an accident. I mean, if there's an accident, you've got to at least lose a leg or an arm. 388 accident. Extraordinary. But all these people are self-employed. They can't... he'd never be able to work without his right hand, and so it goes on. Why? When I first went, I thought they were all going to be old salts. It's going to be a crew of old men, wonderful wise old guys, in my naivety, I thought, who loved the sea. Loved the sea, my arse. Certainly not.
Anyway, I was doing a reading in the Edinburgh festival, and Jerry was in the audience. So we had a... I took him out and we had a drink afterwards, and I said, 'God, Jerry, absolutely terrible that happened to you.' He said, 'Ah, well, you're quite wrong. Do you realise I can never go back to sea?' And it turned out he was working in the toughest school in the UK. It's a place in Glasgow where you can only go, I think, if you've broken a bottle and ripped your teacher's face to bits. Or burned down the music school. Or probably not burning down the music school, that would be perfectly normal. You have to be in there for something appalling.
And I said, 'But that must be really tough.' And he said to me, he seemed very happy with just a stump, and he said to me, 'Oh no, it's a piece of piss. If there's trouble, I can smell it coming. And I just stand up and I say: you stop it right now, and I shake my stump at them. And they sit down.' They obviously all love him. You can't get tougher than a trawler man with one hand. So that was a happy story.

The first really extraordinary feeling was that there is a world in the UK without rules, jurisdiction of any kind. I mean, you're just off the 200 mile limit. And a world that absolutely nobody, not even the wives, know about. That was what they told me, independently, you know. 'If you can produce a bucket, I don't think you will because you're so old and useless, but if you could, I expect... We said... we talked... we did... it'll be a piece of piss. But if you just give us something that we can give to our wives to tell them what we do. We can't tell them, they'll not believe us.' So they all gave it to their wives... 'and took them forever to read it, but then, you know, mine, she never reads the paper.' And that was a big deal. So I loved that. But perhaps the best moment in it all was the publicity tour in America and up the east coast, and the skipper rang in from Gloucester, you know, the port of the Perfect Storm. The sort of legendary port. And said, 'Well, that's really what it's like. Nobody else has ever told it like it really is, and that lots of people, therefore, wouldn't believe it.'

Look, it’s a really good thing that the UK lost the Cod War. Iceland is an example to absolutely everybody. That vast place, that offshore, it’s run like a ranch. That’s why full-sized cod come into Heathrow every night on Iceland Air for our fish and chips. Why? Because they won the war. Thank God, thank cod. Now if they have an inspector, they have a very, very good system. You bring in everything, you don’t bung anything overboard. There’s no waste. It was terrible chucking skates overboard and so on. You bring it all in, and if you meet your quota, you’re a good skipper like Jason, eventually you’ll be able to buy somebody who hasn’t met their quota. And so you get fewer and fewer and more efficient boats in your trawler fleet, and every single one has an inspector on board. So if your codlings... I mean, if you’re getting fish which are small, or you’re getting really pregnant fish, full of eggs, that’s it, fishing banned from that area, that particular area. And that’s the cod nursery for next year. It changes, you see. But it’s managed, it’s sustainable. Every inch of the ocean, I’m afraid, despite all one’s free-for-all instincts, should be owned and managed. There’s no incentive for somebody like Jason to look after stocks when he can see a Spanish trawler with minute mesh nets coming up behind him. Those guys get arrested by the one or two Fisheries Patrol vessels there are, taken into port, fine £75,000. I mean, nothing to them. The Spanish are clearing it all out, every trawler man will tell you.

I can't imagine anything tougher. There's a major in the SAS said, you know, those guys, no one can handle that. No wonder they all end up in prison or... you can't. The fittest, toughest, youngest SAS troop couldn't do with one hour's sleep in 36, going on for two weeks. It's insane. And of course, not only is there not a union, it's a cooperative, so everybody is keeping an eye on everybody else to see how hard they're working. Sleep is a sort of dirty word. It's terrible. And it's very, very cold. And you need thighs not like mine. You need thighs of another order altogether, like Tyrannosaurus Rex, is what you really need.
[Q] To stand up?
Yes, to stand up on the deck at all. And the scuppers. They're very generous scuppers. You know, they take six foot. An old fat man lying flat, boom, gone. No problem. You've got to hang onto things. But they have these massive thighs. And of course, they don't need a gym, their thighs are growing even as they stand there. And they... you see, they buy their jeans many, many sizes too tight, and the waist, flat muscly stomach, but the belts are pulled right in, so it looks ridiculous, all puckered up. But that's the only way, you know, you can get their thighs into those things.
We had a party here for Penguin, to launch Trawler, and Jason came. The skipper came. Robbie came, too. And Jason, I can see him now, standing there. And I was passing with a bottle. Couldn't get anywhere near him. Just surrounded by all these models, beautiful women is what I mean, but publicity girls from the publisher, and editors and... and they should have been ashamed of themselves, all these young girls, just eyes for nobody except Jason. And they'd never seen a guy who's a real macho guy. These massive shoulders, enormous biceps. I mean, they get terrific upper chests from pulling on the nets. But of course, the main thing is the thighs. I mean, the muscles. And as I passed, he said, 'Redmond, you bastard, it's all your fault. The wee... they're looking at me thighs', he said.
[Q] Are you glad you did it?
Yes. God yes. Yes, that was wonderful, extraordinary. But I wouldn't go back to sea, I don't think.
Yes, it was wonderful. It was meant to be a book about life in Orkney and Shetland and so on, but this... nothing bad happened to me. Everybody was so kind, it was wonderful. This was the only time that I could tell myself, oh, you're suffering. Not just your opinion, anybody would say you: are in a very, very bad way. It was the nastiest thing that's happened for a very long time. Then I know I can write about it. Not a single landlady in the B&Bs in Shetland or anywhere else, actually, got a Kalashnikov and stuck it in my stomach. There was nothing bad happened, really.
And the wonderful feeling of the great, still a bit unknown, the richness of marine life. The way that it goes back so far into the past, way before life even began on land, and it's still there. And as Luke Buller said to me, I think, actually: if you measure the plankton in terms of vegetable life, from the surface down 50 feet, it works out you've got three times the density of a tropical rainforest in some places of the ocean. So the plant life is just rich beyond belief.
[Q] Do you like the sea?
I don't like the surface of the sea at all. I like the thought of what's under it. No, no, it's always out to get you eventually. They hate the sea, too.
[Q] The trawler men?
Yes. After a bit, there's absolutely no getting away from the fact that this is an entirely inhuman entity, all utterly indifferent. This is something that has its own life and power and rhythm. You know, it doesn't care about you. Or at least, it wouldn't even do that. I mean, you don't feature, at all. But weirdly, you don't feel as lonely as you can do in the middle of a 200-foot-high tropical forest months away from anywhere. That's also humbling, as it were. Or not humbling, that's not right. It's like looking up at the stars at night, lying on your back. You know, you shouldn't do that too often unless you're an astronomer. Just go home and...

Just the physical things about coming ashore. Luke and I put up in a bed and breakfast, owned by Robbie's auntie. Now our little room was at one end of a small corridor. And the bathroom was at the other end of it. And it was bizarre, because I absolutely had to wait until the doorway of... the door of our room, was up, and then I'd run down the corridor into the bathroom, and then get back from the bathroom, and wait until the corridor... and I'd run down. And I thought this would maybe last just for a day or two. Now maybe it does with young people, but I got... I managed to get Luke back to Aberdeen, which is quite a drive. And that was okay, I suppose because you have somebody with you and you've got to... the brain knows it's got to hang onto itself. So I drop him off, again at about five in the morning. And I set off south. And I realised this is quite dangerous, because the road is going up and down. I get a bit south of Aberdeen, and this is a disgusting story. It's never happened to me before or since, but everything, every bodily function, has collapsed.
So I think I'm just breaking wind, and I'm in my little Clio, a little tiny car, and I'm covered in diarrhoea. So I pull into a lay-by, and in the back of the car, I have, well, the towels. There are towels and that's all. And a couple of bottles of water. So I drench myself in all that and change into some other combat gear, and then I remember that Robbie's auntie said that we stank of fish. 'You two, you stink of fish. I'd kick you out if you weren't friends of my nephew Robbie.'
So I think, 'Well, I hope the fish stink is going to overpower anything left from all of this.' I mean, your sense of smell's gone, everything's gone. So then I get to the... turn into the very first inn I see and park. I can't drive another yard. And I walk into the place and I say, 'Have you got a room for the night?' And this girl behind the bar. And she says, 'Oh no, it's not the season, it's not the season at all. No, we only do it in the summer.' And I say, 'Look here, you listen to me. You call yourself an inn. That means you have rooms. You have a room for the night. I'm going to sleep right here.' And she says, 'Manager!' And down the stairs comes, bom, bom, bom. And I say – this huge guy – I say, 'Look here, I'm just off the trawler, and I'm fucking well going to sleep here, I'm sorry to say. You call yourself an inn, that's that. I can't drive another... and I'm not staying in the car.' And then clever enough not to say why not, don't want to be in the car anymore. And he says, 'You're off a trawler?' And his whole face lights up. Turns out he was a cook on an offshore oil platform. You know, wonderful, perfectly flat, not tough at all, cinemas, bedrooms. Nothing moves. And he said, whenever he felt that he'd got a rotten life in the heat in the kitchen, he'd 'go up to the platform, take my binoculars, I'd look around for a trawler. And I'd see these poor buggers that are there one minute and gone the next. And I'd think, they're all going to fucking drown, and then I'd go back to the cooking, you know.' And he said, he wanted to shake my hand, and I thought... but anyway, then he opened up a room right next to his, and he said, 'I'm afraid it's pay night, there'll be terrible, terrible noise.' And I said, 'Look, I won't be hearing anything.' And I got in and I was frozen, freezing. So I took... I'm afraid I took the curtains down. I put every... and the carpet. I put everything on top of me. And I didn't wake up until three in the next afternoon. And he was so full of admiration for trawler men. I was afraid he was going to check my hands out. And he gave me, personally cooked me this huge, huge breakfast in his place. Not quite like a trawler man's breakfast, because you get two meals a day, if you're lucky, on the trawler, but the main meal is the breakfast, as it were. You know, who knows what time it is? But it's a deep-fried pizza for two and then, well, half a pig, bacon on it. And then fried taties and then, on top of that, four friend eggs. And then... what? Something else went on top of that, but if you really wanted it, you could also have a deep-fried Mars Bar right on top of this pyramid. So he didn't quite manage that.
Yes, that's right, and then people were looking at trawler men because they have really high rate – it's not funny – really high rate of abdominal cancer. Thought it might be being in the ultraviolet all the time and whatever else could happen at sea. And then somebody said, 'Well, let's check out their diet.' And once they saw the breakfast... Anyway, and then the terrible thing is, you know, it's not that far, but it took me ten days to get back to Oxford.

[Q] So is trawler the toughest?
No,  because you're surrounded by people. The minute you've stepped on board,  it's a big... well, a little human endeavour. I mean, you don't have to  make your own decisions, really, except to get out of bed, and that is  tough, but no, it's all done for you. No, I think the only tough thing  is writing afterwards. But...
[Q] Why is that tough?
Because  then you're absolutely and totally alone and you have to make your own  enthusiasm. As I told you, you have to decide you'll turn up for work,  but it's just you, all alone. Doesn't matter what you do in the micro  world. As I told you, you can decide to stay in bed that morning,  because you don't want to upset the cat, who's under the covers with  you. Here he is! He heard us talking about him. Yes. The soppiest cat in  the world.
