richard.wilbur

Acclaimed US poet Richard Wilbur (1921-2017) published many books and was twice awarded the Pulitzer Prize. He was less well known for creating a musical version of Voltaire's “Candide” with Bernstein and Hellman which is still produced throughout the world today.

My mother came from Baltimore and from a family, which for generations had been in journalism. My maternal grandfather, Clarence Melvyn Purdy, had been city editor of The Baltimore Sun in the early years of the 20th Century, and everybody else in the family had been a journalist somewhere. Some of them were heroic. There was a story about one of them saying to a threatening mob, a mob which threatened to come back the next night and get him, 'Don't forget the rope'. I am very glad to have that sort of heroism in my background, and of course that helped me think very highly of writing when I was young. My mother, though she never did write much of anything except very good letters, was an appreciator of good language and a good reader aloud, and all that mattered to me as a child.
My father's family is largely a mystery to me. I know that the Wilburs came to America in 1634... 1632 rather, and dispersed to Rhode Island and thence went in... off in all directions. But as for my father's immediate family, I'm ashamed to say that I know little about them. I have a feeling that his father was in accountancy or banking. In any case, my father, in Omaha, Nebraska in an atmosphere... a local atmosphere of banking or accountancy, discovered that he wanted to be a painter. And so he took some money he had scraped together, and as a very young man, left Omaha, came to New York City and went to the Art Student's League where he studied with Robert Henri and Bellows and all sorts of admirable people.
Now, as for... as for what that meant to me, as for what was formative about that, I think because my father was a very good painter, that it gave me a feeling for doing things properly. It also made me want to see things very clearly and to record them clearly, as my father did with his... with his paints. Poetry it seems to me is a highly visual art and so if your father was a painter, it shows up in the objects of your poetry.
My parents first lived in New York City on Haven Avenue, in what was to be the shadow of the George Washington Bridge. In their Haven Avenue building, they had an apartment and also a studio for my father, who, when he left the Art Student's League, embarked on a career as a commercial artist. He did magazine covers, The Saturday Evening Post or Colliers, that kind of thing, Red Cross posters, recruiting posters, Ward bread ads, there's no limit to what he did in the commercial way at a time when photography was much less used in advertising than it now is. For half of his career he was a commercial artist, and then growing very tired of the limitations of lithography, which can give you only four colours to work with, he abruptly became a portrait painter, and a very good one, and gave the latter half of his career to that.

I was in the apartment and studio on Haven Avenue for just two years of my young life, and of course I remember nothing of it. What I have been told is that I used to sit out on the fire escape looking at the Hudson River and unerringly recognise the Albany night boat when it went by. The other thing - that of course means that I was very clever as a child - the other thing was that I went into my father's studio one day and ate a quantity of his paints and became very sick. So, as you can see, I started out both clever and stupid.

My parents moved when I was three to a gentleman's farm 20 miles out of New York City in North Caldwell, New Jersey. We were not the gentlefolk. The farm belonged to a retired textile manufacturer and millionaire named Joshua Dickinson Armitage. It was a big farm, about 450 acres. It had been largely constructed by Mr Armitage, so as to be a perfect gentleman's farm and a perfect reproof to those in England who had snubbed him for being in trade. He became a country gentleman, a squire. The reason we ended up on his property was that there was an old pre-revolutionary stone house there and when Mr Armitage met my father on some golf course or other and took to him, he had a Maecenas urge and suggested to my father that he move out to North Caldwell, New Jersey and inhabit that house for a very low rental. And so that's where my mother and father went and I with them, and it's where they stayed for 50 years.

One thing about North Caldwell in those days was that there was every conceivable kind of animal and orchard and farm activity on Mr Armitage's estate, and the outlying areas of North Caldwell were also well forested and not at all densely populated. So, I grew up in... I grew up in a very countrified place, hard as it is to believe that at present of New Jersey, and did a lot of lonely exploration of the woods; also a lot of interfering in the chores of the farm which were being performed by other people, but very interesting to be... to be part of. I suppose that if you are brought up anywhere in the country, it means that you develop an ability to amuse yourself and an ability to be alone without weeping, and that of course is essential if you are going to turn out to be a writer.

I was sent to schools outside of North Caldwell because they were better schools. My parents somehow wangled an arrangement whereby I went to the Essex Fells Grammar School about three miles away in a pleasant and progressive suburb. What I remember of the school is that it was awfully good and the teachers were very fine. I had a number of friends there, but I had the loneliness and the slight feeling of oddity of somebody who comes from a distance and who is not around in the afternoons much of the time to enjoy the company of his contemporaries in the neighbourhood.

One thing I remember about that school is that I won the broad jump championship in a track meet we had, otherwise I wasn't distinguished as an athlete. Although I was a slightly odd bird there at that school, I found that I was sometimes the person who thought up what it would be fun to do. I was influential sometimes in that way. One day I remember I managed to get the entire student body during recess, not playing baseball or skipping rope or doing some other wholesome thing, but walking round and round the building in a great mass. This was regarded as very questionable behaviour by the Principal, Miss Tufts, and she did not altogether think well of me for that. I also became a little dubious in the seventh grade when I founded a club. I called it The Death Club, and of course made myself president of it, and much of my seventh grade year was spent in initiating other people into the club, sometimes in scary ways. By the time everybody in the grade had become a member of my club, it became apparent to us all that we existed only to initiate new members, and so we disbanded, but at any rate, that's something I thought of, that's a way in which I was influential.

After Essex Fells schools, I went on to Montclair High School, which was seven miles from North Caldwell, a splendid school. To give an idea of the high morale of the place, I need only mention that Mr Palmer, the Vice-Principal, gave volunteer Greek classes after school and had in fact some takers. I enjoyed Montclair High School a good deal although, of course, I was the person who came from far away and was a little less socially easy than the rest of my classmates.
There were venturesome programmes there, I recall being in a splendid programme called Art English, which was operated by Mr Wells, the English teacher, and Miss Atkinson, the art teacher. We were continually invited in one way or another to fuse our interest in art and in making art, and our interest in literature and in writing.
Montclair's morale was so high and the quality of education was so high that it wasn't necessary to take any tests in those days in order to go on to college, and so soon I was on my way to Amherst College, which was the only college of which our family was at all aware. We had a dear friend, Mr Lewis Wakely, who was an alumnus of Amherst and who regarded Amherst as very close to godliness, and in, in view of his excitement, I was enlisted there.

Once again, at Montclair High School I felt a little bit odd because I was from so far away and a little bit lonely sometimes, but as I've talked to other people about their lives, it seems to me that loneliness is really the condition of people in their 15th and 16th years, and so I shouldn't overemphasize that, and in fact somehow... I was somehow elected secretary of my class, so that I must, without knowing it, have been fairly popular. I was editor of the Montclair High School newspaper. In fact, all during my youth, wherever I went, I edited the paper, and I don't suppose I did anything very distinguished as a high school newspaper editor. I do remember one phrase from an editorial I wrote. I spoke there of 'menacing totalitarian mandibles'. That reflects my pride in knowing that the jawbone is a mandible and of course I was thinking of the great jaw of Mussolini. My guess is that I had nothing at all to say in my editorial and that I was simply proud of showing off the word mandible. It was something I continued to do as I edited things, I continued to make a display of verbal facility and of new words without really having any urgent message. If I had positions as a young man, they were quite simply the positions of the new deal, and I was for Franklin Roosevelt then and I am now.

When I went to Amherst I began to work toward editorship of the Amherst paper and I also wrote for the undergraduate literary magazine, The Touchstone. One thing about Amherst was that it corrected instantly my loneliness, my feelings of isolation. I joined a fraternity, Chi Psi, which was at that time the athletic fraternity on the campus. I think we had most of the football team in our house. And it can be very good if you've had a somewhat isolated boyhood to find yourself suddenly amidst many people who are pledged to be your brothers. I didn't try to be very athletic. During my freshman year I did a bit of boxing, out of a feeling I suppose that I was after all in Chi Psi fraternity.
One evening I remember Gene Hubbard, our football centre saying to me, 'How are you doing Dick?' And I said, 'Well I'm fine, Gene, except that my head rings a little at night from boxing'. And he said, 'What are you doing boxing? We took you into the house to raise our academic average'. And so, so I gave up on boxing, although to tell the truth I had had a pretty good left jab.
What else happened at Amherst? Well, I met the right girl. In my... you know, in those days, as in Fitzgerald's novels or as in the popular songs of Bing Crosby, in those days it was believed that if you could just find the right girl everything was going to be all right, and I believed that, and when I met my wife in my junior year, it simply proved to be so, and here we've been married 60-some years. She astonished me by responding to my interest in her. She had been queen of the Harvest Moon Ball, she was beautiful, she could dance very well, she had an angelic voice, and I was terribly lucky that she decided that I would do. Especially as coming from a literary background, she felt there was no better thing than one could do than to be a poet, and she has backed me all my life in that respect.

One thing about Amherst College was, although the student body was not a bunch of long-hairs and exquisites, there was considerable tolerance for artistic effort. I never felt that I was doing anything odd at Amherst when I interested myself not merely in journalism, but also in the writing of short stories and poems.
People are always asking me why so many poets have come out of Amherst, and I...one reason of course is that the spirit of Emily Dickinson hovers there. Another was that Robert Frost was for so long associated with the College, and that a good poet like Ralph Humphries taught there for some time. People like David Ferry, James Merril, Tom Whitbread, it's a long list of really quite good poets, very good poets, Robert Bagg, another who came out of Amherst, and I think it had something to do with the... with the hovering influences I've mentioned. Also I think with the readiness of teachers to take you seriously if you tried to write a poem. I always found that my teachers, without exception, would take lots of time out to read anything I wrote and would criticize me and encourage me. Once when I... once years later when I was at Harvard's Graduate School, Theodore Baird of the Amherst faculty wrote me a letter about things in general, but in the course of it he said, 'The best intellectual life in Amherst goes on in the classroom'. And I think he was not boasting, I think that was true. The teachers I had, especially in the English department, devoted themselves to preparing exciting classes and devoted themselves to their students, in class and out, and all of that I think was contributory to my becoming a poet and to other having... Amherst poets having been shaped by the College.

In the summers when I was going to Amherst I went hoboing, literally. That is to say I rode through 46 of the then 48 States on freight cars. When I couldn't catch a freight car, I would use my thumb on the highways, but it was largely a matter of excitingly riding the rails. I did that for one summer and then bragged so much about it that a couple of my Amherst friends wanted to go along for a second tour of the country. I can't guess in what way that may have been contributory to my writing, but I suppose... I suppose it was clear evidence of romanticism.

While I was at Amherst of course the... America became involved in World War II. I was slow to become involved. I was more interested in being married, but shortly after our marriage in June of 1942, it became clear to me that I had to get into it one way or another, and I volunteered for the Enlisted Reserve Corps, which took us to New York City for several months where we had an apartment in Greenwich Village and where I studied each day radio physics, radio repair and Morse code transmission at an ERA school.
When I reported for duty at Fort Dix not long after, I discovered that they didn't need any more radio people and they asked me if there was anything else I could conceivably do. At some time during my adolescence I had been interested in cryptography and sufficiently interested in it to take a correspondence course from the US government in that subject and that technique. I learned all about the Playfair Cipher and other cryptographic means which were now thoroughly out of date. But when I told them that at Fort Dix, they said, all right, we'll let you become a crypto- cryptographic technician, and they sent me off for basic training, after which I began to train specifically to be a cryptographer.
It looked, as a matter of fact, as if I were going to be not only a cryptographer but a cryptanalyst. I was on the verge of being taught various languages at a secret camp in the woods of Virginia and converted then into a breaker of enemy codes, when it turned out that the counterintelligence corps and the FBI regarded me as too much of a boy radical to be trusted. Now actually, I was not much of a boy radical, I think that I was an articulate admirer of Franklin Roosevelt, the New Deal and that kind of approach to political life. But I came to feel and indeed came to know that what they wanted in secret work in the US army during World War II was bright, trustworthy people who had in fact no interest in politics and were as ignorant as possible of it.

At that time when I was training at Camp Edison in New Jersey to be a cryptographer, we were often shown films which were meant to let us know why we were in the war. They were indoctrination films, so-called. There was a splendid one, which had been directed by Frank Capra, and the message of it was simply this: we should have stopped them in Spain. Now, that's what they were telling us in indoctrination, but you were not supposed to walk out of the movie and say on the company street that we should have stopped them in Spain. They wanted you to absorb the lesson but not be vigorously political. And because I shot my mouth off a little too much about politics, I found myself thrown out of cryptographic training, sent to a camp for undesirables in North Western Pennsylvania, and then shipped overseas as a general replacement.
After a time - I won't describe the entire journey - but after a time I found myself in a huge hippodrome near Naples, the Hipodromo Daniamo, where soldiers were being placed in this or that unit. I was about to be sent into a line company I think without ever having been trained with a Girand rifle. That alarmed me a little and happily one day as I was on my way to volunteer for the paratroops, because they would have given me some training, I was summoned to talk with Captain Charles Wingo of the 36th Division Signal Company. And I've since turned my interview with Captain Wingo into a kind of a Vaudeville turn, but it did go somewhat like this. Mr Wingo, Captain Wingo had my service record in front of him, and he said, 'It says here you want to overthrow the government'. And I said, 'No sir, I do not'. And he said, 'All right. Well, one of our cryptographers just went crazy. We need a cryptographer, we'll take you in, but if we catch you overthrowing the government, out you go'.
So, from that point on I was in the 36th Division and went with them to Monte Cassino and Anzio, the Southern France invasion and the Battle of the Bulge. I was lucky to find myself amongst Texans. Most of the people I served with in the 36th Division were east Texas country boys and they were very good soldiers. They were also wonderfully playful in their language. They made up new ways of saying things, all the time. They never cussed twice in exactly the same way, and as somebody who was going to turn out to be a writer, I found it stimulating to serve with people for whom language was a lot of fun.

I had an epiphany at Monte Cassino where we were all dug into the ground in the valley which led to the monastery of Monte Cassino. One spent much time underground under those circumstances, and I did a bit of reading. I happened to have, I don't know why, a paperback volume of Edgar Allan Poe and lying there under somewhat scary circumstances, dozing off and waking up repeatedly, I found myself understanding some things about Poe which I had never understood before. I noticed that in his tales, though some of them were about sea voyages and some of them were about land travels and some of them were about finding one's way through buildings, there was... there was always a stage at which one was proceeding by winding paths or winding streams or winding interiors. And the winding paths I noticed always culminated in a vortex of some kind, a maelstrom sometimes, at other times a maelstrom of fire. It began to appear to me that what Poe was doing was finding concrete ways of expressing the stages of the mind entering sleep and approaching the visionary condition. As time went on, I refined my sense of that discovery and convinced myself that I had really been right about it and ultimately, years later, did a good deal of writing and teaching about Edgar Allan Poe.

I want to say something parenthetically about cryptography in relation to my writing. Of course in every poem of any quality there's a certain amount of puzzle interest and there's really a fairly close relationship between an interest in riddles and puzzles and cryptography, and an interest in poetry. If one goes back to Aristotle, what he stresses the... he stresses the importance of surprise and discovery in poetry in the riddle and in the poem, and I know that I was drawn to cryptography from the beginning because I was also drawn in the direction of poetry.

In my work as a cryptographer, I sometimes worked on secret machines in the cellars of buildings, sometimes in a six-by-six truck, under all sorts of circumstances I set up my shop. The fact that I was working with machines made it possible for me when I was not handling and breaking code messages, to type up the poems I was writing on our secret machines. I never thought much about sending my poems to magazines. I believe that a poem of mine called Potato was gently refused by the magazine Horizon in England. Another poem of mine, which I had sent to my wife on a V mail, was printed in The Saturday Evening Post because a good friend of my wife's was an editor there, but I really didn't think of, of publication. I sent my poems to Armour Craig or Theodore Baird, my former teachers at Amherst, I sent them to my wife and my family, my friends, but I did not figure in my own mind as a poet. Of course I was very interested in poetry throughout the War, so interested that I threw away my gas mask and used the space reserved for the gas mask for transporting a volume of Gerard Manley Hopkins and a number of paperbacks from New Directions. I did a great deal of poetry reading during the entire stretch of my army experience, not because I was goofing off, but because as Evelyn Waugh once said, 'War is mostly waiting around'. Even if you are at the front, most of the time you have leisure to understand Edgar Allan Poe.

When I came out of the army in... I guess it was '45, I learned that there was such a thing as the GI Bill which would pay my tuition and allow me to go further on with my education and perhaps become a teacher of English. My notion I suppose, my vague notion, had been that if I survived the war I would be a newspaper writer, perhaps a newspaper cartoonist, too, because I did a good bit of that. But once I heard of the GI Bill, it became clear to me what I ought to aspire to do, and I remembered how my good Amherst teachers had me feel that to be a scholar of English literature and to teach it would be an honourable life. So, off we went to Cambridge and I got an MA in English at Harvard and studying with such admirable people as Harry Levin, FO Mathiessen, Kenneth Murdock, Douglas Bush, and I did well enough, I guess, so that Mathiessen encouraged me to apply for the Society of Fellows, a wonderful institution at Harvard which takes young scholars and gives them three years in which they have a modest stipend and complete leisure and access to all of the facilities of the university and the privilege of talking to each other over dinner and lunch table, and of consorting with the senior fellows, who at that time included such worthies as Alfred North Whitehead.
I was lucky enough to be taken into the Society of Fellows and what I mostly did in the way of scholarship was to remember what I had discovered in Cassino and try to write a book about Edgar Allan Poe. That never happened. I've written lots of essays about Poe, but during the three years in which I was working on him, I never did seem to find the proper terms in which to describe his kind of operation. I taught a volunteer seminar in Poe while I was a junior fellow, and I also kept on writing poems. In 1948 or was it '47? In any case, very early in my tenure at the Society of Fellows, my first book of poems was published by happy accident and the New York Times listed it for heavens sake among it's 100 best books of the year or something like that.

One thing that happened during my initial year of studies at Harvard was that I met André du Bouchet, a refugee from France who had studied at Amherst and who was now living at Cambridge, and was I suppose doing some sort of graduate work. André went on to become a very distinguished poet in France. At the time I knew him, he was an exceedingly lively young man and a fine poet, and we at once took to each other. We used to sit around in my Cambridge apartment translating each other, and that was rather fun. He sometimes made me sound as good as Baudelaire. He interested me in all sorts of French writers. I had during World War II picked up copies of Aragon with one hand, Mallarmé with the other, and read and read in an awkward and untutored fashion a lot of French literature as I went along. But now he incited me to take it seriously, and under his urging I translated a whole novel of Villiers de l'Isle Adam and did a good deal of reading, especially in modernist literature, people like Raymond Roussel.
Very early in our friendship, my wife opened a bureau drawer in which my accumulated poems had been placed and handed them to André and said, 'Would you, would you look at them?' He took them home to his apartment and came back fairly soon afterwards, kissed me on both cheeks and declared me to be a poet, and that was of course utterly delightful to me, and it was the more delightful because André was at that time a kind of talent scout for the New York publisher, Reynal & Hitchcock. He sent all those smudged and crumpled poems of mine down to Reynal & Hitchcock and to my amazement they called back pretty soon and said that they'd like to do a book. And so that's how my first book The Beautiful Changes got published, and I must say it was a very painless route to publication. I had not had much, much rejection and I was published as it were by surprise.

Once I was in the Society of Fellows, I also saw a good deal of Pierre Schneider or Pierre Schneidaire who was later a distinguished art critic in Paris. And he and André combined to educate me in things French and to improve my tastes, and... to the point where I was doing enough in the way of translation to want to get over to France under peaceful circumstances and experience something of it.
The Society of Fellows very kindly sent me over to France, sent us over, my wife and me, for a three-month stay in Paris, and I shan't go into everything that happened there - the usual wonders that happen to a young writer when he goes to Paris and meets Giaccometti, the sculptor, and all sorts of French writers. What happened at any rate was that... the important thing that happened was that we attended a Comédie Française production of The Misanthrope. It was a newly mounted production with Piérre Dux and I think Annie Ducaux, a wonderful cast and a completely fresh presentation of the play. You could tell that because the bored French rose in their seats and clapped at the end. Years later when I found myself at loose ends and unable to get forward with my own writing, I remembered the 1948 production of The Misanthrope and thought to myself, well, perhaps I can do that, perhaps I can produce a version which would give the play to a bright tasteful person who didn't happen to have French. I didn't initially think of production, but I thought of producing a readable translation when I got around to it.

I was aware of Robert Frost when we lived in Cambridge from the very first moment because... in fact the poet whom I had first heard read his poems was Frost. I'd heard him read in Montclair, New Jersey ages before, and he was certainly one of my favourite poets from the beginning. That he was there in Cambridge seemed a great wonder to me, and I was very happy when we came in one way or another to know him.
Now, we had a special entrée with him. My wife, Charlee, came of, of the Ward family and William Hayes Ward, her grandfather, had been the first person to publish a poem of Robert Frost's. He'd published in his magazine, The Independent, he'd published Frost's poem My Butterfly and his sister was also a great advocate of Robert Frost, someone to whom he took his poems very often and whom he always described to the end of his days 'the first friend of my poetry'. Charlee being descended from such people, Frost was, was glad to, glad to see us, and I think he also was glad to see me because I had so much of his poems... so many of his poems by heart. No poet really minds hearing his poems talked back to him by someone who's memorized them. And so we saw quite a bit of Frost in our Cambridge days.
When I stayed on at Harvard and began to teach there, I taught a course in modern poetry in which, to be sure, I taught several days of Robert Frost. And there he was living on Riedesel Street in Cambridge and not coming to my class, but somehow at that distance he knew what I was saying about him. I think he had spies. If I said something rash about one of his poems in my class, he would send word to me that I was wrong about that. Well, that was our  first acquaintance with Frost, but we came often to see him in later years at Breadloaf or in our houses here or there, and, needless to say, he was the greatest all-night talker that ever was and we loved to sit around and prime his conversation.

In 1952,after I'd been teaching at Harvard for a bit, I applied for a Guggenheim saying that I would like to write a poetic play. That was the fashion at that moment. On Broadway there was The Lady's Not For Burning and Elliott's The Cocktail Hour, and in Cambridge, perhaps somewhat in response to that sort of thing on the commercial stage, there was an organization called The Poet's Theatre, to which I belonged from the beginning. And the idea was to write poetic plays and produce them, also to produce the poetic plays of people like William Butler Yates and Archibald McLeish; some extremely fine productions came of it.
Well, I told the Guggenheims that I wanted to write a poetic play and I took their $3,000 and went to Corrales, New Mexico to which I had been directed by a friend, and lived in an adobe house on the desert for a year. We loved it there, my children loved it, we had a quarter horse and could ride off into the desert, go up to the Jemez Pueblo and visit our Indian friends. There were all sorts of advantages of that kind, and it was a very quiet place in which to write. But as I have told, it was also a place in which there were times when I couldn't come up with a play or a poem. I found indeed that I definitely did not have the talent for putting live characters on the stage. Playwriting in verse soon ceased to be a possibility for me. I kept on writing poems, but there came to be time in which to undertake the Misanthrope translation and so I did. When I, when I got back to Eastern civilization, I often began throwing a scene or two of my Misanthrope translation into a poetry reading, and I found that despite my limitations as an actor, people found them funny, and I began insensibly to feel that it was going to work out all right on the stage if I could just finish it. Well I did finish it and we had a first production of it by The Poet's Theatre in 1955. Peter Davison, later poetry editor of The Atlantic, played Alceste and there were a number of excellent actors. We started out modestly in a sort of attic, and it succeeded so well that it had to be moved to the new Kresge Auditorium at MIT, and indeed the next year it had made it to New York.

I can't account for all the influences under which I originally began to write. I know that way in the background there were poems I had read as a child in my family's house. There was a book called Poems of American Patriotism edited by Brander Matthews of Columbia, and it had Paul Revere's Ride in it and it had that splendid Whittier poem Barbara Frietchie, which I can still not read aloud without breaking up. Some of the poems in that book were more patriotic than poetic I suppose, but some of them I know have obscurely stuck with me all, all this time. And of course there were the usual children's poems: Mother Goose, Edward Lear, and Stevenson's wonderful Child's Garden of Verses. Then I had in my high school days commenced to Read TS Elliott. I had, I think, very little notion of what he was up to, but I loved the flavor of his poems and I loved his ability to do many voices, to shift, to shift tone.
I also was very fond in those days of something most people did not bother with very much were the poems of James Joyce, which were not at all experimental poems really. They were simply song-like, rather Elizabethan poems having little to do with the experimental author that he was. When I was 16, I asked my grandmother please to give me for my birthday the complete Hart Crane, and she did, and I did got drunk on Hart Crane's poems. I can still say a lot of him by heart. I think what I like now best is the simpler ones, like My Grandmother's Love Letters, but he, he gave me a strong sense of how intense and how exciting poetry should be.
Now, I know, I'm skipping a lot of other people I read in my adolescence. By the time I got to writing my own poems, I know that I had been touched by Marianne Moore, and I don't know that I can point out her influence in my first book, The Beautiful Changes, but I know that it was there. Perhaps, perhaps - though she wrote in syllabics always - she inclined me to play around with certain stanza structures. I don't doubt that was part of what she did for me, and of course she also did for me what was done by most of the poets I've admired: she gave me a feeling that poetry should be full of excitingly exact concrete perceptions. Gerard Manley Hopkins, whom I came upon toward the end of World War II, gave me also a sense of how intense and vatic poetry could be, or some poetry could be. He was a great describer as well, and I responded also to the extraordinary rhythmic jags of his poems. I don't think I was ever quite so jagged as he, but he did give me a feeling that strong vigorous rhythms were part of what one should aspire to.
Now, I know there were other influences, but I can't bring them to mind now. I think that my first book was responsive to lots of poets, even Degas. Degas' sonnets I know were an influence on that first book, and my second book too, I think, was colored by my reactions to other poets, and thereafter - I hope this is true - thereafter I think I ceased to be so very much influenced by other poets and simply went on in what had become my own way.

After I got back from New Mexico, I went back to teaching at Harvard where I was assigned by the nature of my Briggs Copeland appointment, I was assigned to teach a certain amount of creative writing, so-called. Mostly I taught short story writing. Why I had any authority in that field I don't know since I've only published one short story in my life, but it was rather good fun to teach in any case. I've always preferred to teach subject matter courses, but it can be very exciting to see a student begin to get the hang of himself, begin to find what it is that he can do, and on the whole, what I felt I was able to accomplish in writing courses, was to advise a student, with luck, as to what his strengths were, what his emerging strengths were. Sometimes I was satisfied with my good counsel, and it seemed to justify the whole business of the teaching of writing.
I've never felt that there should be too much creative writing teaching in college. Probably one course is enough for anybody so inclined. Once, I can't remember exactly when it was, but once I was a member of the visiting committee to the English Department at Harvard and another member of that committee was John Updike and then there were a lot of scholars and lawyers and so on in our embassy. At that time, there was a good deal of interest in creating what they called a creative major at Harvard. This would have meant that people could come to Harvard and concentrate for four years on their blind stupefied hearts and I didn't like the idea at all, neither did John Updike. The  two writers in the visiting committee were the ones who thought, who were most adverse to the idea. John Updike made a nice little speech to the English department assembled saying writers have to know something, therefore they have to take geology and know what it is they are standing on. And I quite agreed with him. Yet, every place I taught, Harvard, Wellesley, Wesleyan and Smith, I was necessarily asked to teach writing courses, and I always found many of my students sympathetic and thought it was not time wasted for anybody concerned. For subject matter courses where I was really happy, I most enjoyed teaching Milton. I guess I became a Milton man officially when I was teaching at Wesleyan and a fine fellow named Tom Henney told me, 'Have you got a course you can trade me? I want to get rid of the Milton course', and he said, 'I can't make them like it'. And I said, 'Well, Tom, how do you like it?' and he said, 'Not so well'. And so I took on the Milton course and had greater pleasure with it year after year and always managed, even at Smith College where they had some experts in the field, to have the occasional Milton seminar. I also did seminars in Poe, and one wonderful thing about teaching Poe, especially under seminar circumstances is that if you assign a story to this student and another story to that student and they are to bring in reports on what's in the story, talk us through the story, chances are there will be fresh discoveries made. This is not true with most of the authors that students read in college or university, but it is true with Poe that a good student reader, tackling almost any one of Poe's pieces, can come up with some fresh observations and that, that makes it exciting.
Well now, at a certain point when I was at Harvard, I was - no, I moved on to Wellesley. I'm losing track, but I think yes, I had moved on to Wellesley when I was offered the Rome fellowship of the Academy of Arts and Letters, and so my wife and I and, and three children went to the American Academy in Rome to stay for a year and that was splendid.

We found ourselves an apartment on the margin of the Janiculum Hill and found ourselves a donna de servizio so that we could eat well at home and, and made full use of the American Academy, which has a wonderful library and which always has, has a lot of fascinating people about.
I think the big thing that happened to me that year was that I made the acquaintance of the Baroque. A couple of English friends who were very interested in church architecture and especially interested in the Baroque, kindly trotted us all over Rome over a considerable period of time showing us every bit of Baroque that there was and attuning us to the spirit of it. And this was important not only for the sake of art appreciation, it was important also because it got into my blood and I think that poems like Love Calls us to the Things of This World, which I wrote in Rome, are full of the spirit of the Baroque, full of a kind of aesthetic in which the spiritual must embrace the concrete and the everyday. That's one aspect of the Baroque which was important to me. I don't think I can now lecture at length on it, but the entire aesthetic appealed to me and was something utterly new. I think if I'd been asked in America what Baroque was before I went over there in '54 and '55, I'd have confused it with the Rococo mirrors you see in beauty parlours and... not that at all. I didn't associate the word Baroque with the extraordinary power of Bernini or of Borromini's architecture.
So, that was a big thing. I met a number of people who were of consequence to me. One of them was Anthony Hecht who was returning to the Academy for a stay. He had had the pleasure of being there for a year before and I shared a lot of talk of Rome and a lot of information about it with him.

My wife, Charlee, had been brought up in Italy, that is, her earliest days were on Capri and then in Florence, and she had pretty good Italian from the start and it became better and better, and she simply loved being in that city. My children had been hauled around from one place to another and put into one different school after another and they adjusted nevertheless heroically in Rome. Both my daughter and my eldest son went to a convent school, which was taught in Italian by French nuns, and they did pretty well there. What I had to do for my, for my eldest son, who was at first grade level at that time, was to make sure that he could read English and write in English. We went downtown in Rome to, to various bookstores looking for good text for him to work with, and we found a horrible English Macmillan text which we read for a few days in my study when he came, as he always did daily, to see me. It had passages that went like this, 'Ned be off to bed, Ned be off to bed, be off to bed, be off to bed, Ned be off to bed'. And my son simply rose up against that and he was right and of course I could not bear to be the administrator of such stuff. So what we did was to, was to find somewhere, a cache of comic books and the more legible comic books proved to be perfect texts for Christopher. He wanted to know what was going to happen in the next frame, and he very quickly was a good reader of English, or at any rate, of the sort of English that you find in comic books.

Lillian Hellman was looking for a collaborator in her project of adapting Voltaire's Candide for the musical stage. She and Leonard Bernstein had been tinkering with this project since about 1950, and various people, among them John LaTouche and Dorothy Parker had tried their hands at the lyrics, but in all cases, for some reason they had left the show, and so Lillian was looking for a replacement. Harry Levin said to her, well, maybe you ought to look at Wilbur's translation of The Misanthrope. If he did fairly well with one witty Frenchman, he might do well right with Voltaire.
And so I was invited to go down to New York and talk it over with her and Leonard Bernstein, and we all seemed to hit it off. I especially hit it off with her. We simply had a great time throughout the whole experience. They asked me to do a sample number, so I wrote them a lyric in which three kings marooned in the middle of the ocean were resolving to lead the simple life if they happened to survive, and Lenny, Lenny Bernstein liked that, Lillian liked that, and they signed me on. We spent the summer of 1956 therefore on Martha's Vineyard, writing the show, and that was exactly as intense as show-writing is always said to be, or shown to be in horror movies about such experiences. But there were a lot of good things about it too, a lot of moments of joy and self-congratulation. At one, point there was enough discord amongst the collaborators so that it was good to... it was seen as a happy thing that Tyrone Guthrie, who was to be our director, arrived on Martha's Vineyard. Lillian said, 'He looks like Charles de Gaulle and I think that perhaps he can get us all into line'. Actually, he was not particularly dictatorial, though I have one fond memory of him. I had written what I guess was the best lyric I wrote for the show, one called Dear Boy, also called Pangloss's Song, and given it to Lenny for setting, and he spent a couple of days trying to set it and said to me with a face full of misery that he simply could not get inspired, at which point Tyrone Guthrie said to him, 'Lenny, we all know that you were water-skiing at Piggy Warburg's yesterday. Now, you sit down and write a nice piece of music for Mr Wilbur's song'. Which he did, he wrote a perfectly wonderful tune once Guthrie had given him the de Gaulle treatment.
We, we opened in New York that winter at the Martin Beck Theatre, and we had the sort of reviews which should have kept it running forever, but the show was over-produced. There was much too much money in it. One would have had to fill every seat in a much larger theatre than the Martin Beck where we were playing, and so the show was technically a money-loser and actually it didn't last as long on Broadway as my Misanthrope translation, which was at the same time playing nearby at Theatre East. Since then of course the show has been repeatedly exhumed and revised, and those who invested in it have been well paid.
At some point during the, during the period in which I was working on the show, I found that I had won the Pulitzer Prize, and that of course had an effect on my career, if not on my poems. I don't think that prizes make a great difference to poets if they're at all serious, but I was gratified that that happened and that probably had something to do with the fact that I was offered a teaching job at Wesleyan University at a living wage. By that time I had to... I did have to think of what I needed in the way of a salary because my children were multiplying and they were having to go off to school and college.

This show lyric, Pangloss's Song, also called Dear Boy, comes at a point in the story, Voltaire's story, at which Candide, who has thought his master, Pangloss, dead, finds that he is alive, but suffering from venereal disease, and he says to him, 'Dear Dr Pangloss, you taught us that everything was for the best in this best of all possible worlds. How can this, your condition, be for the best?' So, Pangloss now sings this rather fuzzy professorial song of rationalization:
                I
 Dear boy, you will not hear me speak
  With sorrow or with rancour
Of what has paled my rosy cheek
  And blasted it with canker;
T'was Love, great Love, that did the deed
  Through nature's gentle laws,
And how should ill effects proceed
  From so divine a cause?
 
Sweet honey comes from bees that sting,
  As you are well aware;
To one adept in reasoning,
Whatever pains disease may bring
Are but the tangy seasoning
  To love's delicious fare.
                 II
 Columbus and his men, they say,
  Conveyed the virus hither
Whereby my features rot away
  And vital powers wither;
Yet had they not traversed the seas
  And come infected back,
Why, think of all the luxuries
  That modern life would lack!
 
All bitter things conduce to sweet
  As this example shows;
Without the little spirochete
We'd have no chocolate to eat,
Nor would tobacco's fragrance greet
  The European nose.
                III
Each nation guards its native land
  With cannon and with sentry,
Inspectors look for contraband
  At every port of entry,
Yet nothing can prevent the spread
  Of love's divine disease:
It rounds the world from bed to bed
  As pretty as you please.
 
Men worship Venus everywhere,
  As plainly may be seen;
The decorations which I bear
Are nobler than the Croix de Guerre,
And gained in service of our fair
  And universal Queen.
That... that song was dropped from the show just before the New York opening because of a fear on the part of some of the producers that it might offend somebody, and happily the number has been restored in many subsequent productions of Candide. If there is anything tast... tasteless or raunchy about this, it can be blamed on Voltaire, I think, because this of all the lyrics I wrote for Candide, this is the one which is most simply a versification of Voltaire.
 

Back in 1950... '61 or so, Peter Viereck and I made a trip to the Soviet Union as part of a cultural exchange programme intended to increase understanding, or at least tolerance, between the two nations, and the Russians... the Russians played ball with us pretty well. I think they wanted to show in fact that they could be more welcoming and loose than we. We sent them a list of some 50 writers we would like to talk with, and by the time we were through, we had met just about 48 of them.
Our first visit was paid to the dacha of the 'Old Fox', Ilya Ehrenbourg, and we had a very pleasant teatime talk of two hours or so with him. We talked in French, which was at times a little awkward for me, because Ehrenbourg was very fluent in that language, and because we believed that the communist party watchdog who had come with us did not understand that language.
In later encounters, I met people like Evgeny Evtushenko and Andrei Voznesensky, very good and then young poets about whom the Russian populace were very excited at the time. After I came home from Russia, I did some translations from Voznesensky at the invitation of Max Hayward and Patricia Blake, who were extremely good linguists and extremely good at conveying the flavour and tone of the original. I did several translations for an anthology of Voznesensky's poems, and later when Joseph Brodsky defected to the United States or was sent over here, I hastened to do something of his because I had been told when in the Soviet Union that the best translations of my poetry into Russian had been done by Joseph. I wanted to pay him back and, because I had heard he was very choosy, very finicky about translations, I wanted to do something that he would approve of. So, when I... my first translation from a Brodsky poem took me a month, and the second was done slowly too, with the help of linguistic counsel and with the help of dictionaries as well. By that time I was trying to teach myself the Russian language. Here's a poem of Brodsky's, and I think it's probably the best effort I've made in translating a Russian poem, a poem of Brodsky's called Six Years Later.
So long had life together been that nowThe second of January fell againOn Tuesday, making her astonished browLift like a windshield wiper in the rain,   So that her misty sadness cleared, and showed   A cloudless distance waiting up the road.So long had life together been that onceThe snow began to fall, it seemed unending;That, lest the flakes should make her eyelids wince,I’d shield them with my hand, and they, pretending   Not to believe that cherishing of eyes,   Would beat against my palm like butterflies.So alien had all novelty becomeThat sleep’s entanglements would put to shameWhatever depths the analysts might plumb;That when my lips blew out the candle flame,   Her lips, fluttering from my shoulder, sought   To join my own, without another thought.So long had life together been that allThat tattered brood of papered roses went,And a whole birch grove grew upon the wall,And we had money, by some accident,   And tonguelike on the sea, for thirty days,   The sunset threatened Turkey with its blaze.So long had life together been withoutBooks, chairs, utensils—only that ancient bed—That the triangle, before it came about,Had been a perpendicular, the head   Of some acquaintance hovering above   Two points which had been coalesced by love.So long had life together been that sheAnd I, with our joint shadows, had composedA double door, a door which, even if weWere lost in work or sleep, was always closed:   Somehow, it would appear, we drifted right   On through it into the future, into the night.
As I remember, Joseph Brodsky was very approving of this translation, though not quite sure of one or two lines in the latter stanzas. He went down to Oklahoma to judge some contest or other in the company of Derek Walcott, and he told me later that on the flight back from Oklahoma, he and Derek had studied my translation and had decided that one or two tinkerings should be made in the latter stanzas. I of course had no business objecting to any changes he might make in my translation of his poem, but I did cling, when I put this poem into a book of my own, I did cling to my original and perhaps mistaken lines. Joseph publishing the translation in a book of his own, used the improved version.

My notion of translation is that you try to bring it back alive, as Frank Buck used to say. If you take on a text which is somehow appropriate to you and which, if you know the language, you may already love, what you want to do I think is to be perfectly the slave of it, as perfectly the slave of it as you can be, and if you can't bring it across with the same sense, with an analogous form, I think it's not at all worth doing, and it amounts to an actionable crime.

On the whole, because I tend to throw out any poem that doesn't seem to me to do the job, I include whatever is left on my desk when it comes to making a book. One principle, not a very clever one but one I've used, one principle of organisation is simply to alternate long and short, so as to give relief of a kind, to alternate light and heavy to some extent, although some very light poems will not mix with some serious ones. I seldom gather poems with adjoining themes into a section, but it has been done for me. My friend William J Smith is very good at putting books into shape for other people and he's done it for me twice now I think, not only gathering poems into sheaves or sections but also giving them section titles taken out of the poems. There's something to be said for the section title and it gives you an opportunity for a nearly blank page.
I'm not sure what else I can say about that. I do include a lot of translations in my books and it's not because I think they are poems by me, but because I think they are worth reading. I think my practice has been to put the shorter translations from other poets in the main body of the book, perhaps also on a principle of relief, and then in the case of something sustained, to put it into a final section or appendix. One of my books ends with a canto of Dante and the introduction to Molière's play, Amphytrion, and both of those things are much too long to have tossed into the central body of the book. I'm not sure that I can refine any further on the science of book assembly. It's important to start with a good one, I know that.

[Q] Since you've been writing poems since the mid 1940s, would you be willing to name a single book by another poet that has meant the most to you?
That's very tough. I know there must be such a book, but perhaps it is that I've skipped from book to book in time, and that I sometimes transfer my allegiance from one to the other. I remember John Holmes saying that Robert Graves' poems for him were a great starter, by which he meant that they made him want to write poems. They reminded him of what charm and energy poetry could have, and set him to writing again, and I think that there was a time when some volume or other of Robert Graves' performed that function for me. Obviously Robert Frost has performed that function at one time or another in my life.
[Q] Has Elizabeth Bishop? 
Elizabeth Bishop, I'm glad... yes, Elizabeth Bishop was a great refreshment and inspiration to me the first time I read her. I read her at a time... and most people nowadays won't believe this, but I read that at a time when she was relatively obscure, when people did not rank her among the heavy hitters of poetry, but she had her passionate devotees from the beginning. I remember that Howard Moss, a very good poet and the poetry editor of The New Yorker urged me strongly to read this or that poem of Elizabeth Bishops, and I was glad to be steered to things like her wonderful poem, Anaphora. And yes, I think that she does not stale. I think that I go back to her again and again, as to something that's honest and artful, and full of reality.
[Q] And in which the ego is not on... 
The ego is not on display, no. A very, a very modest poet who extends her sympathies to all sorts of things in her verse, but not much to herself. I remember talking with Elizabeth once about her poetry and she said, shaking her head, 'It's all description, no philosophy'. But of course there's... she may not have an organised philosophy in her poems, and I'm not sorry she doesn't, but her extension of sympathy, a kind of - as Cal Lowell said - a kind of sorrowing sympathy to the world around, amounts to something better than a philosophy.

I've found that if I needed to be prodded or reawakened by some other poet, I often turned to someone like Elizabeth Bishop whose poetry is full of surprising realisations of fact. When she refers to 'the wallpaper's ignorant map', I can see that stained wallpaper and I'm grateful for it and it makes me want to write something as perceptive and quietly eloquent as that, and there are other poets who, at one time or another, have prompted me, jolted me in the same way. I think that Lawrence in his poems about animals is wonderfully perceptive, and one of the French poets I first came to love was Francis Ponge, whose first book was called Le Parti-pris des choses. He's writing about the world from the point of view of things, or at any rate, with very strong attention to things and their behaviour. I know that Yeats is a great poet, but sometimes in reading him I feel a great lack of anything like the wallpaper's ignorant map. He is not a very observant poet really.
[Q] On the other hand, Hardy is.
Yes, Hardy is indeed.
[Q] Is Shakespeare just too overwhelming, too...
A lot of Shakespeare is stuck in my mind, but I don't find that I go back to him as a resource, as a starter in John Holmes' terms, but there's much of him that keeps occurring to me. A line I found myself... a morbid line of his which I found myself repeating a great deal a few years ago was his distillation of the horrors of death and of the grave in one line, 'To lie in cold obstruction and to rot'. There are so many unbeatable lines in Shakespeare. I don't go back to him for the whole structure of plays, but for wonderful things like that. And as I have already said, I go back to Milton when I want to see how expressively and muscularly language can move through verse patterns. To see what he does to the sonnet is simply wonderful, to see him take over that dainty form and in some cases fall down through it with one long sentence, or two.
[Q] Well, [On] the Late Massacre in Piedmont, I mean the energy in that is unmatchable.
Yes. And his... in a sonnet like [On] the [Late] Massacre in Piedmont, his overrunning of the conventional divisions of the sonnet is at every moment clearly expressive of physical facts.
[Q] And Herbert is such a different poet as a religious sensibility from Milton, but must be somebody you've read a lot.
Yes, yes. I haven't read George Herbert recently. I think I'm waiting to open that bottle again, but I know it will be good. 
[Q] It will be. Pope, has Pope meant much to you?
I don't read him very much. Every now and then when I do, I realise that I've been very, very... what's the word, very isolated, very provincial in time in staying away from the great masters of the couplet. He's a wonderfully, wonderfully witty poet.
[Q] 'The beaked ladle plies the chuckling ice' is a line that Pope could have written, I've thought.
I think I was aware when I wrote that that, though I had thought it up, it sounded a bit like a quotation.
[Q] It's not to its discredit. How about Wordsworth? I mean Wordsworth is the nature poet for the language, if you will.
I love particular poems of Wordsworth's very much. I've never found myself very fond of the long biographical ones, and that's probably my loss, but I love many of the sonnets, Surprised By Joy, for example.

I went to Wesleyan in '57 or so and stayed there for 20 years teaching all kinds of things, but especially enjoyed teaching in their freshman humanities programme where once again, as at Harvard in its humanities programme, I had to read epics and all sorts of long books, which otherwise I might not have slogged my way through, and all of which did me good, and did me good to be articulate about.
One thing that happened rather promptly when I got to Wesleyan was that the university, which had lately been enriched through a gift of an alumnus, decided that it wanted to have a university press. And I remember conferring with Willard Lockwood, the director of this new university press and making what turned out to be a useful suggestion. I said a very new university press can't possibly take the best scholarly books away from the Yale University Press or the Harvard, but it seems to me that there is one way that the Wesleyan University Press could put itself on the map right away, and that would be through having a poetry series. And they happily bit on that after some consultation with people like Norman Holmes Pearson of Yale. It sounded like a good idea to a number of people. And so we got ourselves a Board, which initially I think consisted of Norman Pearson and Donald Hall and Howard Nemerov, perhaps John Brinnin, I don't know. We were commonly a Board of four and of course it changed year after year as people became tired of reading 200 and 300 manuscripts a year. The programme was successful from the start because there were all sorts of good poets around of whom we knew and who either didn't have publishers or were ready to be detached from their publishers for the sake of the Wesleyan Press. For example we published all of the early volumes of James Dickey. We published the volumes he wrote when he was good, and one of our great triumphs was to write to Robert Francis who was living in his usual seclusion and quiet in Amherst, Massachusetts and who I think had been... had felt rebuffed by the publishing world. We asked him if he didn't happen to have some poems around and he sent us a perfectly splendid manuscript that had piled up for some years and we published it under the title of The Orb Weaver. Well, there were many satisfactions like that, and of course we were somewhat innovative in view of what happened later. All sorts of other colleges and universities decided to have poetry series' and there are now a number of highly respectable poetry series' all around the country, most of them based in educational institutions.

Another thing I was doing at the same time - I seem to have been very busy - was editing The Laurel Poet's Series. My friend Frank Taylor, who was associated with something called Western... Western Printing, came to me and said, 'How would you like to be a general editor of a series of paperback volumes of English and American poets?' and I signed on for that, and began to line up editors for the individual volumes we were contemplating. All these came out under... under the title of The Laurel Poet's Series, and it was wonderful how many very good people were ready to do the pleasant but laborious job of putting together - for not too much money - a little paperback, and doing an authoritative introduction. We had people like Andrews Wanning editing John Dunne, Howard Nemerov editing Longfellow, Reed Whittemore did Browning for us, John Brinnin did Dickenson, I did Poe, of course, William Meredith edited a Shelley volume, Leslie Fiedler a Whitman volume, Dudley Fitts a Herbert volume, and WH Auden kindly did a volume called 19th Century British Minor Poets, which was quite a splendid collection. And for a while there, one could enjoy walking through any air terminal in America and seeing on the news-stands books like this, well designed and well selected and well introduced, and selling for 35 cents. I felt very virtuous about that, I felt like a... like a promoter of our culture.
[Q] A bit like Penguins back in those days, too. 
Yes.
[Q] Which were not so available in America.
No, and I don't think... and I think they were... they were more expensive than... than our little editions, though, though when we... when we came to be publishing Chaucer, for example, we had to do him in sufficient quantity to make it a 75 cent volume, and that was the case with Spencer as well.

I had a long association with Smith, of course, having gone to Amherst, having married a Smith girl, and having known a good many members of its admirable faculty, people like Daniel Aaron, whom I had known from way back. I felt right at home there, as soon as they took me in and called me, I think, poet in residence or writer in residence, a title which was very dignifying and which also implied that I wasn't carrying a full load of courses. So I did enjoy it there, and of course I especially enjoyed it for selfish reasons of convenience. By the time I moved to Smith College to stay there for 10 years, we had moved house and were living in Cummington, Mass, a half hour's drive from Smith, and it had been a little harder to commute way down to Central Connecticut and teach at Wesleyan.

I think I started doing a lot of readings in the Cambridge area about the time I started teaching at Harvard. The poetry reading, in my experience, became a popular form of concert at just about that time. When I was in my teens, I was aware that there were a few great performers travelling around the country and doing their poems. Carl Sandberg would say some poems and then he would get out his - what was it - a guitar or a banjo? And Vachel Lindsay had been a very rousing presence on both sides of the water. Edna Millay went to my wife's school, Dana Hall, and gave a reading in which she stood there in a long, white gown next to a table on which was one perfect rose.
[Q] And the students never got over it, I'm sure.
No, that's right. Robert Frost had been a great performer on the circuit too, but that's almost the limit of the list of travelling poets, up until the post-war period. For me, the watershed moment came at Harvard when Wallace Stevens had been invited to come and give a reading. He wasn't terribly fond of giving readings, but he was a Harvard alumnus and so he came back to do it, not telling his friends at the insurance office what he was up to, and I think he was first to read in Emerson D in the philosophy building, a little room in which to hear about Plato but not a sizable room for a poetry reading. It was clear an hour before the reading was to occur that we had an overflow audience there, and it overflowed into Sever Hall and then that overflowed and finally we took possession of a great lecture hall in the bowels of the Fogg Art Museum. I remember walking past a man whom I recognised as Wallace Stevens on my way from one of these locations to the other, and he was standing there aghast. The word aghast was invented to describe how he looked at the imminence of this vast audience. And as soon as the poetry reading came by way of experiences like that to be a more exciting experience for people literarily inclined, it was possible for someone who had published a few poems in a few obscure literary magazines to presume to give a poetry reading and to expect to have an audience.

My friend Sam Green, the painter, said, 'Why don't you stop flying to far away Caribbean islands, using all your money on airfare and having to stay a very short time and come back? Why don't you go to our American tropics?' he said. He recommended Key West and we said, 'What's it like?' and he said, 'Well, did you like the movie Bonnie and Clyde with its mixture of beauty and tawdriness?' And we said, 'Yes, we liked it pretty well. We thought it was morally dubious but delightful'. And he said, 'Well then you'll like Key West'.
[Q] So that's the late 60s, I would think.
Yes, I think so, and we did find that it was a place where one could afford to stay for a longer and longer time. It was not then an expensive place. Indeed, it was very much a depression town. In 40 years it's now become a rich man's town, but then I think the only winter visitors tended to be good, plain people from Indiana who wanted to have a week or two in one of the two or three motels that the island had to offer.
But you met all kinds of people there, right, over the years.
Yes. The great thing about Key West... well, there were many great things about Key West, but the thing we loved most was that it was an island full of an extraordinary variety of people. It was about 45% Cuban, about 8% island blacks, the kind of people who say 'mon', and retired navy people and active navy people as well, people devoted to fishing, people devoted to sailing, lots of gay people, there had always been a large gay population there. All these very different people, and I haven't begun to exhaust the categories, all these people were tolerant of each other. That gave the island an extraordinary charm. What people did about difference was to laugh at it, or laugh with it, laugh in a not unkind manner, and Charlee and I thought we have found our way to Isaiah's holy mountain. This is where the lion lies down with the lamb. And so it seemed for a long time, until the forces of gentrification arrived and until the island was advertised by various interested parties, developers and so on, to the nation and began to attract a great tourist population.
One thing the island was advertised for of course was its history as a winter residence for some writers. Wallace Stevens had forever gone down there to one of the hotels of the 20s, Elizabeth Bishop was resident there from time to time in the 30s and 40s, and when we went down there, Tennessee Williams was there and had been there for a good while.
We went back to New York after we decided to buy a little apartment in Key West and told some friends of ours at a largish cocktail party that Key West was the place to be and that you could buy a little pad for almost nothing, and a number of people we knew, some of them very good friends, suddenly felt the need for a Southern pad, and we were not responsible for the influx of writers, but we were responsible for part of that, and pretty soon there was an enormous number of rather good writers wintering down there, Peter Taylor for example, James Merrill, his friend David and Alison Lurie. It's a long list, I'd better not get going on it.
[Q] Bob Stone?
Yes, Robert Stone, and this in itself was very pleasant, but the developers of Key West, the people who wanted to popularise it, began to glamorise it as a haven for writers, as a place where Hemingway had worked and where all sorts of lesser writers were still to be seen in the flesh, and that had a lot to do with what's become of the island now.

I guess I'd better go back to Archibald MacLeish. I think that it was under his quite distinguished librarianship at the Library of Congress, that there was invented a role or a position called Consultant in Poetry to the Library of Congress. I have a feeling that the first appointee may have been Louise Bogan. In any case, that happened a good while back and so for a couple of decades, many good poets had been asked to come and spend a year, sometimes two years, in Washington under that consultancy title. People like Conrad Akin, Alan Tate, Randal Jarrell, Elizabeth Bishop, Robert Frost had done it. I don't think that there had been a great deal of excitement about it, about this appointment, and one reason probably was that it was called a consultancy. In Washington DC nobody gets excited if you say the word 'consultant' because half of the people on the street are consultants.
But in '86 or '7, Senator Spark Matsunaga finally had his way. That senator had been a war hero, had been a poet all his life, a lover of poetry, he wanted America to have a laureateship and to confer on poets the honour of being called laureate for a bit, and so the Congress voted that there should be a poet laureate. However, they didn't vote anything else along with it. It continued to be the old consultancy with the same requirements. What Congress wanted you to do if you were the American laureate was to advise the Library of Congress on acquisitions in poetry and literary criticism, advise the Library of Congress as to who should come and read or lecture in the Gertrude Clark Whitall Auditorium, and give the Library good counsel about who should record for their remarkable archive of recordings. I think that was about it, although of course the position entailed being hospitable to visits of school-children to the Library and the like.

When the name of the job changed, it was offered first to Robert Pen Warren, who accepted it but who was not well at the time and really couldn't perform many of its functions. For him, it amounted chiefly to an honour, and then the job was offered to me and I was in good health, and so I did all the things that they expected of me, but those were not very time-consuming really. To pick out a few lecturers and introduce them when they came to Washington, to give a little advice as to what books the Library should acquire, to suggest that so-and-so should record his poems for the Library, all of that is not too exhausting. On my first day in Washington I walked into the office of the two secretaries who had to do with the laureate operation and said, 'Now what do I do?' and they said, 'Well, you must tell us what are you going to do, what use will you make of this appointment'. And I said, 'Well, what if I was simply to declare it an honour and go home and write some more poems?' and they told me that that was really not the idea, or hadn't been the behaviour of anybody to date.
I found soon that, that there were other things involved in the job. For one thing, the title of poet laureate maddened the journalists of Washington. They wanted to know what it meant, and the first question in any of the many, many interviews I gave was always, 'What does the poet laureate do?' The answer came to be, 'He gives interviews of this kind'. I think and I understand why the press wanted to question me about this job, and that was one thing I generally said. I can see that one of my functions came to be - I don't think the Library was being sly about this at all - but one of my functions came to be to give the Library a little publicity. It's rather hard for a library, even one as magnificent as the Library of Congress, to get its way into the newspapers, and you need to get into the newspapers if you're going to get next year's congressional appropriation, so that I found myself essentially, but not through anybody's slyness, doing publicity for the Library of Congress.
I also ran around and gave readings wherever I was asked to go, and I did quasi-diplomatic things. When some English poets would come and read at the auditorium, I would try to be nice to them, within my powers. Now, subsequent laureates have given the position still more meaning than had ever occurred to me to give it, partly I think because the Librarian of Congress and others wanted if possible to use the new position and the glamour associated with it for what they called outreach, for the furtherance of the art of poetry in America, and well, as we know, subsequent laureates did thing of clever ways to exploit the office and it's, it's noticeableness. Joseph Brodsky wanted to give away poems at every checkout line in our grocery stores. That didn't happen, but I think it started subsequent laureates to do things like reading poems rather regularly on public radio, fostering contests here and there, supporting prize-giving. Well, I can't really list all of the, all of the promotions which have happened since, and some of them have doubtless been good. I think there's a limit to our power, to anybody's power, to ram poetry down the throats of the public. We can only do so much to call attention to what might please people if they were not so busy with other and easier diversions. But I think something actually has been accomplished by some of my successors.

When I was doing the laureate job, I think I was made to feel that I was not called upon to write any partisan political poems, but I did very often get letters from my constituency suggesting that I celebrate the opening of Congress, that I speak well of the Statue of Liberty, that kind of thing, and I have done things like that. When Bill Schuman, the composer called me one night and asked me if I would like to write a cantata in honour of the centennial of the Statue of Liberty, I said, 'Good heavens Bill, how can I do anything like that? Hasn't it all been said in 4th of July speeches for years and years?' Well, I did a lot of, 'Oh Bill talk', and finally he said, 'Well, think it over, I'll call you tomorrow', and when he called me tomorrow I thought what fun it would be to work with him and how interesting it would be to see if I could say something somewhat fresh about the Statue of Liberty for which indeed I feel a proper love and respect.
So, there's the celebratory side of it, and I think some laureates have felt that they ought to a certain extent to go along with that. Howard Nemerov I think wrote a couple of poems which were suitable for Washington occasions, and that was good. When Robert Pen Warren was appointed as our first laureate, he said he was damned if he was going to write any get well quick poems for Ronald Reagan's sick horse. That, in other words, he was not going to do any of the work that English laureates have often felt that they had to do, and have sometimes done so handsomely. He was not going to do that, and he didn't. But Howard Nemerov did a bit of it and I think that others could have and that it would have been good perhaps if they had done so. As for partisan political poems, there's an anthology somewhere around this building that was published toward the close of the Vietnam war and it was full of poems saying of course no to the war, and that anthology is absolutely unreadable from cover to cover. It's full of poems written by people who were being as Tony Hecht once said, war profiteers. They were furthering their careers by appearing in front of large indignant audiences and telling them what they already knew. I think I'm being a little too sweeping, undoubtedly there were some good poems that came of it, but mostly I think not, and I think that that partisan excitements have misled poets in all periods. I sympathise with Yeats' refusalt to write a war poem or whatever it was that he was asked to do. Probably I'm too sweeping in what I say. Undoubtedly if I really sat here and thought, I could come up with a number of fine poems of a partisan nature. The best one I think that was ever written was Vachel Lindsay's poem, Bryan, Bryan, Bryan, Bryan. It's wonderful, it makes me weep, and the special thing about it is that it gives you the politics of Bryan's period from the point of view of a 16 or 17-year-old boy who is running around with crowds of excited people in the streets of Springfield, Illinois, excited about a romantic heroic version of politics, which Lindsay both espoused and gently mocked. He knew that the flavour of Bryan, Bryan, Bryan, Bryan was noble but that it was also kid's stuff.

The special thing about Vachel Lindsay's wonderful poem, Bryan, Bryan, Bryan, Bryan is that it's not Lindsay himself here and now at the time of writing spouting out of indignation, idealism or what not, it's Lindsay recording and recreating beautifully the high-minded, romantic, idealistic political feelings of young kids of 14 or 15 that qualifies everything that is said in Lindsay's poem. At the same time, nobody who reads Lindsay's poem could take it for an endorsement of the eastern capitalists with dollar signs upon their vests and spats on their feet. We know where he stood.

When I try to say to myself,  'What's the state of poetry in this country?' it almost always comes down to something not quantifiable, although of course it is encouraging that there are many more poetry readings than there ever were and that there are larger crowds assembled to hear poets. It's also good that books of poetry are published in much larger editions than was the case when I first started publishing, and somebody must be buying them. But that's about as far as one can go in terms of quantity. The quantitative news is encouraging. As for quality, there are so many, many different kinds of poets writing now, so many poets writing now, that it's hard to diagnose the situation. What I generally end by feeling is that there are 15 poets, maybe 20 poets in America who are writing poems that I would like to read. If I saw their names on a magazine cover, I'd open it and see what they were up to, and since there are that many, I'd just as soon say that yes, poetry is in a state of good health.
I incline to be a little doubtful about master of fine arts programmes. Some very fine people have come out of such programmes, some wonderful people have taught in them, Robert Lowell taught in such a programme at Iowa, Donald Justice for years was a great teacher and encourager of younger poets in such programmes, but I think that many people through creative writing courses in colleges and universities and through the elaboration of that sort of thing into MFA and perhaps even doctoral courses, that many people have been led astray. They've been led to feel that they had more potential than they really did, and it might have been better for them to do something else and to stop stewing in their own juices.

[Q] Has reading fiction in your time had an effect on your writing, on your thinking about writing? 
I think it must have because... I think fiction must have affected me often in one way or another. I remember that when I was writing my first adolescent efforts I found the prose of James Agee in his Let Us Now Praise Famous Men very contagious, as contagious as the Hart Crane I was then reading. I'm not sure what other writers I could come up with right now. Saul Bellow writes the kind of prose that a poet delights to read. Well, many people delight to read Saul Bellow, but the special thing about him is that he writes with all his languages at once. He writes like someone who knows his Nietzsche and who knows his Church Fathers, someone who has taught seminars in the classics. At the same time, he writes like somebody who knows how to talk to just anybody on the streets of Chicago. I think of poetry as an effort to express, to find words for everything that you perceive, everything that's in your experience, and also to give voice to your various selves, to let them all talk at once, if you possibly can, and Bellow is the kind of writer of prose, who inclines you to try to do that in poetry. There must be other fiction writers I could think of, but I don't think of them just now. Mostly, I think I am moved by either actual situations or by the poems of others.

If you are a poet of course you are used to sitting in a stupid-looking state all by yourself and waiting for a line to come which may not come until 5:35 in the afternoon. It's a lone but I won't say lonely business. People who can't be by themselves had better not try to write poetry. But what a difference there is when you find yourself involved with theater, musical or otherwise, and when, in setting down one word and then another, you are trying to hear what will happen to these words when they are projected over the footlights. My first real direct encounter with theater came when I worked on Candide with Bernstein and Hellman, and at first I really didn't think of the audience. I didn't think of the man from Scarsdale in the third row who must be amused and in a hurry, too, because he has to get back to Scarsdale that night.
I remember writing an experimental lyric as I was sort of trying out for the job of lyricist for Candide, in which I had some singer say, 'We'll find ourselves a humble cot and cultivate the chicken'. Well, my collaborators, Hellman and Bernstein, did not recognise the word 'cot'. They didn't know its ancient meaning, having to do with a rural residence. And so that's where my education about the audience began, and pretty soon I did learn as people came and tried out for the show, as we began to try out our numbers with Bernstein at the piano and others listening, as we began to rehearse. I came to see that a line that simply says, 'I love you', at the right point in the show and with the right music, is entirely adequate, that a great deal of verbal sophistication is not necessarily called for, at any rate, not the kind that the readers of poetry tend to relish.
When it came to attending rehearsals of Molière productions and translating further Molière plays as I have gone on and on doing, I found that attending rehearsals was a great help and it was also a great relief because I found that from the beginning with that particular author, with Molière, I had known how to translate the original into speakable English couplets. Speakability is so important. I know that when I was first writing poems, I used to have no awareness whatever of whether it would be hard or easy to say the poem aloud. Professionals like Tennyson would never allow two ess's to occur in great proximity. They'd write an extra line in order to get around that kind of difficulty of pronunciation, but that's something I slowly had to learn about poetry, and something I had to work on always with Molière.
I had the luck early in my experiences with Molière to meet the actor Brian Bedford who is God's gift to Molière on this continent, and as I translated the latter plays of Molière that I have done, I've always been hearing Brian's voice in my head. I've said to myself, 'How would he say that? How would he get the laugh that that calls for? How would he express the mood that underlies this line? I think by now I am probably a pro at translating French 17th Century drama, and the trouble is that I've just run out of Molière's verse plays. I think I've done the last one that it would be practical to attempt.

It is a very interesting thing to try to conduct in a profitable way a course for eager undergraduates who want to try their hands at poetry. One thing I always did, because lots of undergraduates think they might like to write a poem and you can often have too many applicants for the course, one thing I always did was to give my first two hours to prosody. I would talk about metres and talk about stanzas and what the capabilities of all these things were, and I hope I did this in ways that amused me and seemed lively to me, but of course all this talk about the formal aspect of poetry was discouraging to some of the students, and that usually reduced the class to a manageable size.
The thing I found I could do sometimes with an undergraduate poet was to say, 'Good, you've written a poem in which we hear your mother's voice talking under certain circumstances in the kitchen and she's angry. That seems to be something that you can do. You seem to have a capacity which not everybody has for writing what amount to little play scenes in verse, so do do more of that'. And there were of course always with the people, with the young poets who were possible at all, there were always things that you could pick out of their efforts and say this is something you can do, this is something you can work on, it will be a strength in your work if you on with poetry. Some of my students, even when I had narrowed the class down by two daunting hours on prosody, were not able really to write poetry, but I think that they often profited by criticising the efforts of the other students, and that it may, it may have led them to be better readers of poetry in general, of the poetry that they were studying in their classes. I hope that's the case. Indeed I know that was the case with some of my people.
The atmosphere of a creative writing class is always kindly, or should be so, and it's necessary of course to be fairly decent to people who are sticking their necks out and trying to write verse. At the same time there's obviously something wrong with that. If it were possible not to scare people out of writing at all, I think it might be good to begin a creative writing course by saying, 'You are proposing to enter the arena in which John Milton wrote and Shakespeare wrote, and so don't be too self-indulgent, be hard on yourself'. But that's a thing I think but it's not a thing that I have ever gone right out and said to my students.
What else can I say about...? Well, getting students under present circumstances to write anything but shredded prose, a dribbly kind of free verse, is very hard. If they go to the library and look at the most distinguished of our little magazines, they'll find that that indeed is the prevailing form of the period and they'll feel justified in doing something of the sort themselves. But I agree with Mr Eliot that no verse is free, no verse is really free, and I agree with Mr Eliot and many another poet that before you can write good free verse, you ought to be able to write a sonnet. And one way I used to trick students into writing formally was to give them an excited talk about the riddle, which is a great poetic form, offer them some examples of great riddle poems, and then ask them to, as an exercise, to bring me in a riddle the next week. The riddle somehow teaches the students that there are certain kinds of communication which require metre and rhyme. There are a few good free verse riddles, but not many. The great ones, the great ones all get some of their power from the reinforcement of metre and rhyme.

My idea of a great riddle is the riddle which I think was originally in Latin, but somebody got over very nicely into English. It goes:
   White bird featherless 
   Flew from paradise, 
Perched on the castle wall; 
   Along came Lord Landless, 
   Took it up handless, 
And bore it off horseless, to the king's white hall.

It's a magnificent poem as well as being a fine riddle about snow and sun. How fine to call the sun Lord Landless. And let me read you a few of the riddles I've been translating from the Latin riddle-maker, Symphosius, over the years. Well, here's one I like:
I have borne more than a body ought to bear. 
Three souls I harboured; when I lost a pair, 
The third one all but perished then and there.

That's a soluble riddle. I think if anyone thinks hard about that for a bit he realises that it's a mother of twins who therefore has had three souls in her. And here's an onion:
I bite, when bitten; but because I lack 
For teeth, Ino biter scruples do attack, 
And many bite me to be bitten back.

This one I think, this next one, is splendid in the original, and I think I caught the beauty of its third line in this translation:
Unequal in degree, alike in size, 
We make our flight, ascending toward the skies, 
And rise with those who by our help can rise.

And that's a staircase, and of course there's a bit of a pun on degree there, and as a matter of fact, there's a pun on flight:
Unequal in degree, alike in size, 
We make our flight, ascending toward the skies, 
And rise with those who by our help can rise.

Symphosius didn't know what our scientists have recently discovered that fish are very voluble actually. They do a lot of noise-making under water. It was his opinion in the 6th century or whenever he wrote, that fish were mute.
Sweet pearlings in an earth-walled inn resound. 
Within that inn, a silent guest is found. 
Together, guest and inn are onward bound.

That's a river with fish in it, of course. Well, there are some samples, and I think, though the riddle is usually associated nowadays with the nursery, if you read a bit of Symphosius and his like, it's clear why an ancient Greek was said to have died for shame because he was unable to solve a great riddle. It is really a high form of poetry, or can be, and Aristotle knew it, he says it over and over again in his poetics, or at least he says it once.

A while ago, I came to realise, belatedly, that there is such a thing as the past, that there was such a thing as my own past. I had felt until really quite late in life that if I wanted to get back to anything I'd enjoyed before, I could go and see particular friends and talk about it, or I could go to a particular place and have my sense of it renewed. Well, so many places have utterly changed. The North Caldwell in which I was brought up is now a junior executive suburb, or perhaps an executive suburb. The buildings are very impressive and they are chock a block. Yes, many of the places I once could go back to have disappeared, many of the people have disappeared, and when this was borne in upon me I found myself writing, almost for the first time, a poem of retrospection called This Pleasing Anxious Being. That takes its title from the country churchyard poem we all know. It's in three parts and I guess I'll just plunge into part one.
 
In no time you are back where safety was,
Spying upon the lambent table where
Good family faces drink the candlelight
As in a manger scene by de La Tour.
Father has finished carving at the sideboard
And mother's hand has touched a little bell,
So that, beside her chair, Roberta looms
With serving bowls of yams and succotash.
When will they speak, or stir? They wait for you
To recollect that, while it lived, the past
Was a rushed present, fretful and unsure.
The muffled clash of silverware begins,
With ghosts of gesture, with a laugh retrieved,
And the warm, edgy voices you would hear:
Rest for a moment in that resonance.
But see your small feet kicking under the table,
Fiercely impatient to be off and play.
 
Susan Snively talking about this poem the other day quite rightly observed that the vegetables being offered at the family table are Southern in character, they are out of my mother's Baltimore kitchen. We were so Baltimorean in fact that because of the strong German influence in Baltimore cuisine, we always had sauerkraut with our Thanksgiving turkey. The second part of this poem starts with a reference to the Angel of Death, Azrael.
 
The shadow of whoever took the picture
Reaches like Azrael's across the sand
Toward grown ups blithe in black and white, encamped
Where surf behind them floods a rocky cove.
They turn with wincing smiles, shielding their eyes
Against the sunlight and the future's glare
Which notes their bathing caps, their quaint maillot's,
The wicker picnic hamper then in style,
And will convict them of mortality.
Two boys, however, do not plead with time,
Distracted as they are by what? perhaps
A whacking flash of gull-wings overhead.
While off to one side, with his back to us,
A painter, perched before his easel, seeing
The marbled surges come to various ruin,
Seeks out of all those waves to build a wave
That shall in blue summation break forever.
That's my father of course. My father was devoted to painting the sea and here in my study is my father's self-portrait with waves breaking behind him. The third part.
Wild, lashing snow, which thumps against the windshield
Like earth tossed down upon a coffin-lid,
Half clogs the wipers, and our Buick yaws,
On the black roads of 1928.
Father is driving, Mother, leaning out,
Tracks with her flashlight beam the pavement's edge,
And we must weather hours more of storm
To be in Baltimore for Christmastime.
Of the two children in the backseat, safe
Beneath a lap-robe, soothed by jingling chains
And by their parent's pluck and gaiety,
One is asleep. The other's half closed eyes
Make out at times the dark hood of the car
Ploughing the eddied flakes, and might foresee
The steady chugging of a landing craft
Through morning mist to the bombarded shore,
Or a deft prow that dances through the rocks
In the white water of the Allagash,
Or, in good time, the bedstead at whose foot
The world will swim and flicker and be gone.
 
Sometimes a poem fairly recently written needs a footnote for younger readers. I think many people hearing me read this haven't been sure what the jingling chains were about. They don't remember when there were tyre chains in the snowy and icy weather. The bombarded shore is either Anzio or the shore of Southern France near Fréjus and St Raphael. As for the canoe, which is dancing through the rocks of the Allagash, I must confess that I never canoed in the Allagash River, but I've done various adventuresome things and I have done some canoeing, and Allagash was simply the right sound at that point. It sounds like a lively river.
 

Derives its title - to some extent at any rate - from St Augustine. It's a poem that begins rather abruptly, but I don't know that that's proven to be too confusing for most of its hearers. One is waking up in a city apartment house somewhere and as one wakes up, the neighbor's laundry is being yanked across the window frame.
The eyes open to a cry of pulleys,
And spirited from sleep, the astounded soul
Hangs for a moment bodiless and simple
As false dawn.
Outside the open window
The morning air is all awash with angels.
 
Some are in bed-sheets, some are in blouses,
Some are in smocks: but truly there they are.
Now they are rising together in calm swells
Of halcyon feeling, filling whatever they wear
With the deep joy of their impersonal breathing;
 
Now they are flying in place, conveying
The terrible speed of their omnipresence, moving
And staying like white water; And now of a sudden
They swoon down into so rapt a quiet
That nobody seems to be there.
The soul shrinks
 
From all that it is about to remember,
From the punctual rape of every blessed day,
And cries,
"Oh, let there be nothing on earth but laundry,
Nothing but rosy hands in the rising steam
And clear dances done in the sight of heaven."
 
Yet, as the sun acknowledges
With a warm look the world's hunks and colours,
The soul descends once more in bitter love
To accept the waking body, saying now
In a changed voice as the man yawns and rises,
 
"Bring them down from their ruddy gallows;
Let there be clean linen for the backs of thieves;
Let lovers go fresh and sweet to be undone,
And the heaviest nuns walk in a pure floating
Of dark habits,
Keeping their difficult balance."
 
One thing I like about that poem is that I managed to use the word 'hunks' in it. It's a word which is perhaps out of keeping with some of the rest of the language of the poem, but that's precisely why I'm glad that it's there and that I have apparently gotten away with it. In another poem that I wrote during that period in Rome, I was very pleased to be able to use the words 'reinforced concrete' in a line of verse. You'd think that would sink a line of verse absolutely, but I think it didn't quite in that case.
 

This one is called Piccola Commedia, Little Comedy, and it derives from my period of hoboing around the country when I was an Amherst student.

Piccola Commedia 
He is no one I really know,
The sunned-charred, gaunt young man
By the highway's edge in Kansas
Thirty odd years ago.
 
 On a tourist-cabin veranda
Two middle aged women sat;
One in a white dress, fat,
With a rattling glass in her hand,
 
Called "Son, don't you feel the heat?
Get up here into the shade."
Like a good boy, I obeyed,
And was given a crate for a seat
 
And an Orange Crush and gin.
"This State," she said, "is hell."
Her thin friend cackled, "Well, dear,
You've gotta fight sin with sin."
 
"No harm in a drink; My stars!"
Said the fat one jerking her head.
"And I'll take no lip from Ed,
Him with his damned cigars."
 
Laughter. A combine whined
On past and dry grass bent
in the backwash; liquor went
Like an ice pick into my mind.
 
Beneath her skirt I spied
Two sea-cows on a floe.
"Go talk to Mary Jo, son,
She's reading a book inside."
 
As I gangled in at the door
A pink girl, curled in a chair,
looked up with an ingénue stare.
Screenland lay on the floor.
 
Amazed by her starlet's pout
And the way her eyebrows arched,
I felt both drowned and parched.
Desire leapt up like a trout.
 
"Hello," she said, and her gum
Gave a calculating crack.
At once, from the lightless back
Of the room there came the
 grumble
 
Of someone heaving from bed,
A Zippo's click and flare,
Then, more and more apparent,
The shuffling form of Ed,
 
Who neither looked nor spoke
But moved in profile by,
Blinking one gelid eye
In his elected smoke.
 
This is something I've never told
And some of it I forget.
But the heat! I can feel it yet,
And that conniving cold.
 
That heat and cold at the end of the poem are suggestive, I hope, of Dante's Inferno where everything is both  very hot and very cold.
 

My wife is one of the great readers of all time, and she's also one of the great re-readers. She recycles books, even books as big as War and Peace, every year, and this poem called The Reader is about her.
She is going back these days to the great stories
That charmed her younger mind. A shaded light
Shines on the nape, half-shadowed by her curls,
And a page turns now with a scuffing sound.
Onward they come again, the orphans reaching
For a first handhold in a stony world,
The young provincials who at last look down
On the city's maze, and will descend into it,
The serious girl, once more, who would live nobly,
The sly one who aspires to marry so,
The young man bent on glory, and that other
Who seeks a burden. Knowing as she does
What will become of them in bloody field
Or Tuscan garden, it may be that at times
She sees their first and final selves at once
As a god might to whom all time is now.
Or, having lived so much herself, perhaps
She meets them this time with a wiser eye,
Noting that Julien's calculating head
Is from the first too severed from his heart.
But the true wonder of it is that she,
For all that she may know of consequences,
Still turns enchanted to the next bright page
Like some Natasha in the ballroom door-
Caught in the flow of things wherever bound,
The blind delight of being, ready still
To enter life on life and see them through.
Since publishing that poem I've often heard from people who were themselves great readers and who want to know exactly which Balzac novels I'm thinking of when I speak of the young provincials and so on. I must prepare a list to send out to my correspondents.
 

Here's another poem for or about my wife. It's called For C. It's a poem about lovers who part or do not part, and the poem begins with three pairs of lovers who separate and then it ends with my wife and me who did not.
After the clash of elevator gates
And the long sinking, she emerges where
A slight thing in the morning's cross-town glare,
She looks up toward the window where he waits,
Then in a fleeting taxi joins the rest
Of the huge traffic bound forever west.
 
On such grand scale do lovers say goodbye-
Even this other pair whose high romance
Had only the duration of a dance,
And who, now taking leave with stricken eye,
See each in each a whole new life forgone.
For them, above the darkling clubhouse lawn,
 
Bright perseids flash and crumble; while for these
Who part now on the dock, weighed down by grief
And baggage, yet with something like relief,
It takes three thousand miles of knitting seas
To cancel out their crossing, and unmake
The amorous rough and tumble of their wake.
 
We are denied, my love, their fine tristesse
And bittersweet regrets, and cannot share
The sweet frequent vistas of their large despair,
Where love and all are swept to nothingness;
Still, there's a certain scope in that long love
Which constant spirits are the keepers of,
 
And which, though taken to be tame and staid,
Is a wild sostenuto of the heart,
A passion joined to courtesy and art
Which has the quality of something made,
Like a good fiddle, like the rose's scent,
Like the rose window or the firmament.
I think that there are various possible ways of describing poetry, but one thing that's almost always true of it as opposed to prose is that its words are working very hard with each other. The words of poems work harder with each other than the words of most prose can do, and I do think there's an instance of that at the end of this poem. It's rather a lot to have a love poem soar into the firmament and have 'firmament' be its last word, and I think if I do get away with it, I do because 'firmament' is balanced by something as modest and earthly as a good fiddle.
 

Continuing with poems which have to do with my wife, here's a poem called C Minor, which is I suppose a day in the life of... C Minor.
Beethoven during breakfast? The human soul,
Though stalked by hollow pluckings, winning out
(While bran-flakes crackle in the cereal-bowl)
Over despair and doubt?
 
You were right to switch it off and let the day
Begin at hazard, perhaps with pecker-knocks
In the sugar bush, the rancour of a jay,
   Or in the letterbox
 
Something that makes you pause and with fixed shadow
Stand on the driveway gravel, your bent head
Scanning the snatched pages until the sad
  Or fortunate news is read.
 
The day's work will be disappointing or not,
Giving at least some pleasure in taking pains.
One of us, hoeing in the garden plot
  (Unless, of course, it rains)
 
May rejoice at the knitting of light in fennel-plumes
And dew like mercury on cabbage-hide,
Or rise and pace through too-familiar rooms,
  Balked and dissatisfied.
 
Shall a plate be broken? a new thing understood?
Shall we be lonely, and by love consoled?
What shall I whistle, splitting the kindling wood?
  Shall the night-wind be cold?
 
How should I know? And even if we were fated
Hugely to suffer, grandly to endure,
It would not help to hear it all fore-stated
  As in an overture.
 
There is nothing to do with the day except to live it.
Let us have music again when the light dies
(Sullenly or in glory) and we can give it
  Something to organise.
 
 

This poem, A Late Aubade, derives of course from my marriage. An aubade as we know is an early morning amorous poem or song. This is a late aubade because a man is speaking to his wife in bed at about 11:45 in the morning. A Late Aubade.
You could be sitting now in a carrel
Turning some liver-spotted page,
Or rising in an elevator-cage
Towards Ladies' Apparel.
 
You could be planting a raucous bed
of salvia, in rubber gloves,
Or lunching through a screed of someone's loves
With pitying head,
 
Or making some unhappy setter
Heel, or listening to a bleak
Lecture on Schoenberg's serial technique.
Isn't this better?
 
Think of all the time you were not
Wasting, and would not care to waste,
Such things, thank God, not being to your taste.
Think what a lot
 
Of time, by woman's reckoning,
You've saved, and so may spend on this,
You, who would rather lie in bed and kiss
Than anything.
 
It's almost noon, you say? If so,
Time flies, and I need not rehearse
The rosebuds-theme of centuries of verse.
If you  must  go,
 
Wait for a while, then slip downstairs
And bring us up some chilled white wine,
And some blue cheese and crackers, and some fine
Ruddy-skinned pears.
That's been approved of by quite a number of people, but I remember its being disapproved of by feminists a few years back. They felt that the man in the poem ought to get out of bed and go downstairs and bring up the cheese and the rest.
 

Well now, something about children. We've had four children, all quite wonderful. The fourth had the bad luck to be born autistic, but he's come along pretty well and is perhaps the most cheerful of us all.
All during the time our children were growing up, I did a great deal of playing with them and reading to them, and found that it kept me playful and flexible, as we ought to be. Children I think have a strong sense of order, have a desire for order. At the same time, I think that they like to play around with it, indeed play against it. It's a child who notices that the emperor has no new clothes, and I think of, of Alice at the end of the second Alice book saying, 'You're nothing but a pack of cards'. Every now and then a child finds it very refreshing to say that to the world and to its presumptive order. That's why my children liked to hear me read Lewis Carroll and Edward Lear to them. They highly relished nonsense and any other way of testing the conventional order of things. They were fond of riddles and I wrote some poems to entertain them and to appeal to this side of the child. Let's see if I can find some good specimens. Well, I wrote some poems called Opposites, and I probably can't find exactly the, the opposite which will explain the form, but... now here's one I like.
I wonder if you've ever seen a 
Willow sheltering a hyena?
Nowhere in nature can be found 
An opposition more profound: 
A sad tree weeping inconsolably! 
A wild beast laughing uncontrollably!

I don't know whether that puts anything in question as an opposites poem is meant to do. I think poetry of this kind is meant to shake up your sense of reality a little, shake up your sense of order and of what is opposite to what, and then of course refresh your sense of what the order of things is.
When you are playing on a harp, 
The opposite of flat is sharp, 
And both sound very good if they 
Are what the music says to play. 
But when you think it's time to stop 
And drink a bit of soda pop, 
How bad the thought of flatness is!
A soda should be full of fizz.

Maybe I'll read also some specimens of a kind of playful poem I wrote more recently. I had put out a little book called The Disappearing Alphabet, and... well, you'll see from the samples I give what the strategy is.
What if there were no letter A?
Cows would eat HY instead of HAY. 
What's HY? It's an unheard of diet, 
And cows are happy not to try it.

Now, that doesn't really profoundly shake our sense of what hay is or what cows are, but at least it makes a kind of an attack on the word hay and shakes it up for a moment.
What if the letter Q should be destroyed? 
Millions of U's would then be unemployed, 
for Q and U belong like tick and tock, 
Except, of course in places like Iraq.


Here's a little poem out of my own childhood called Digging for China.
 'Far enough down is China', somebody said.  'Dig deep enough and you might see the sky  As clear as at the bottom of a well.  Except it would be real-a different sky.  Then you could burrow down until you came  To China! Oh, it's nothing like New Jersey.  There's people, trees, and houses, and all that,  But much, much different. nothing looks the same.' I went and got the trowel out of the shed  And sweated like a coolie all that morning,  Digging a hole beside the lilac-bush,  Down on my hands and knees. It was a sort  Of praying, I suspect. I watched my hand  Dig deep and darker, and I tried and tried  To dream a place where nothing was the same.  The trowel never did break through to blue.  Before the dream could weary of itself  My eyes were tired of looking into darkness,  My sun baked head of hanging down a hole.  I stood up in a place I had forgotten,  Blinking and staggering while the earth went round  And showed me silver barns, the fields dozing  In palls of brightness, patens growing and gone  in the tides of leaves, and the whole sky china blue.  Until I got my balance back again  All that I saw was China, China, China.
 Somebody said that I had no right to close a poem like that after Elizabeth's fish poem which ends, 'Rainbow, rainbow, rainbow', but then happily I remembered Kipling's, 'Boots, boots, boots', and it seemed to me I was acquitted.
 

This poem, The Writer, is a poem about my daughter Ellen who is a very good short story writer and is about to publish a new and selected book of her short stories. This poem looks back at her as she was in her junior high school days when she used to come home to our house in Portland, Connecticut and climb up to her room, sit at her desk and get busy writing stories every afternoon.

The Writer
 In her room at the prow of the house Where light breaks, and the windows are tossed with linden, My daughter is writing a story. I pause in the stairwell, hearing From her shut door a commotion of typewriter-keys Like a chain hauled over a gunwale. Young as she is, the stuff Of her life is a great cargo, and some of it heavy.. I wish her a lucky passage. But now it is she who pauses, As if to reject my thought and its easy figure. A stillness greatens, in which The whole house seems to be thinking, And then she is at it again with a bunched clamor Of strokes, and again is silent. I remember the dazed starling Which was trapped in that very room, two years ago; How we stole in, lifted a sash And retreated, not to affright it; And how for a helpless hour, through the crack of the door, We watched the sleek, wild, dark And iridescent creature Batter against the brilliance, drop like a glove To the hard floor, or the desk-top, And wait then, humped and bloody, For the wits to try it again; and how our spirits Rose when, suddenly sure, It lifted off from a chair-back, Beating a smooth course for the right window And clearing the sill of the world. It is always a matter, my darling, Of life or death, as I had forgotten. I wish What I wished you before, but harder.
 That poem was not written so very long ago, but I suppose there are sounds in it that many people hear no more. Some young hearers wouldn't know what the commotion of typewriter keys would sound like.
 

This is a relatively new poem of mine, and it's called Blackberries For Amelia. Amelia is my granddaughter, and with her I did at one time or another a good deal of berry-picking. She's now off at college so we pick berries not quite so often, but this looks back at it.
 Blackberries for Amelia
 Fringing the woods, the stone walls, and the lanes,  Old thickets everywhere have come alive,  Their new leaves reaching out in fans of five  From tangles overarched by this year's canes. They have their flowers too, it being June, And here or there in brambles dark and light Are small five-petaled blooms of chalky white, As random-clustered and as loosely strewn As the far stars, of which we now are told  That ever faster do they bolt away,  And that a night may come in which some say,  We shall have only blackness to behold. I have no time for any change so great, but I shall see the August weather spur Berries to ripen where the flowers were- Dark berries, savage sweet, and worth the wait-  And there will come the moment to be quick And save some from the birds, and I shall need Two pails, old clothes in which to stain and bleed, And a grandchild to talk with while we pick.
 Well, that's a poem about my grandchild and berries. For certain it's also a poem which has to do with the territory around here, with the bushes which come up every year in Cummington Massachusetts.
 

I want to read a poem called Lying on which my wife once passed a severe judgement when I first showed it to her. She said, 'Well, you've done it - at last you've written a poem that is unintelligible from beginning to end'. And then I said, 'Oh no, it's a very jazzy sort of poem, it's full of riffs, but fundamentally it's simple, it's just saying that all things are of one nature'. So, with that clue, she read it again and said, 'Well, it's quite intelligible', and it's called Lying.
 To claim at a dead party to have spotted a grackle, When in fact you haven't of late, can do no harm.  Your reputation for saying things of interest  Will not be marred, if you hasten to other topics,  Nor will the delicate web of human trust  Be ruptured by that airy fabrication.  Later however, talking with toxic zest  Of golf, or taxes or the rest of it  Where the beaked ladle plies the chuckling ice,  You may enjoy a chill of severance, hearing  Above your head the shrug of unreal wings.  Not that the world is tiresome in itself:  We know what boredom is: It is a dull  Impatience or a fierce velleity,  A champing wish, stalled by our lassitude,  To make or do. In the strict sense, of course,  We invent nothing, merely bearing witness  To what each morning brings again to light:  Gold crosses, cornices, astonishment  Of panes, the turbine-vent which natural law  spins on the grill-end of the diner's roof,  Then grass and grackles or, at the end of town  in sheen-swept pastureland, the horses' neck  Clothed with its usual thunder, and the stones  Beginning now to tug their shadows in  And track the air with glitter. All these things  Are there before us; there before we look  Or fail to look; there to be seen or not  By us, as by the bees's twelve thousand eyes,  According to our means and purposes.  So too with strangeness not to be ignored,  Total eclipse or snow upon the rose,  And so with that most rare conception, nothing.  What is it, after all, but something missed?  It is the water of a dried-up well  Gone to assail the cliffs of Labrador.  There is what gold the arch-negator, sprung  From hell to probe with intellectual site  The cells and heavens of a given world  Which he could take but as another prison:  Small wonder that, pretending not to be,  He drifted through the bar-like boles of Eden  In a black mist low creeping, dragging down  And darkening with moody self-absorption  What, when he left it, lifted and, if seen  From the sun's vantage, seethed with faulting hues.  Closer to making than the deftest fraud  Is seeing how the catbird's tail was made  To counterpoise, on the mock-orange spray,  Its light, up-tilted spine; or, lighter still,  How the shucked tunic of an onion, brushed  To one side on a backlit chopping-board  And rocked by trifling currents, prints and prints  Its bright, ribbed shadow like a flapping sail.  Odd that a thing is most itself when likened:  The eye mists over, basil, hints of clove,  The river glazes toward the dam and spills  To the drubbed rocks below its crashing cullet,  And in the barnyard near the sawdust-pile  Some great thing is tormented. Either it is  A tarp torn loose and in the groaning wind  Now puffed, now flattened, or a hip-shot beast  Which tries again, and once again, to rise.  What, though for pain there is no other word,  Finds pleasure in the cruellest simile?  It is something in us like the catbird's song  From neighbour bushes in the grey of morning  That harsh or sweet, and of its own accord,  Proclaims its many kin. It is the chant  Of the first springs, and it is tributary  To the great lies told with the eyes half-shut  That have the truth in view: The tale of Chiron  Who, with sage head, wild heart, and planted hoof  Instructed brute Achilles in the lyre,  Or of the garden where we first mislaid  Simplicity of wish and will, forgetting  Out of what cognate splendour all things came  To take their scattering names; And nonetheless  That matter of a baggage-train surprised  by a few Gascons in the Pyrenees  Which, having worked three Centuries and more  in the dark caves of France, poured out at last  the blood of Roland, who to Charles his King  And to the dove that hatched the dove-tailed world  Was faithful unto death, and shamed the devil.
 

This was published in the New Yorker Magazine at a time when Howard Moss, the usual editor at the time, was on vacation, and whoever was substituting for him called me and said, 'It's very nice, lively poem, I wonder if you could put a few clarifying lines in it toward the end?' And so I wrote the line, 'And to the dove that hatched the dovetailed world', and we stuck that in, and whether or not it was clarifying, I think I was talked into one of the better lines in the poem.
[Q] It was Charles McGrath by the way.
Oh, was it? Well, I think the poem probably does ultimately boil down to a rather simple statement, that all things are of one nature, that all metaphors are in some sense true.
I daresay as I was reading, that any hero would have heard when I shifted into Miltonic gear, began to talk about Satan's escape from hell and indeed quoted, 'In a black mist low creeping'. I think Milton happened in this poem partly because of his concerns of his great poem, Paradise Lost, and the relation of those concerns to what I am talking about, but also because Milton was the great master of supple discourse in the blank verse form. It came to me as I was beginning this poem that since it was going to be argumentative, since it was going to be full of instances, I did feel that in advance, that blank versed might be the form in which to do my talking.
That's the way poems happen with me. I have some sense of what I may be about to say or entertain. I have some sense of what words might be lively in the first or second line of the poem, and then the form of the poem simply evolves accordingly. That is to say what the poem is about to say is what gives shape to the poem. I generally know - I can't say why but I expect I'm not alone in this - I generally know when I start a poem about how long it's going to be, and I think I know whether it's going to have a series of stages in it, which a stanza pattern would accommodate. I think I generally know what the tone, what the mood, what the drama of it is going to be, and whether therefore I'm in need of rhyme to stress one kind of emotion or another. I think I've fairly well explained why Lying took the, took the shape it did, and I think actually that it's one of my best efforts in the, in the form of blank verse discourse.

I'm trying to think of who said it. It was perhaps someone like Pascal who said, 'Man is neither angel not beast, when he tries to play the angel he becomes the beast'. That's, that's one clue I think to what I was thinking of when I wrote this poem, Beasts.
         Beasts in their major freedom     Slumber in peace tonight. The gull on his ledge  Dreams in the guts of himself the moon-plucked waves below      And the sunfish leans on a stone, slept         By the lyric water       In which the spotless feet    Of deer make dulcet splashes, and to which  The ripped mouse, safe in the owl's talon, cries      Concordance. Here there is no such harm         And no such darkness       As the self-same moon observes    Where, warped in window-glass, it sponsors now  The werewolf's painful change. Turning his head away     On the sweaty bolster, he tries to remember         The mood of manhood,      But lies at last as always,    Letting it happen, the fierce fur soft to his face,  Hearing with sharper ears the wind's exciting minors,      The leaves' panic, and the degradation         Of the heavy streams.       Meantime, at high windows    Far from thicket and pad-fall, suitors of excellence  Sigh and turn from their work to construe again the painful        Beauty of heaven, the lucid moon           And the risen hunter,      Making such dreams for men    As told will break their hearts as always, bringing  Monsters into the city, crows on the public statues,       Navies fed to the fish in the dark          Unbridled waters.
 Any pictures one paints of natural order probably should contain something like a ripped mouse in them to be true and honest.
 

This poem is called Cottage Street, 1953, and it has to do with a visit my wife and I made to her mother in Wellesley, Massachusetts for the sake of some afternoon tea, and for the sake of meeting Sylvia Plath and her mother, who did live in Wellesley and were friends of my mother-in-law, Mrs Ward. My assignment, when I went to tea that day, was to be encouraging to the very young Sylvia Plath about the life of the poet, and to hearten her to set aside her suicidal urges and go on with her writing. That of course was a very difficult assignment, which I clearly failed.

Cottage Street, 1953
 Framed in her phoenix fire-screen, Edna Ward  Bends to the tray of Canton, pouring tea  For frightened Mrs Plath; then, turning toward  The pale, slumped daughter, and my wife, and me,   Asks if we would prefer it weak or strong.  Will we have milk or lemon, she enquires?  The visit seems already strained and long.  Each in his turn, we tell her our desires.  It is my office to exemplify  The published poet in his happiness,  Thus cheering Sylvia, who has wished to die;  But half-ashamed, and impotent to bless,  I am a stupid life-guard who has found,  Swept to his shallows by the tide, a girl  Who, far from shore, has been immensely drowned,  And stares through water now with eyes of pearl.  How large is her refusal; and how slight  The genteel chat whereby we recommend  Life, of a summer afternoon, despite  The brewing dusk which hints that it may end.  And Edna Ward shall die in fifteen years,  After her eight-and-eighty summers of  Such grace and courage as permit no tears,  The thin hand reaching out, the last word love,  Outliving Sylvia, who, condemned to live,  Shall study for a decade, as she must,  To state at last her brilliant negative  In poems free and helpless and unjust.
 I've often been attacked for writing this poem, often by the advocates of Sylvia Plath or by the admirers of confessional verse. All I can say is that I did not write this poem against Sylvia Plath or against any mode of poetry. I hope to do her justice by giving her these several words: 'brilliant', 'free', 'helpless', 'unjust'. What is unjust about her poems I think any reader can perceive, but surely they are also brilliant.
Some correspondent asked me a while ago if Edna Ward was not in fact the heroine of the poem, and I must say she is, yes. The poem plays around I notice with dimensions, it plays around with the immensity of Sylvia Plath's suicidal grief, and with other... with other largenesses and smallnesses, but I hope to balance the poem in favour of showing grace and courage and ending your life with the word love.
[Q] Did either she or Ted Hughes respond to this poem in any way?
Ted Hughes kindly wrote me a few years ago and said that he thought that this poem was the best page ever written on the subject of Sylvia Plath. I was delighted to have that opinion of his, but course there are those who differed with Ted Hughes in his estimate of the situation.
 

Here is a two-part poem called Altitudes, and it's about versions of spirituality. It's written more or less from the point of view of Europe or of myself in Europe. It begins inside a cathedral which undoubtedly is in Rome, but it looks back in its second part to Amherst, Massachusetts where I went to school, and it looks back also to I suppose such people as Emily Dickinson's neighbors who had to think up the spiritual life on their own and for themselves, transcendentalists, you know.

Altitudes
                  I       Look up into the dome:  It is a great salon, a brilliant place,     Yet not too splendid for the race  Whom we imagine there, wholly at home       With the gold-rosetted white  Wainscot, the oval windows and the fault-    Less figures of the painted vault.  Strolling, conversing in that precious light,       They chat no doubt of love,  The pleasant burden of their courtesy     Borne down at times to you and me  Where, in this dark, we stand and gaze above.       For all they cannot share,  All that the world cannot in fact afford,     Their lofty premises are floored  With the massed voices of continual prayer.                    II      How far it is from here  To Emily Dickinson's father's house in America;     Think of her climbing a spiral stair  Up to the little cupola with its clear       Small panes, its room for one.  Like the dark house below, so full of eyes     In mirrors and of shut-in flies,  This chamber furnished only with the sun       Is she and she alone,  A mood to which she rises, in which she sees     Bird-choristers in all the trees  And a wild shining of the pure unknown       On Amherst. This is caught  In the dormers of a neighbour, who, no doubt,     Will before long be coming out  To pace about his garden, lost in thought
 That neighbour, I suppose, would have been Austin Dickinson, but I have in mind a kind of generic New Englander who is making up his religion for himself.
 

Back in the 50s, I was asked by my friend the composer, Richard Winslow, to write a hymn for him to set for the purposes of a Wesleyan University Christmas concert, and so I did, and Richard set it rather in the manner of John Cage. It was set for one voice and a harpsichord, I think, and it came out very lively but not what I had imagined. Since then the hymn has been adopted by the Episcopal Church and the Lutheran Church and many another, and most recently I was delighted to find that it had been set by Dave Brubeck. That was a great surprise, and I'm waiting to hear what his choral setting sounds like.
This Christmas hymn has a couple of epigraphs from Saint Luke: 'And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said unto him, "Master, rebuke thy disciples". And he answered and said unto them, "I tell you that if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out".'

A Christmas Hymn
A stable-lamp is lighted Whose glow shall wake the sky;  The stars shall bend their voices,  And every stone shall cry.  And every stone shall cry,  And straw like gold shall shine;  A barn shall harbour heaven,  A stall become a shrine.  This Child through David's city  Shall ride in triumph by;  The palm shall strew its branches,  And every stone shall cry.  And every stone shall cry,  Though heavy, dull and dumb,  And lie within the roadway  To pave His kingdom come.  Yet He shall be forsaken,  And yielded up to die;  The sky shall groan and darken,  And every stone shall cry.  And every stone shall cry  For stony hearts of men:  God's blood upon the spearhead,  God's love refused again.  But now, as at the ending,  The low is lifted high;  The stars shall bend their voices,  And every stone shall cry.  And every stone shall cry  In praises of the Child  By whose descent among us  The worlds are reconciled.
One thing I found by answering Richard Winslow's challenge was that if you write a hymn and you are serious about it, you have no business filling it with... with maverick notions of your own. A hymn has to be perfectly orthodox so that a congregation can stand up and... and belt it out with one voice, and that's an interesting constraint under which to work and, of course, a great... a great challenge. I'm glad to have met the challenge once. There are some, some people who, like Charles Wesley, who met it many times, and they have my admiration. Isaac Watts as well.
 

Years ago we went down to Yale to take part in a memorial observance for Randall Jarrell who had just died, and on that occasion I talked a bit with Robert Penn Warren, his wife, Eleanor Clark and they warned me that New England was about to be taken over by real estate rascals and that I should, if I possibly could, buy a few acres of it and protect them, and Charlee and I in fact did that. We... we had, we had caught sight of Cummington during our undergraduate days when we were driving through on our way to a football game at Williams. We knew that it was a beautiful place and when another friend of ours gave us the name of an honest real estate woman, we headed for this town of Cummington, and almost at once fell in love with it, even though... even though it was the middle of the winter and there were high drifts everywhere, the real estate woman said, 'There are beautiful timber trails to walk out there and I believe one of them leads to a pond', and she said, 'In summer you could see that there's a ruined tennis court down there and a ruined swimming pool'. So, we believed her and it was all true and we bought a little cabin, which had access to the trails and the pool and the ruined facilities. After a while we restored the swimming pool and the tennis court, and we've now been living here for a very long time and I think are regarded as among the early settlers. We have - depending on how you read our deeds - we have somewhere between 80 and 100 acres of woods, and I love to... love to wander in them, and I know the names of most things to be seen in our... in our woods and in the fields roundabout, and one... one specialty of these woods in North Western Massachusetts is that there are great strews of... of ferns, not a fern here and a fern there, but great beds of ferns running along the forest floor. So, here's a poem called Fern-Beds in Hampshire County.
Although from them Steep stands of beech and sugar-maple stem, Varied with birch, or ash, or basswood trees Which spring will throng with bees, While intervening thickets grow complex With flower, seed, and variants of sex, And the whole wood conspires, by change of kind, To break the purchase of the gathering mind, The ferns are as they were. Let but a trifling stir Of air traverse their pools or touchy bedsAnd some will dip their heads, Some switch a moment like a scribbling quill And then be still, Sporadic as in guarded bays The rockweed slaps a bit or sways. Then, let the wind grow bluff, and though The sea lies far to eastward, far below, These fluent spines, with whipped pale underside, Will climb through timber as a smoking tide Through pier-stakes, beat their sprays about the base Of every boulder, scale its creviced face And, wave on wave, like some green infantry, Storm all the slope as high as I can see. Whatever at the heart Of creatures makes them branch and burst apart, Or at the core of star or tree may burn At last to turn And make an end of time, These airy plants, tenacious of their prime, Dwell in the swept recurrence of An ancient conquest, shaken by first love As when they answered to the boomed command That the seas green rise up and take the land.
I think that actually is fairly solid natural history, and... and I do try to be satisfactorily factual in writing about such matters. The form of this poem is one that I have never used in any other place. It's... the lines are rhymed, but they are of all sorts of different lengths. I don't think anything is longer than a pentameter, but as... as one can hear, there are many short lines and many long lines, and I think probably my excuse for that is that the poem was about swellings and developments, and that happens about three times in the poem that the lines grow longer and then shorter. That's probably the logic behind it, at least, it sounds right to my ear.

I do a lot of vegetable and herb gardening and this little poem came out of that. In fact, to hear this poem properly, you have to imagine yourself as grovelling on hands and knees in the row and looking at a seedling that's just come up.
The poem is called Seed Leaves, and it's... it's sub-titled Homage to Robert Frost. This poem is indebted to Robert Frost, first because the first two lines of it, the first two rhymes, are stolen from his poem, Putting In The Seed, and also I think because some of the sentiments implied in it would not... would not have been inacceptable to him.
Seed Leaves
Here something stubborn comes,  Dislodging the earth crumbs  And making crusty rubble.  It comes up bending double,  And looks like a green staple.  It could be seedling maple,  Or artichoke or bean.  That remains to be seen.  Forced to make choice of ends,  The stalk in time unbends,  Shakes off the seed-case, heaves  Aloft, and spreads two leaves  Which still display no sure  And special signature.  Toothless and fat, they keep  The oval form of sleep.  This plant would like to grow  And yet be embryo;  Increase, and yet escape  The doom of taking shape;  Be vaguely vast, and climb  To the tip end of time  With all of space to fill,  Like boundless Igdrasil  That has the stars for fruit.  But something at the root  more urgent than that urge  bids two true leaves emerge,  and now the plant, resigned  to being self-defined  before it can commerce  with the great universe,  takes aim at all the sky and starts to ramify.
One of the pleasures of writing I think is to... is to take a whole of a word and carry it back to its... to its root, and the word 'ramify', now I'm afraid is chiefly associated with business and professional language. People talk about the ramifications of this or that problem, and as they say it, they're not really thinking of the branching out of the problem. I'm trying to carry it back to the root.
 

Once long ago, when in fact we were living down in the middle of Connecticut, there came a rather big snowstorm in the middle of April and that begot this poem. So, it's... it's a poem about how it is when you get a snowstorm when you hadn't expected it. It's also, I think, in the broadest way a poem about how to die so as to go on living.
A Storm in April
Some winters, taking leave  Deal us a last, hard blow,  Salting the ground like Carthage  Before they will go. But the bright, milling snow  Which throngs the air today -  It is a way of leaving  So as to stay.  The light flakes do not weigh  The willows down, but sift  Through the white catkins loose  As petal-drift,  Or in an up-draft lift  And glitter at a height,  Dazzling as summers leaf stir  Chinked with light.  This storm, if I am right,  Will not be wholly over  Till green fields, here and there  Turn white with clover,  And through chill air, the puffs of milkweed hover.
'Hover' is not a pure rhyme with 'clover', but I like the way it works anyway. The... I remember Wilbert Snow, a Connecticut poet who also was on the Wesleyan faculty for a time and who before that had been lieutenant governor of the State, saying to me about the, the rhyme scheme of this poem that it was as difficult as Frost's rhyme scheme in Stopping By Woods, and he said, 'You just got out of that with your honour.'
 

It's on the whole a factual poem about the way things look and behave in the world of trees and fields.
Crow's Nests
That lofty stand of trees beyond the field,  Which in the storms of summer stood revealed  As a great fleet of galleons bound our way  Across a moiled expanse of tossing hay,  Full-rigged and swift, and to the topmost sail  Taking their fill and pleasure of the gale,  Now, in this leafless time, are ships no more,  Though it would not be hard to take them for  A roadstead full of naked mast and spar  In which we see now where the crow's nests are.
Now that's just a simple fact. That's where crow's nests are, in the tops of trees, though not everybody knows it.
[Q] But you have to know about crow's nests, then.
Yes.
[Q] On ships.
On ships as well.
 

There's a brook running through our woods here, with which I am well acquainted, of which I am very fond. I found an early 19th century map not long ago. It was made by William Cullen Bryant's brother, and it gave the names of the old bodies of water of Cummington, which I think have generally been forgotten now. The stream that moves through our property was then called Hamlen Brook, and that's the title of this. Now just before this poem begins, I've been chopping wood or doing something energetic so that I'm covered with press... perspiration and I kneel down to get a drink from the brook.
    At the alder-darkened brink   Where the stream slows to a lucid jet  I lean to the water, dinting its top with sweat,     And see, before I can drink,     A startled inchling trout   Of spotted near-transparency,  Trawling a shadow solider than he.     He swerves now, darting out     To where, in a flicked slew   Of sparks and glittering silt, he weaves  Through stream-bed rocks, disturbing foundered leaves,     And butts then out of view     Beneath a sliding glass   Crazed by the skimming of a brace  Of burnished dragon-flies across its face,     In which deep cloudlets pass    And a white precipice   Of mirrored birch-trees plunges down  Toward where the azures of the zenith drown.     How shall I drink all this?     Joy's trick is to supply   Dry lips with what can cool and slake,  Leaving them dumbstruck also with an ache     Nothing can satisfy.
 That poem in its general structure is... it's like an old fashioned 19th century nature poem which builds up to a moral, but that's... that's all right. The... the central sentence of it is terribly long, and is sometimes challenging to read, but of course it's... it is so long because so many things are perceptible at once in the brook one is leaning down to look at and into.
 

Here's the title poem of my next to last book. It's called Mayflies.
 In sombre forest, when the sun was low,  I saw from unseen pools, a mist of flies       In their quadrillions rise  And animate a ragged patch of glow  With sudden glittering - as when a crowd          Of stars appear  Through a brief gap in black and driven cloud,  One arc of their great round-dance showing clear.  It was no muddled swarm I witnessed, for  In entrechats each fluttering insect there          Rose two steep yards in air,  Then slowly floated down to climb once more,  So that they all composed a manifold             And figured scene,  And seemed the weavers of some cloth of gold,  Or the fine pistons of some bright machine.  Watching those lifelong dancers of a day  As night closed in, I felt myself alone         In a life too much my own,  More mortal in my separateness than they -  Unless, I thought, I had been called to be            Not fly or star  But one whose task is joyfully to see  How fair the fiats of the caller are.
 By no means all of my poems about natural things are religious in intention, but in this poem at any rate, one can clearly see that the natural world delights me by its order and that I attribute its order to the Creator.
 

Downhill from our house there are a couple of pastures which are used by our neighbour across the road for the pasturage of his Holstein heifers. And the behaviour of those heifers one day came to suggest to me something that could be turned into the tanka form. I guess the tanka form is in... is roughly analogous, very roughly analogous to the English sonnet and its closing couplet. In the tanka what you have is an initial haiku followed by two lines of seven syllables which have something summary to say about what the first lines have said. Well, this is the behaviour of some of my neighbour's heifers.
 Black-and-white Holsteins  Crowd downfield at feeding time,  Mingling their blotches.  It is like ice breaking up  In a dark, swollen river.
 And here's one called In Trackless Woods. Once again I... I am out fooling around in the woods and stumbling on a poem.
 In trackless woods it puzzled me to find  Four great rock maples, seemingly aligned,  As if they had been set out in a row  Before some house, a Century ago,  To edge the property and lend some shade.  I look to see if ancient wheels had made  Old ruts to which the trees ran parallel,  But there were none, so far as I could tell-  There'd been no roadway, nor could I find the square  Depression of a cellar anywhere, And so I tramped on further, to survey  Amazing patterns in a hornbeam spray Or spirals in a pine-cone, under trees  Not subject to our stiff geometries.
 Did I say 'hornbeam' too horribly then? Should I read it again? It was okay?
 [Q] No, it was fine.
 That... that poem is I suppose describable as a kind of sonnet, although its... its rhymes are... although it's actually a pile of couplets, but one does have a progression of thought and description for about eight and-a-half lines after which a kind of sextet begins and sums up and counters what's preceded it.
 

I found out not long ago why the trees are green and wrote a poem about it. Trees are green because the leaves in manufacturing wood have no use for that particular colour of the spectrum, therefore it's excluded, left behind, and all over the place in summer.
 Green 
 Tree leaves which, till the growing season's done,  Change into wood the powers of the sun,  Take from that radiance only reds and blues. Green is a colour that they cannot use,  And so their rustling myriads are seen  To wear all summer an extraneous green,  A green with no apparent role, unless  To be the symbol of a great largesse Which has no end, though autumn may revoke  That shade from yellowed ash and rusted oak.
 

For variety sake, I'd like to read a goofy poem which I wrote at a terribly early hour of the morning, although that's no excuse. My wife was away and I at loose ends, and so I saw the late movie on the television. Having seen that, I saw the next movie on television, the late, late movie, which was a remake of The Prisoner of Zenda with Stewart Granger and Deborah Kerr, and having seen that, I wrote down this poem in a sort of groggy spirit.  The Prisoner of Zenda.
 At the end a The Prisoner of Zenda, The King being out of danger, Stewart Granger (As Rudolph Rassendyll) Must swallow a bitter pill By renouncing his co-star, Deborah Kerr. It would be poor behavia In him and in Princess Flavia Were they to put their own Concerns before those of the Throne. Deborah Kerr must wed The King instead. Rassendyll turns to go. Must it be so? Why can't they have their cake And eat it, for heaven's sake? Please let them have it both ways, The audience prays. And yet it is hard to quarrel With a plot so moral. One redeeming factor,  However, is that the actor Who plays the once-dissolute King (Who has learned through suffering  Not to drink or be mean To his future Queen), Far from being a stranger, Is also Stewart Granger.
 

Back in the early 1950s, I was putting together a bestiary text for Alexander Calder to illustrate, and that led me on wonderful hunts through the stacks of Widener Library at Harvard and, and elsewhere, and of course I got tips from lots of my friends as to where I could find a good animal passage or animal poem. It was actually Dylan Thomas who told me I could find a very good poem about donkeys if I looked into the poems of the French poet Francis Jammes, and so here's my translation of Francis Jammes' poem, A Prayer to Go to Paradise with the Donkeys.  When I must come to you O my God, I pray that... No, start over.
 When I must come to you O my God, I pray  It be some dusty-roaded holiday,  And even as in my travels here below,  I beg to choose by what road I shall go  To paradise, where the clear stars shine by day.  I'll take my walking-stick and go my way,  And to my friends the donkeys I shall say,  "I am Francis Jammes and I'm going to paradise,  For there is no hell in the land of the loving God."  And I'll say to them: "come sweet friends of the blue skies,  Poor creatures who, with the flap of the ears or a nod  Of the head, shake off the buffets, the bees, the flies..."   Let me come with these donkeys Lord into your land,  These beasts who bow their heads so gently, and stand  With their small feet joined together in a fashion  Utterly gentle, asking your compassion.  I shall arrive, followed by their thousands of ears,  Followed by those with baskets at their flanks,  By those who lug the carts of mountebanks  Or loads of feather-dusters and kitchen-wares,  By those with humps of battered water-cans,  By bottle-shaped she-asses who halt and stumble,  By those tricked out in little pantaloons  To cover their wet, blue galls where flies assemble  In whirling swarms, making a drunken hum.  Dear God, let it be with these donkeys that I come,  And let it be that angels lead us in peace  To leafy streams, where cherries tremble in air,  Sleek as the laughing flesh of girls; and there  In that haven of souls, let it be that, leaning above  Your divine waters, I shall resemble these donkeys, Whose humble and sweet poverty will appear  Clear in the clearness of your eternal love.
 I love that poem.
 

When I was living in Rome and working at the American Academy and living over on via Sproviere in Monteverde Nuovo, I used to walk to work every morning, passing by the Villa Sciarra, the only public gardens in Rome which have artificial ruins, for heaven's sake. In the Villa Sciarra there's a perfectly wonderful fountain, about which I could find nothing in the Academy library, except that it's classified as scuola vignolesca. Well, I don't need to say too much about it because the poem is a description of that fountain and of what it might mean, but passing by the Villa Sciarra and glancing in at this fountain many a morning, I came to associate it with sheer pleasure; as I was going my industrious way to put in a day's work, this fountain stood for pleasure. And so this is a poem about that fountain and about pleasure, and about spiritual hunger as well.
 A Baroque Wall Fountain in the Villa Sciarra 
      Under the bronze crown  Too big for the head of the stone cherub whose feet    A serpent has begun to eat,  Sweet water brims a cockle and braids down      Past spattered mosses, breaks  On the tipped edge of a second shell, and fills    The massive third below. It spills  In threads then from the scalloped rim, and makes      A scrim or summery tent  For a faun-ménage and their familiar goose.    Happy in all that ragged, loose  Collapse of water, it's effortless descent      And flatteries of spray,  The stocky god upholds the shell with ease,    Watching, about his shaggy knees  The goatish innocence of his babes at play;      His fauness all the while  Leans forward, slightly, into a clambering mesh    Of water-lights, her sparkling flesh  In a saecular ecstasy, her blinded smile      Bent on the sand floor  Of the trefoil pool, where ripple-shadows come    And go in swift reticulum,  More addling to the eye than wine and more      Interminable to thought  Than pleasure's calculus. Yet since this all    Is pleasure, flash, and waterfall,  Must it not be too simple? are we not      More intricately expressed  In the plain fountains that Maderna set    Before St. Peter's-The main jet  Struggling aloft until it seems at rest      In the act of rising, until  The very wish of water is reversed,    That heaviness borne up to burst  In a clear, high, cavorting head, to fill      With blaze, and then in gauze Delays, in a gnatlike shimmering, in a fine    Illumined version of itself, decline,  And patter on the stones, it's own applause?     If that is what men are  Or should be, if those water-saints display    The pattern of our areté, What of these showered fauns in their bizarre,     Spangled, and plunging house?  They are at rest in fulness of desire   For what is given, they do not tire  Of the smart of the sun, the pleasant water-douse     And riddled pool below,  Reproving our disgust and our ennui    With humble insatiety.  Francis, perhaps, who lay in sister snow      Before the wealthy gate Freezing and praising, might have seen in this    No trifle, but a shade of bliss- That land of tolerable flowers, that state      As near and far as grass Where eyes become the sunlight, and the hand    Is worthy of water: the dreamt land  Toward which all hungers leap, all pleasures pass.
 

Well, this is a poem called The Beacon.
 Founded on rock and facing the night-fouled sea A beacon blinks at its own brilliance,  Over and over with cutlass gaze Solving the Gordian waters, Making the sea-roads out, and the lounge of the weedy  Meadows, finding the blown hair  As it always has, and the buxom, lavish  Romp of the ocean-daughters.  Then, in the flashes of darkness it is all gone,  The flung arms and the hips, meads  And meridians, all; and the dark of the eye  Dives for the black pearl  Of the sea-in-itself. Watching the blinded waves  Compounding their eclipse, we hear their  Booms, rumours and guttural sucks Warn of the pitchy whirl  At the mind's end. All of the sense of the sea  Is veiled as voices nearly heard  In morning sleep; nor shall we wake  At the sea's heart. Rail  At the deaf unbeatable sea, my soul, and weep  Your Alexandrine tears, but look:  The beacon-blaze unsheathing turns  The face of darkness pale And now with one grand chop, gives clearance to  Our human visions, which assume  The waves again, fresh and the same.  Let us suppose that we  See most of darkness by our plainest light.  It is the Nereid's kick endears  The tossing spray; a sighted ship  Assembles all the sea.
 

This poem, In Limbo, I read not long ago at a Key West celebration of Elizabeth Bishop. There were a number of us, Tony Hecht, James Merrill and others who met to honour her and perform in her honour, and were... we were each asked to pick a poem of ours that seemed to be in the key of Elizabeth, and I think probably this is. She was terribly interested in dreams, as I always have been. This poem, In Limbo, is a poem which tries to evoke that state in the... when we are in the marchland between sleep and waking, that state in which we are not sure where we are, when we are, which one of ourselves we are. You have to be a certain age, I think, to experience this kind of limbo.
 What rattles in the dark? The blinds at Brewster?  I am a boy then, sleeping by the sea,  Unless that clank and chittering proceed  From a bent fan-blade somewhere in the room,  The air conditioner of some hotel  To which I came too dead-beat to remember.  Let me, in any case, forget and sleep.  But listen: under my billet window, grinding  Through the shocked night of France, I surely hear  A convoy moving up, whose treads and wheels  Trouble the planking of a wooden bridge.  For a half-kindled mind that flares and sinks,  Damped by a slumber which may be a child's,  How to know when one is, or where? just now  The hinged roof of the Cinema Vascello  Smokily opens, beaming to the stars Crashed majors of a final panorama,  Or else that spume of music, wafted back  like a girl's scarf or laughter, reaches me  In adolescence and the Jersey night,  Where a late car, tuned into wild casinos,  Guns past the quiet house towards my desire.  Now I could dream that all my selves and ages,  Pretenders to the shadowed face I wear,  Might, in this clearing of the wits, forgetting  Deaths and successions, parley and atone.  It is my voice which prays it; mine replies  With stammered passion or the speaker's pause,  Rough banter, slogans, timid questionings-  Oh, all my broken dialects together. And that slow tongue which mumbles to invent  The language of the mended soul, is breathless,  Hearing an infant howl, demand the world.  Someone is breathing. Is it I? or is it  Darkness conspiring in the nursery corner?  Is there another lying here beside me?  Have I cherished wife of thirty years?  Far overhead a long sussurus, twisting  Clockwise or counter clockwise, plunges east,  Twin floods of air in which our flagellate cries,  Rising from love-bed, childbed, bed of death,  Swim toward recurrent day. And farther still,  Couched in the void, I hear what I have heard of,  The god who dreams us, breathing out and in.  Out of all that I fumble for the lamp-chain.  A room condenses and at once is true-  Curtains, a clock, a mirror, which will frame  This blinking mask, the light has clapped upon me.  How quickly, when we choose to live again, As Er once told, the cloudier knowledge passes!  I am a true and portion of the all Misshaped by time, incorrigible desire  And dear attachment to a sleeping hand,  Who lie here on a certain day and listen  To the first birdsong, homelessly at home.
 My friend John Cheever once wrote me a little note, which made me very proud. He said he had read this poem and it... and had turned immediately to the novel he was working on and finished it.
 

This poem, The Ride, is an effort to tell precisely what happened within a particular dream. I tell the dream, I don't explain it, but people in general seem to have an understanding of it.
 The Ride 
 The horse beneath me seemed  To know what course to steer Through the horror of snow I dreamed,  And so I had no fear, Nor was I chilled to death  By the wind's white shudders, thanks  To the veils of his patient breath And the mist of sweat from his flanks.  It seemed that all night through,  Within my hand no rein And nothing in my view  But the pillar of his mane,  I rode with magic ease At a quick unstumbling trot  Through shattering vacancies On into what was not,  Till the weave of the storm grew thin,  With a threading of cedar-smoke,  And the ice-blind pane of an inn Shimmered, and I awoke.  How shall I now get back  To the inn-yard where he stands,  Burdened with every lack,  And waken the stable-hands  To give him, before I think  That there was no horse at all Some hay, some water to drink,  A blanket and a stall?
 

A friend of mine reminded me a few years ago that many people at any rate feel that when a barred owl cries out in the woods at night, what it's saying is, 'Who cooks for you, who cooks for you all?' The 'you all', of course, is more insisted on in the south. It can also just be, 'Who cooks for you, who cooks for you?' And you have to know that to hear this poem properly. It's called A Barred Owl.
 The warping night air having brought the boom  Of an owl's voice into her darkened room,  We tell the wakened child that all she heard  Was an odd question from a forest bird, Asking of us if rightly listened to,  "Who cooks for you?" and then "Who cooks for you?"  Words, which can make our terrors bravely clear,  Can also thus domesticate a fear,  And send a small child back to sleep at night Not listening for the sound of stealthy flight Or dreaming of some small thing in a claw Borne up to some dark branch and eaten raw.
 Some teacher told me that one of her students had said, 'That's the poem that begins like a lullaby and ends like a nightmare', and I suppose it's a poem, it's a poem which teeters between kindness to children and the need that poetry has to embolden us by saying how things really are.
 
