w.d.snodgrass

American poet WD Snodgrass, entered the world of poetry with a bang winning several awards, including the Pulitzer Prize, for his first collection of poetry, Heart's Needle.  A backlash followed his controversial fifth anthology “The Fuehrer Bunker”, but in recent years these poems have been reassessed and their importance recognised.

My father was an accountant. I... I was actually born in Beaver Falls, which is about 40 miles north of Pittsburgh, is a small industrial city, you know, up... up one of the rivers that flow down to... into the Ohio and... I was born there because his father was a... was a physician in the... in the hospital but then we moved for two years to live in a... a very slummy area of Pittsburgh called Wilkinsburg and, you know, he was... he was rather hard up. He put himself through college shooting pool and... he was pretty tough and a macho kind of guy. He was also very tall and handsome… slender … and as he grows up in the world he became an accountant and then when he could he moved back to Beaver Falls, and he lived there and he would... catch a train every morning to go to Pittsburgh — to his office — and then later he had his own office there and... and came to be doing quite well. As a matter of fact, to my utter astonishment, I was later told my... by my brother that at one time he became a millionaire, and that was at a time when a millionaire was a millionaire, you know. He... he..., as I think I may have told you at some time, he had been an ice man; you know, they carry these great blocks of ice on... on their back and deliver them to people's houses and a number of times the tongs had slipped off the ice thing and caught him in the face, so he’d had... he’d had badly broken cartilage inside his nose and stuff like that, that later gave him a lot of pain.

When he went to the little super-Christian college there, that was right across the street from where... where I later grew up — Geneva College — the older boys and particularly the really tough guys — immigrants' children who came to play football — they would haze the freshmen and they had to wear a... a beanie and do things like that. He refused, he utterly refused and got beat to a pulp and went into the hospital for some time and then he went out to the Middle West and met my mother in college out there and they got married, or... or they planned to get married. I think they were apart for a year after he came back to Beaver Falls but then she did come back and they got married. Well she was always sort of looked down on because she was from the Middle West, she came from just the same kind of family he did. His becoming a... an accountant was sort of a scandal. These... these were in Scotch-Irish families and you must either become a minister or a physician. He became an accountant; this was a disgrace, but he married a girl from the Midwest. Her father was a... was a minister; his father had been a minister. But they were from the Middle West where supposedly Indians were still running around scalping people instead of... instead of running around and getting killed. And... and so she was always looked down on there, rather, and I think that affected her feelings about a lot of things. You know she had a... she had had a superb education, quite better than his. I think she took something like eight or nine years of Latin and at least six or seven years of Greek and then later she taught... she taught a school and so she'd been fairly independent; now suddenly she was in this position of being dependent on this rather upper middle class family, well established in the town there, and she always resented that; and I must say she kept resentments better than almost anyone I have ever met. I've learned a little of that from her, I'm afraid. But, once she hated somebody she hated them, you know, forever with a... with a... and... and she came finally to practically hate most of the outside world.

We moved from house to house to house and the... each house in turn got bigger and really more impressive and... but more and more, it... it became a fortress and... in which she collected all kinds of junk, all kinds of trash. You could scarcely get through the hallways, it was... and when we moved in it was... it was a simply beautiful house full of light, high ceilings; the... the moldings around the... the rooms were... were a... a cherry that... a cherry wood that was now extinct in that part of the country, and... and, it was... it was a house that had been very experimental when built; it had its own... cleaning system in the basement and there were little... knobs on... or hooks on the wall that you could attach a tube to and then clean the room that way. By now that was all lost. It... it was a brick... great brick house; it sat on a... on a high pot... a little plot of ground across from the college. Somebody said it looked like an old soldiers' home sitting in a football field. It... It was a lovely house, we... we just loved it when we first came in. It had round corners; it was made of brick but the corners were rounded and there were great, you know, there were lots and lots of windows. There were windows in these round corners, the window itself curved and they would only lift about six inches but they would swing open, and gradually she managed to get all that light out of there, to get everything turned dark. She... I mean there were... there were beautiful fireplaces which she painted a black. She painted the hallways in a sort of dark bloody, like scabby... it... it was just amazing to happen… meantime she collected all these things. If she... if she needed some dishes, a dish or something, she wouldn't go out and buy one fine dish — and they could afford it, I mean, you know, a... as time went on he was making a lot of money — she would go out and buy 10 cheap ones and then they would always break and then she would save all the parts in different parts of the house, where you could never find them again but always with the promise that she would repair them. And if you... if, you know, if you said anything to her about it she said: 'But... but we always had so little when I was young.'

Well, I was, I think, a very sissified child and very much attached to my mother — strongly attached. I mean you know, she was... she was God; my... my father wasn't even one of the saints. And actually as I... as I got older and as I think about it now, he was a very nice man, and I should have admired him but... he certainly didn't admire me, I mean, because I was this sissified little boy, and he wanted me to be the kind of macho guy he was. He... he almost became a professional baseball pitcher, or catcher, pardon me, he was quite a good catcher. The thing was he wasn't... he had been very ill as a baby and came, oh, that close to dying as a little kid. He... he had such terrible coughing fits he would hold on to the fence to keep from knocking himself flat, and I think this... this late... showed up later on in things like: A... a really good catcher gets down in a squat, you know, and catches the ball and then he has to throw it to second base without getting up, and it has to be so low — so straight — that it would take the pitcher's head off if the pitcher hasn't moved to one side or another. Well, he couldn't do that very well, he said every time you do that you take... you take a week or two off your career and so he hadn't... he hadn’t become a professional pitcher but he... but he did get into fights and... and stuff like that and — fist fights, I mean — and... and he was very... he was very strong; he was very powerful — well-built but slight — and handsome. She on the other hand became sort of uglier and uglier and more sealed up in the house and... and more seal... trying to seal up all the wickedness that she saw around her in the world outside. And, I think I came to be very much under the... under the domination of that. I remember that as a child I walked around praying all the time. I mean... before I would throw a snowball, I would make a prayer that it would hit the guy — honest — you know, before I... before I did anything, you know. I was... I was a terrible believer.

My mother was the strong one; you attach yourself to whoever has strength and it was clear that she ran the family. I mean that she could... she could buy all these things like this, she could produce these terrible meals, she... she could... well; the whole place was just filled with junk. I mean there were stoves and things that didn't work... a mangle, you know, to iron with, sitting there in the kitchen, all these things were sitting there. There were pots and pans hanging on the walls, which were covered with fuzz... and dust; this is a steel mill city, but they had... they were all wearing sweaters! It was just crazy. And you know, she... she would have a fire on the stove every day. Well, every other day. Be... so she had great bins of salt sitting there, and she would throw heap... saying, 'You know it's perfectly all right, don't worry about it', and... and throw salt onto the fire to put it out, and you know, it was... it was just weird. And... but...even if they went out say, they would go out to... for a drive someplace, and they would pass one of these places that had yard art — funny now, with... with Kat my wife, and me, we... we go by one of these places, we say, 'Yard art, yard art!', like: alarm, alarm! — she... she and she would go in and want to buy a bunch of these things and then... and then she would usually say, 'Oh no, I don't need that', and he would say, 'Go ahead Helen, you know we can afford that' and he would encourage her. Maybe that was his way of trying to... to win her back, but it... it's clear that she was the power, she had...she had the rule there.
I remember when we were little kids, we — you know, we were very religious — we had to... before we said... went to... to bed, we had to kneel down at our parents' knees and... and give a... a night prayer. One night my father — my mother was away — and so my father said: 'You can come and say your prayers to me'. Well of course, if... if you even put it in that terms that means that the parent is in the position of the divinity: you can say your prayers to me. I said, 'No, I want to wait till mother comes home' and he says, 'No, you have to do this now, you have to go to bed'. And I refused. And without realizing it I clenched my fists, and he says, 'You want to fight me, come on'. I almost fainted with terror. I mean, he was so much stronger than I, and... and I knew by... well he used to claim that when he and I would have boxing lessons — he was trying to teach me to be more like him — he'd say... he'd say: 'If... If you hit Claire English, your... the kid you're having a fight with at school, if you hit him half as hard as you hit me, you'd win every fight'; but somehow the thought that... that he... that maybe he was actually going to hit me just... just put me in an utter panic. I don't know what the hell I did.

Well, we went to what was called a United Presbyterian Church. These were... these people... these people had all come from Scotland and the rich people were Presbyterians, or... or upper middle class. Sort of middle, middle class people were like us, we were United Presbyterians. The poorer people were Reformed Presbyterians, and they were very strict and they ran the college, for instance. You could not... you could not have dances on the campus or even at buildings down in the town. You... you couldn't smoke; the result was — especially after World War II — all... all the students would run out in front of the college and smoke... smoke like fury and... and then, you know, throw down the... when... so when you... you went to go in the main campus of this college you had to sort of wade through piles of cigarette butts. It was a... a very... at the same time they seemed to be much freer about sex than... than others... other Presbyterian sects; I don't mean that pun either. They... in the chapel meeting — we had to have chapel every... every day and sometimes we would have little chapel skits and things like that and since I'd sort of become the class clown in high school, I... I tended... tended to do things like that again there — but in the chapel skits they would always talk about guys taking girls out to the big rock which was a... was a wooded area that overlooked the river and they seemed to be almost encouraging you to get sexually involved and... but... but you know, smoking was... was very bad. There's a joke now about... about the Scots about why... why they hate... why they hate sex: it could lead to dancing. And they seemed to be sort of that way.

I don't know, I was almost always part of... part of one gang or another and they were usually... they weren't the tough gangs, you know. The... the immigrant children would have very, really quite... quite tough gangs and some of these guys really were very tough. But I was never the leader of any of... of this thing, and we moved frequently as I said, you know, as... as we sort of went up the scale and each time you moved, then you had to fight the... the gang there. You had to have a fight — fist fight — with somebody and I was always terrified of this; I... I'd become so... so christianized and... and, you know, my mother's manners and so forth, that... that I... I would go to great lengths to avoid a fight. But finally I would have to... have to fight some guy and I usually did pretty well, now that I — to my utter amazement — but it never made it any easier I must say. It's very hard... it was always very hard for me to hit anybody hard enough to... to have any effect, I mean, I... I simply have restraints against that. I have... I have been in situations and — later — where something like that would come up and my... I would see my fists going all around somebody's face, but I couldn't hit them. You know, I... I just have a... a resistance against that kind of violence. I... I don't do it well so I decided to quit doing it.

I was the oldest, my... my sister Barbara was two years younger and her birth must have really upset me very deeply. Now I don't remember any of this but they tell me about my... when my mother brought the baby back and was lying in bed with it and I was coming upstairs, calling, 'Mama, Mama, Mama, Mama', and I know that — as a result of psychoanalysis that I did later on — that a number of times I did things that... that could very much have injured her. That, for instance, at one point I got her to look out a window on the second or third floor and told her that I was looking out the window down below and she should lean out far enough to see me and I was coaxing her to lean out farther and farther, thank God some... somebody interrupted that.
You know, Freud tells about himself, when his younger sibling was born, he went on a... on a binge of throwing things out the window, he threw silverware and chinaware and all kinds of stuff, he just wanted to... and as a matter of fact I’ve seen that with my own children that... they get very shaky if they're carrying the baby or something so we take them someplace and have them throw a bunch of things off a cliff and then... then they get easier with themselves. Now, Barbara came to be a very shy... she had... she had one date in her life and it was with somebody that... the family would have disapproved if... if she could have had a date with anybody else, because he was Jewish. Otherwise she had a few girlfriends but mostly... she... she just stayed home which in a way is what my mother wanted us all to do, we were to stay home and follow her direction, follow her morality, do what she believed we ought to do and the outside world, more and more, came to seem wicked to her.

Barbara died when she was 25 I think, and I... one morning she simply... she... well, she died on the 4th of July — I... I've written poems about this — and I think she just simply declared her independence. She... she went... finally went to work for my father in one of his offices. He, by now, had a number of accounting offices, he had taken his brother in to work with him and they had three or four offices, the big one in Pittsburgh, other ones in small mill towns like Aliquippa and Ambridge and places like that. She worked in one of those and it was simply clear that she would never have any life outside of their definitions and things. And as a matter of fact at... at... you know, as I got more and more different and got more and more interested in the arts — and I was perhaps doing this just to sort of bug my father for all I... I'm sure he didn't... didn’t have inclinations that way — but, you know, I came back there from school at one point and suddenly she was raging at me, I'd never seen her... said, 'If you don't believe the kind of things we believe around here why don't you just get out, why don't you just get out of here and don't come back'. I... I couldn't believe this... this was my shy little sister, but finally I think she came to think the same thing about herself and... and since she didn't... probably didn't really entirely believe all... everything that mother believed; it was better to get out. She'd had asthma and, you know, but... and it... it got worse and worse, they had to... she had gone away to college, then when she came... when she graduated from college... no, no, she didn't. She had a bad asthma attack there at school and they brought her back and at this time I was away at school in Iowa and my... my then wife and I said that... said: 'Well that's the end of her'. We didn't know how right that was. It was the end of her and... and she got worse and worse. She... the only thing that ever gave her any relief was something called Green Mountain Asthma Mixture and she smoked it in a pipe and she would smoke this stuff and it would... it would relieve the congestion and... and the tension in her... in her throat and so forth, but one morning — I wasn't there — my brother —now, I had originally had the third floor of this house which was gigantic, it was like a railway terminal. They later, put up a wall and made it into two rooms and she had one room, my youngest brother Dick had the other room — he heard her get out of bed and then fall, and he ran over there to the... to her room and she was already dying.
The family doctor — who was an old friend — refused to make any statement about the real cause of death, he said it was just... seemed to be general complications and... well, you know we... efforts had been made to get her out of the house. The... the doctor himself had said 'Why didn't they send her to... oh Montana or someplace where the air was lighter and dryer'. Well, my mother would say 'Oh... Oh she couldn't do that, I... I have to cook for her and... and who's going to cook... cook for... for De and for... the older De' —my father — and I think we'd have been relieved to... she was such a bad cook, I mean it was incredible. Well and he said, 'Well, at least you could get rid...- the house is full'. I mean, there... there were pets. My... finally my mother had sort of made substitutes for us, in... instead of two boys and two girls she had two dogs and two cats, on top of that there... there was wool everywhere, there was... there was all this stuff that would give you asthmatic problems; why not get rid of some of these rugs and stuff: 'Oh we couldn't afford that, we couldn't possibly afford to do that, that would all cost too much', my mother said; and, finally one morning she just got up and died of it all. My father never really recovered from that, he... he had been very close to her and liked her.

My third sister was Shirley and she was much younger. She was very cute; she was a little blonde... Barbara had been a brunette and slim, she was... she was a plump little thing, Shirley was, and... I think she felt like a leftover, and there was really no place for her in the family much and I... I suspect my mother didn't want another girl but you know they just sort of went through the motions of... of raising another child and... until, after Barbara died, she was promoted to Barbara's position and... was furious, she just... she just raged. I... I don't remember her ever saying what she was raging about — of course you wouldn't dare — I mean the house... the house was, it was... everything was a lie, you had to tell your mother how wonderful her cooking was all the time — it was... it was a disgrace — we ate worse than people on welfare in the town. My...you know every couple... a couple of times a week my mother would go to the store and she'd bring back these enormous baskets — sacks — brown paper sacks of food for... 10 times the amount of food we needed and she would take it all to the kitchen and sort of dump it on the floor or on tables on... every... everywhere all around and just leave it there and after three or four days had passed she'd come back and now she would have  figure out how much had.. had rotted and... and she'd tear all that off and throw it away, this is... and... and then put that in the refrigerator and that's what we would get to eat. But we had to tell her always how delicious it was, how excellent it was and I... we didn't know any better, I mean, we didn't... we didn't, you know, you don't dare trust your own senses, you trust what you've been told and we were told she was a wonderful cook who loved to cook for us and loved to care for us and loved to do all these things which she didn't love to do and... you know. It's like when the waitress brings you a cup of soup with her thumb in it, you know that she doesn't like being a waitress, anyway... whoa, how did I get on to this corner?

The... the fourth member was... was my brother Dick and he was much, much younger. I... I can't say how many years apart, things were... I'm very bad at dates and at time passage, but he... he came as a great surprise to everyone, I’m… and I'm sure he came as a great surprise to them. I... I imagine they thought they were no longer capable of getting pregnant, but I... I wouldn't have thought they were capable of having sex. The... by now the... the cold between them had... had become so severe, so terrible. I mean, I... I remember sometimes as my mother would walk past my father would reach out and pat her on the bottom and she would bristle, and... and it... it was fierce. She... she had the fan... she had the belief — I would say a fantasy  — that while she was delivering me, he was playing around with her younger sister who had been sort of a glamour girl, whereas she was the ugly duckling of her own family, and always believed this and... and never forgave him.
Then later on he did come to have... be having affairs and I must say when I learned of this, I was kind of relieved because I thought,  ‘Jesus nobody ought to have to live on the slim rations of affection that he gets’. I didn't want to know... one day he took me with him to Pittsburgh and we had lunch with somebody who I then realized was... he was having an affair with, and apparently had been for some time, it was a woman he'd known in school. He came later to have... have a long, long affair with his head secretary. But you know when I thought about this I thought, ‘Yea, thank God he should… he, you know, I should have recognized this before’. Sometimes I've tried to call him in the evening at the office, he was often gone to the office and I began to see why now, but... I... and he... I would get no answer at the office, that should have told me but it didn't. Now I met this woman, I thought okay I'm… I’m glad to see that, but I don't want to have to be part of the lies about it ‘cause when we get back home I'm going to have to say something about where we were and who we were with and I don't... I don’t want to be a part of that, I don't want to... you know, too many lies already.
So, anyway, when Dick came along he seemed to be more welcome than Shirley… I… he came in time to be the... almost the only member of the family that I really liked, and... and I paid for that. But... I don't know much what else to say about him, our lives were so far apart and by the time he was growing up, most of the time I was either away in the Navy or away at school — at college — so I... I didn't see too much of that. I know I made one blunder at one point: I knew that if... if I had...if he was in the baby buggy, and I was rolling him back and forth and he was crying and fussing and carrying on a little bit, if I tipped him a little bit... he would stop crying and laugh, he would find that funny and so even though my mother had told me not to do that I... I would do that, and one day he slipped and slid out of there onto the floor. And I thought: Jesus I... I may have damaged him, he could have hit his head and, you know, I... you know, I don't know that the fontanel was still… was closed at that point completely and I… I get to wondering, was I trying to get rid of him, like apparently, in some ways, I was trying to get rid of my sister at one point. I remember one of the games that I… we played with her, I… I mentioned trying… trying to lure her to look too far out the window. We had a pair of old World War I bayonets in the house, they were… you know they were about so long and they fastened on the end of a rifle and they were triangular, and I somehow had talked her into holding pictures like this and then I would stab them, and of course, I could have… I could very well have… Okay! That's… that’s about as much as I know about my siblings.

I went to school in the regular schools in Beaver Falls, public… public school system, and you know, there are a lot of things probably wrong with that but… but I'm sort of glad we did. You know I… you know a lot of my friends that went to private schools and something… and… and they probably got better teaching but, you know, being around so many kids that came from immigrant families and so forth, there was a… you know, there were a lot... I mean, the tough guys were Italians but there… then there were the Hungarians and the Romanians and Yugoslavs of one kind and another and all of that and, you know, there was… you were learning something there. I mean, I… I didn't appreciate any of this until much, much later when I got to go to those countries and see that, you know, to… to us these people were uncultured, not fit to do anything but work in the steel mills and suddenly get… getting to their country and finding out that they had cultures that were 10 times older than ours and richer and… although maybe they hadn't partaken of much of that but it was there, and it was in… you know, it was in the back of their heads too in part.
And there were gangs and as I said, you know, you had to… to fight to get into each of the gang which... which was kind of ridiculous and… and I was never any good at. I was… I was a good student. I was usually the A student in the… in the class. There was, if I was challenged, it would usually be by a girl, and… but mostly I… you know, I… I was also the teacher's pet usually, and… and I got very good grades and I… I learned. I also had… it's also true that the teachers of that time were very dedicated, some of them, and… and I had a few very good teachers. There was a wonderful drama teacher that we... that we had there, there were several fine English teachers, there was a very tough Latin teacher, we were all scared to death of her, but we learned some Latin. I had a… a real bully of a shop teacher, who… a guy who… and this was… this was very humiliating to me. He… he would…before… before class each day he would have us get… sit up on the woodworking benches and talk to us and he… he would… he would describe me to the class as a pantywaist and… and make all kinds of remarks about me and how I wasn't male enough and… and so forth, well he never used that term but this is what. And I remember one year… one year when I had to go back to school, I remember… simply getting into an absolute panic and bawling all night and thought… I thought I can't… I just can't go back and face that anymore. I'm not sure but what my father went in and talked to him. I rather suspect he may have.

When… when I graduated, I went to this little college for a year or so and that's where I met my first wife and started a… an affair with her and — a relationship — we were both virgins and… then I got... I got drafted, I went in to the Navy and I was out for about two years then— a year and a half on Saipan. When I came back I… I went back and took a class or two there, but I had these… I had realized by now that I could not make it as a musician, that I was not good enough. Up to then I had… oh I got to go back a little bit. Music was of great importance in my education and I got into it in the weirdest way that you possibly could. We… my mother and I and I think my sister went to a concert somewhere that was held at the high school and I was fascinated by the violins because I thought that the… the bow hairs were underneath the strings and I thought: How the hell do they ever get those underneath the strings and how do they get them back out so I asked my mother about this. Well my mother had always had a fantasy of playing the violin, she had always wanted to but she… out in the Midwest in Kansas or Nebraska or wherever they were growing up, they couldn't afford that, they couldn't afford a violin, they couldn't afford lessons. So, I think she encouraged me and I got a violin and started taking lessons. I was terrible and there is nothing in the world worse than a beginning violinist; I mean the sound is just absolutely excruciating. I think I took lessons for about 10 years. I never got out… I never got out of the first position, you know a… as you come up the neck, you go position by position to… to reach higher pitches, I never got out of the first position; how… how any of the neighbors stood it I don't… I just don't know. Then for a while I took some piano lessons and I was equally bad at that.

Later in high school I… I think I fell in love with a guy. There was nothing sexual about this, but this was the guy who played timpani in the band and orchestra. He was known as Flash Hamilton. His name was Leo and he… he was very tall and slender, rather like my father; he… his mother —and this was very unusual then — was divorced, and she ran a country club out a way from… from town someplace. So, he had a little Model A Ford that he drove. No… no one else in school had a… high school kids did not have cars then. He had a car. And he came in, and he played the… he played the timpani and… and was very good at it, and of course… to me at least it was an immediately attractive instrument. He also was student conductor and… and all the musicians admired him and… and really liked him. There… there was nothing sexual about this I must say, he was going with twin girls: one was beautiful and the other slept with him. But… but every… but a lot of us really admired him, really… really thought: Jesus, Flash, he’s… he's it! And so I started taking timpani lessons and I knew that he was a year or two ahead of me and pretty soon he'd graduate and I could move into that role and so that's what I had done and I took… I took some conducting lessons and I… when I got to college — after the Navy — I also did some choral conducting and the chances are, when I… okay, I knew that I couldn't be a timpanist, there were only about ten symphonies in the country at that time and all of them had a fairly young man as a timpanist except the Philadelphia orchestra that had an old, old man named Oscar Schwar and he had a pupil so… you know, there was just no hope there, you couldn't do it.
Now if… if you had the orchestras you've got today, I mean there's room for timpanists everywhere, but these guys are so good, they are so much better than I would have ever have got to be and, you know, they… they are marvelous, they are really… well, you know, the level of musicianship in… in this country now is… is incredible. So I knew I had to get out of... out of that when I… I had to get out of music. I had been too dilatory, if I had gone to work very hard when I was maybe 15 I maybe could have caught up; you know usually you should start when you're six or eight, but I hadn't. I… I had had… I had a schoolteacher once and I… I had asked him — a college teacher — and I asked him, 'What should I do with my life?' And he had said, and I was… I felt fairly insulted, and he knew I would; that he says: 'You don't seem to me to have an attachment to any one thing, you seem sort of a dilettante; you go toward the thing that you're in love with right then'. He was exactly right I must say, although it needn't… it needn’t have quite the insulting edge to it that I took.

I knew that I… I loved the theatre and I had been in plays from time to time and… and also had helped rewrite a… a musical at one point and… so I thought, okay, I… I will… I'd like to write plays. So, this is the time when the University of Iowa was just becoming the place where writers went and I had seen a big coverage of this and of Paul Engle — the man who ran it — in Life magazine I think. I had wanted… I thought that's what I'll do, I'll go there and I'll study playwriting. You couldn't get in; everybody was trying to get in. Fortunately or unfortunately — no fortunately, very fortunately — my mother was friends with a lady on the board of… of directors; they had grown up together and she… and, again, my interest in the arts may have reflected a kind of warfare between my mother and father. She could get me in, and did. Well I went… so I was registered mainly for the theatre. I… I wasn't acting though; I… I was just studying playwriting and I had an absolutely dreadful teacher. She had been… she had kept Tennessee Williams alive while he was there, we thought there was a love affair between them, we didn't know he was gay.

She asked us each to make up a scenario for a play, I was interested then… I had been reading Trevor-Roper about… you know, it was after the war, and his book about the death of the Nazis; I was really interested in this and I thought I'd like to dramatize some of this. I wrote… wrote out a thing about this. When she brought back everybody's scenarios that day, she picked up mine, held her nose and carried it through the room and handed it to me. She was known to the whole campus as the bitch and in those days you didn't use that word unless you were ready for a fist fight. I mean it was like… you know, the things that 15 year old society girls say these days, in those days would… would get you broken teeth. But, then… so then she said, 'Let’s… let’s all go together, all… all of us together, we will write a scenario'. And says, 'Now the situate… the basic situation will be this'; and she would ask questions from… from the other students and they were… they were all drama students and… but then finally she would, well that isn't quite, what about this, finally they decided they want a little orphan girl. Honest! She's living in an orphanage and she has dreams of becoming a concert pianist; however, the real hero isn't the little girl, it's her teacher, her older teacher who knows that the little girl doesn't have talent enough for this. So she wants her to learn a related skill: typing! But if the girl is going to learn typing she… she is going to be… have to kept in the orphanage for a year… year or two extra from the age when they're usually booted out. So she… her task is to try to get them to extend the little girl's time in the college… well she's a teenager by now, of course; the… and I… I don't remember how it ended up but it is just so silly, it is so bad, well anyway, when this was all made up and it… it was all written down she said, 'Now let's go around the class and see what you think of this' and she went around to each of the class and they would say, 'Oh yes, I think that's a really gripping story and I think it… it… I think it could probably… it might go to New York and it would… it would certainly after that, then it… then it would go to small theatres around the country and… and it might have several… several good years of that and… and probably become a… a kind of standard…' one person after another said this. They came to me and I said, ‘I think that's the worse trash I ever heard’. I… you know, I said… I had already mentioned Medea, Macbeth, all these horrendous people, she says, 'No the essence of it is it has to be somebody likable, why else would the audience watch. The central figure has to be lovable, likable', she says ‘these aren't likeable people’. I… I said but… you know, I said, 'What about Medea, what about Macbeth what…' she said, 'You have to learn the rules before you can break them'. Well anyway, so I… I got out of the theatre, I… I knew there was nothing there for me.

And I wandered around and finally wandered into the poetry workshops and just fell in love with the… with the situation, with the teachers; I mean these were people who really knew about poetry, they loved it, they really studied it, they really… and… and really worked hard on trying to help people and I took to sitting in with the poetry workshop. I wasn't signed up for it, I… I wasn't good enough yet to be in… in the class; and after about two years I began to think: I believe I can do some of this. Now later on I had to rebel against them. They… they were… they came from the school known as the New Critics and… and they… they were too doctrinaire about it, but at the same time the New… what the New Critics did was they taught Americans how to read, how to read and really understand something. I hadn't known it was possible. I'd gone through Gen… the Geneva College, I got an A in every single course; I hadn't understood a damn word. I mean… when we read poems I didn't know it was possible to understand anything about it, all of a sudden these people were teaching me something and… and I… I developed several very close friends there, then to my great — to my great and utter — well, my… the first things that began to get any good that I was writing… I was imitating a British poet named William Empson who was a very great critic and also wrote some really terrific poems, he was a very strange man, but these were quite good poems. I don't… I don’t think anyone thinks of him as a major poet now but he… but he’s… he’s a major… he’s certainly is a major critic and then probably thought of as a minor poet now. Then… and that… that… his… his work was almost totally intellectual, he… he had a tremendous brain and the stuff was just, you know, enormously intellectualized. I... I could sort of, kind of manage that, I… I was kind of intellectual.
The next thing that hit me was that they announced… now Lowell  —the teacher was away often and other poet… he'd bring other poets in to teach — the next one he brought in was Robert Lowell and I simply couldn't believe that Lowell was going to come there to teach; I mean, he was my… absolutely my idol and his writing was absolutely the total opposite of… of Empson's. Empson, you know, dry, intellectual, thought out; whereas Lowell's stuff was just explode… exploding rhetoric, exploding images and all of this coming in the wake of TS Eliot and Ezra Pound and those people who had… who had started this whole modernist movement. And, so pretty soon I was writing just like Lowell. And, as a matter of fact, one summer a very fortunate thing happened, a lady who came to give a reading gave her fee back and I got a part of that and took it to go to Colorado to a writers conference where Randall Jarrell was. And Randall Jarrell was… was Lowell's best friend but a very, very different writer from him, and he was… he… I… I, okay. Jarrell is our best poet of World War II. His… his war poems are absolutely marvelous, there's… there’s at least two of them I can't read out loud because I break up — break up completely — just go to pieces. I showed him these poems and… and other critics had come… come to Iowa and look… and each of them had liked at least one poem but it was always a different poem which had… had me suspecting there must be something slightly wrong here if, you know, if… if this poem hooks up with this guy's intellect and this one hooks up with this guy's and the… I'm going to have to write a hell of a lot of different poems to get any kind of width of audience.

Well, the… the big New Critics weren't there but… they were often the disciples of those people. The… the big names were, you know, TS Eliot and E… Ezra Pound and they had… had started this whole modernist movement. In… in the wake of this a bunch… a bunch of southern people known as the fugitives… of whom probably the most important figure was John Crowe Ransom, a wonderful, lovely man and a very good, terrific poet and terrific critic also. But then others — there were other southerners — Cleanth Brooks and then Brooks and… and Robert Penn Warren wrote a book — series of books together — Understanding Poetry, Understanding Fiction, Understanding… two or three other things, I forget what… but, and these books were of great importance I think, they certainly were to me.
And now the thing is, what happened in a way is that with… with Paul Engle who was the head at the school, is that he had started out writing sort of wild… hyper-poetical stuff, and he was predicted to be the... the new great American poet. Well the New Critics really beat the bejesus out of him and for good reason; they were totally dishonest poems and he… he was, in many ways very, very dishonest. It made him a bad poet but a really great administrator. I mean… I mean, dishonesty was just… if there was a simple easy way to do it — straight forward — you ask the dean for this office, and a careful under-way to do it by maybe wrecking a couple pieces of furniture and… and knowing someone who can… you know, and… and you work out a deal this way, he would always go for it and he did the same thing in his poems. So he… he got beat up by these guys, the New… the New Critics, the result was he converted to New Criticism and like most converts he outdid the… the originals, you know, people who have become Catholics are so Catholic, I mean… the Pope isn't good enough for them… and as opposed to, you know, people who are in it from birth and so forth. So… so, anyway, but he did some… he did some wonderful teaching when he was there, he wasn't there all… all the time. Much of the time he was away recruiting young poets and he was absolutely brilliant at that. He brought in the most marvelous young poets and so it meant you were surrounded by this richness all the time; it… that was wonderful. When Lowell came, I… as I said, you know, I just couldn't believe my luck. And in no time at all I was writing just like Lowell.

Well, when I went to Randall Jarrell who was… he was our… our great war poet and I wanted… gee, the chance to study with Randall Jarrell, what will he be like, what kind of tough guy will he be like? He was like a little girl, he would say, 'Gee, don't you just love Colorado, don't you think Colorado's dovey? I think it's dovey, how about you?' And he would go on and on like this all the time and I think: This is the guy who wrote those poems that killed me about World War II? The only guy I've known whose mind is tough enough to really look at that thing and see how awful it was? And put it on paper? Well, he was. And he was also a… he… he was a very cruel critic — at least to me he was — and I've seen this in other… in other art forms sometimes, if… if a… a higher artist thinks you have some talent, he will beat the bejesus out of you, maybe out of jealousy but maybe also out of trying to toughen you up or something. He… he would… he picked up my poems and said, 'Snodgrass, do you know you're writing the very best second-rate Lowell in the whole country?' And he said this: 'The only trouble is that there's one other person who's writing first-rate Lowell'.
He would… we… we would go to sit and look at my poems and he would… there were student, it… it was in a student union and it was out on a sort of open porch and there were tables all around and students at all the other things. And he would pick up my poem and he would read a line and say, ‘Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, Snodgrass! You wrote this?! You wrote… listen to that I'm going to read it again! Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah’ you know… and everybody at the tables around us  hearing this… you… if he hadn't been so… he… he… he's so brilliant and he's so funny, that if he hadn't kept me weak with laughing I'm sure I would have hit him. I mean, Jesus. But, the horrible thing is he was right, he…  he jarred all that stuff out of me and I didn't come to… now I didn't come to be writing like him — I don't think I ever did — but the earlier ones I… I wrote like… either like Empson or like Lowell. Jarrell said, ‘Young poets are like little dogs, they… they’d  have a mistress who sings and when she practices they just can't help sitting under the piano and howling’. God he was funny, but, you know, we became, in a way, friends, but… but you know, I… I could never be entirely friendly to him. But he was… Jesus he was so extreme and it… it was a way of keeping everybody at a distance.

I remember he came once to Detroit to give a reading and… and it was a wonderful reading. He… he read his translation of Faust — partly — and he was the best Gretchen that ever lived. I mean, no… no woman ever read the part of Gretchen as… as wonderfully and femininely as… as he did. Then, I remember the… the Art Institute is right across the street from the… from the university there and they went over there… over next door, he was with his wife — oh and I was responsible for their getting together at that earlier thing in Colorado — and now he brought her there and they went up and they were on the… the second floor of the Art Institute. She's down on one end looking at some paintings down there; he's goes down and there's a… there’s a cat down there painted by Kokoschka and… and it's like a… it's like… what was the term you used, feral, it… but it's like it's gone feral in… in the slums, and it… it is in a slum scene, it's up on a fire escape and… and there's blanked out windows everywhere and… and junk lying around and here's this fierce looking cat, hairs going out in every direction. Jarrell yells, the length of the Art Institute: 'Kitty Cat, come see the pussy'. You know, strong guards fainted. God he was so… he was so funny. And, the awful thing was that in a way he had moved out of the centers of power. Lowell was in New York and of course he was a Lowell so… so there was a lot of money behind him and a lot of family prestige and all of that. Jarrell did not, he came from what must have been a fairly poor family and so he was a kind of super snob and… but he was teaching at the Women's College of North Carolina; well that's… you know that's sort of sort of boondocks-ish; and so he… but… but he was writing criticism and he is the best… he was the best critic we ever had, and some of it very savage, but… he said to me, and I think it's probably true, he never beat up on people who didn't have much reputation or anything, but it was only people who had had a lot more reputation than they deserved and he made himself… that's why his poems aren't known much anymore. He got thrown out of the anthologies for this because he… he didn't hesitate to attack the people who were making the anthologies, Oscar Williams in particular. He said about Oscar Williams' anthology: 'You know, you have to have great self confidence to believe that your own work… that your own work is seven times better than Thomas Hardy, five times better than Hart Crane', and he went down the list like that. And, Williams had done that, seven times more of his own work than of Thomas Hardy — yea — how… something like five times better than Frost, you know. By return mail there was a copy of… of that anthology in his post... post box — in Jarrell's post box — with a marker to the place where his poems used to be and that's… that’s largely the reason that his poems are forgotten now.

First I had this criticism from Jarrell; at the same time my life was falling apart, you know, my wife — my first wife — and I were the worst things that could ever have happened to each other, and we had a baby, which just quadrupled the awfulness of this. I… I started going to a… I… I had been frozen for two years, I couldn't do… I couldn't write at all — pardon me — I had a writer's block. And, so I went… I went to psycho and… and… as an outpatient, and I was part of an experimental program there where the doctor was not in the room with you, he was actually behind a one-way mirror but I didn't know that and you didn't know that at first, this was an experiment they were trying. And to my surprise, I mean I expected the doctor was going to say: 'For heaven sakes get… get out of writing poetry; I mean make a decent living.' I mean I thought they would say the kind of thing that… that my father was still saying to me, although he paid the bills, and a lot of them.  A lot of them were also paid by my wife and… and like a lot of people, a lot of the veterans, I was being supported by my wife. But she was getting pretty weary of that and I wasn't showing much signs of ever going to earn a living and… and we got farther and farther apart from each other and, you know finally I took to sleeping on… on a couch, not always sure that I would wake up the next morning. I mean the… the hatred had grown very, very strong and… and although… I mean a great part of the trouble between us is that we were both very passive. I was afraid she might get very active and… and I'd become not merely passive but… but yea, level.
Anyway I… I started going to the doctor and we… we had sessions and I… I would talk and talk and talk and talk and finally I realized what was happening here was that one of us sounded like a psychiatry text book and it wasn't him; that until, you know, until you got it in your own language it didn't count. As long as you… you're saying you've got a problem but you're using language that claims you can handle it, that claims you know what to do about it, you know, and so you know, you can perfectly well go in there and say, 'Oh doctor I have a castration anxiety', until, you know, you've said, 'They're gonna take it!', you know, it doesn't count. And so I decided, you know, I decided okay, that's… that’s what's wrong with the poems. I'm… I’m always, you know, it's over- intellectualized, it's over… I'm… I'm too much acting in command of it, I have to know what it means when I start out and Frost had said, you know, it's… it’s only a fake poem if you… if the idea's been thought of first and then is saved for the last line. And of course, that's what we were all doing, and especially I was doing.

There were two other things that affected how I wrote while I was there and they were both music. Won… there's a wonderful Swiss tenor who… who is just coming in… into… into the scene then and they played a record of his one day, his name's Hugues Cuenod, I can't pronounce it pro, his name — H-U-G-U-E-S — but it's pronounced like Ugh, some of the troubadours for instance spelt their name — U-C— well that's the way his name is pronounced. He's a Swiss tenor and it's very different from any of the singing I had ever heard, it's right through the nose and pang, pong, pang, note after note after note, exact. And it's rather dry; it doesn't have all that vibrato that… that I hated in… in operatic singing of the 1920s and ‘30s, all that overdriven quality. You know, it sounds like you're trying to start a truck on a cold morning. Jesus Christ what is this? No, it… he was a… and… and he was becoming an enormous big star then. For example, when Stravinsky first heard him sing, he wrote a part for him into The Rake's Progress. And he was travelling around the country with Nadia Boulanger and all the… all the composers of that period studied with Nadia Boulanger, all the, you know, big musicians of almost any sort. I mean you had to have studied with her or… or you just, you… you weren't there. He had a record of Spanish and Italian songs of the 16th and 17th century that came on the radio one day — the university's radio station played a lot of classical music — and they played this one day and my hair just leapt… leap up off my head; I thought: you know the poems I'm writing have got everything they need, except that kind of passion and that kind of clarity and you gotta go for that.

The other… the other thing is that… the breaking up of that marriage — which did then break up completely — took my daughter, and that really ripped me. You know, our teachers had been telling us that we had to write about the things that TS Eliot was supposed to be writing about; they weren't really what he was writing about, he was writing about his own fear of sex and his own hatred of it and so forth; but they… they all believed the critics who said,  'Oh he's writing about the loss of myth in our time, how we must all have a myth', you know, 'Go back to God'. I'd been trying so hard to get rid of that stuff, I mean ever since I was in the war, you know. That… that changed my… my beliefs totally right then. It wiped them out. I thought, you know, every… there's 5000 sailors on this ship alone and how many ships are in this convoy? One… one Japanese torpedo sends 5000 of us in the water at once, and we're all clamoring all over each other and drowning each other, and I'm supposed to pray? Didn't everybody prayed, whoever went… whoever went down with a ship, and how the hell many ships are there in the bottom of that ocean? So, you know, the whole thing just died right then; this is nonsense and I don't want any of it. But my teachers were telling me I must… get myths back into my life; I said, 'Jesus Christ I grew up with lies, I don't need any more', and, so I… I started… the break-up of that marriage was… that you know…I talked about this with my doctor that, you know; I don't give a damn about those ideas, why am I trying to write about them? Now, that of course, is the reason I'd been for two years unable to write.
What do I care about? Losing my daughter. And I think I was much closer to her then probably than my wife was. But she had recognized, as most wives do in that situation, that suddenly that child was valuable to her as a weapon, that she could keep me from seeing that child. So I started writing poems about that. Oh, but there’s a… there was another piece of music behind that and that's Mahler's Kindertotenlieder, — Songs for the Death of Children — and I thought: Jesus, after all, things like this, the people that you love, the death of somebody dear to you, this is what poets have always written about. It's only after TS Eliot misled everybody and so did Robert Frost about what he's writing about, that people thought you ought to write about something else. You ought to write about what you really do care about, so I started writing the poems about my daughter and those were the ones that first got me any kind of notice. Much of it disapproval, as a matter of fact I went to Lowell with these and showed them to him and he said,  ‘Snodgrass…’ —I had become a kind of favorite pupil of his and I…I quite adored him, I… I thought he was a wonderful man, well he was. He had some terrible aspects but… but he also… he also… he's the biggest brain I've ever been around — He looked at it, he said, 'Snodgrass, you can't write this kind of tear-jerking stuff; you've got a brain'. I thought: He's probably right, at least about that… that I shouldn't do this, but it… it's sort of what I have to do right now, and so I went ahead and did it.
And, you know, about two years later he changed his mind and wrote me a letter saying, ‘I'm… I’m taking you as my model’. And that scared me so bad, I mean, this, you know, to have somebody that you’ve adored as I had, almost worshipped him, say that… oh Jesus, it really… it really kind of flipped me. Anyway, those poems at first didn't… didn’t get any notice. Finally Donald Hall and Louis Simpson and Bob Pack brought out an anthology where they put some… some of that cycle, and that, that's where I began getting some notice and got the first prize that I… the first big prize that I got.

Okay, I… I got drafted, when… I was put in the Navy, I… I wasn't 4F but there's a sort of… some kind of limit that’s put on you if… if you wear… wear glasses if you… yeah. That meant that probably I would not be in direct combat. The Navy… well, the Navy at least had, you know, they are awful stupid, but at least they had sense enough to know that I… that I wasn't a frontline warrior, and they said…  I… they sent me to yeoman school.
A yeoman is a… is a kind of clerical worker. You know, I… I don't fight with a rifle, I fight with a typewriter. They sent me first to yeoman school at Bainbridge, Maryland, and then when I came from there I was sent… shipped out to the west coast — oh goodness, I can't think of the name of the camp — but it was a place where you… where you were trained for overseas duty. It was a former racetrack as a matter of fact, and we lived in what had been the stables. At first when they… when they took… took this over for the war, they gave it to the Army. Well, the Army wouldn't have it, there… there was too much… there was too much manure around, so the Navy gave it... or the Army gave it up and the Navy took it over; and we were being readied for… to go over to the… to the Asiatic front.
I must say something happened to me that…that was of tremendous importance to me there. One morning a man took 50 of us out and gave us a lesson in how if you get caught out without any weapons, you can blind a man with your bare hands and then go on to kill him. This was a lesson for 50 people. It really shook me because first of all I knew… well at least I felt if I… if I get into a situation where it comes to it, I will do that. Maybe I overrate myself and… and my aggressive powers, but at least I thought you know, yes, I would do that. So I have no business to go there.

I mean it… it seemed to me simply at that point that I simply must become a conscientious objector. I couldn't go and do something of that sort, but I simply didn't have the nerve to face my society and say:  ‘No, I won't’. I know that for instance that Bill Stafford, whom I… I had lived near to there, in Iowa City, had… had done four years as a conscientious objector and as a matter of fact he… he was taken out with a bunch of other conscientious objectors some place in the South and they had the rope around his neck already when… when the sheriff arrived. I didn't have that kind of nerve, and so I went.
I think as a matter of fact that many of the people felt much as I did, that they would go and try to do something of… of that sort, but as a matter of fact, it later came out that during World War II, three-fourths of the men in combat were unable to pull a ri… a trigger. The guns all jammed, they thought. Now they… they put people through a kind of psychological training so that they become more able to… to kill other people.
Anyway, I… I simply didn't have that; I went ahead and... and I became a… they… they sent us to Saipan where I became a brig guard and I ended up doing some things that… that really are fairly disgraceful. They brought… one night the SPs — shore patrol — brought aboard the ship two guys who had… whom had… who were drunk on the beach, and we threw them in the brig. Later that night they claimed they had been raped by some of the guys in the… other guys in the brig. Whether this was so or not, of course we will never know. Things of that sort happened, not infrequently.

Our… our officers, rather than carry out a trial or carry out a real examination to find out, what they did was to put the guys who were accused in a special… what they called a hot box. It was a… a… one… what do you call it, a room of… of the ship, fairly down low in the ship. It had only little barred windows and the… the hatches on… on a room like that have big metal levers that you clamp down to… to clamp the thing shut, and on the inside, those had been taken off so these guys can't get out. They are in there for the night. There's no… there’s no beds, they’re not… they sleep on the bare floor, and then we had to take them out and work them all day, very hard. This was their punishment, and every night I had to go down and get them up on their feet.
There was one dog taken off the… the door altogether, and before I would go in, I would, you know, go up to that… well first I would… I would — I had a .45 and I would take the flap off of it and cock it — and I would look through the hole to see who was inside. There was always an eye on the other side of that door. And then you had to open the other dogs, swing the door open and say, 'Get back', and they'd get back, then you'd step into the room with these — oh, there might be 10 guys in there — and you'd say, 'On your feet', and they would get up and… and stand at attention and then you'd… then you’d dismiss them and go away. You had to do this every hour, and I didn't really like doing this. I didn't know whether they were guilty of what they had been charged; if so, I thought they ought to be charged and brought to trial on this. The… the officers didn't want to do that because it would bring… it would look bad for them.

One night I missed one of the calls and didn't get there till a half hour. That means that in the long run I called them one time less than I was supposed to that night. The next day we… we were… as I say, we took them out and then worked them very hard all day long. There was a guy that I was particularly fond of, he was a great big black guy, his last name was Humbert, and he was so big he was… he was called Heavy all the time — Heavy Humbert — and I had worked with him on the KP line for a while and… and he was big and you know, there was a big solidity about him. And I must say, you know, guys like me who don't feel particularly tough sometimes tend to attach themselves to big sturdy guys like him. He came up to me and he was just furious. Well… well first of all I knew that it… it wasn't just that he was there at all. He had been in a... he had been on an aircraft carrier, got in a fight over a poker game, hit the guy that he was in… in the fight with and assumed the fight was over and walked away. The guy picked up an… a fire axe and hit him in the back with it. So he'd been in the hospital for some… quite a long time. He now was… had no business to be in the brig, he'd been sent to us to travel to where they were trying the other guy. He was just a witness, but that's the Navy. They… they threw him in the brig. He didn't belong there at all. Anyhow, he came up to me and he was furious. He said you call… you called us once too often last night. And… and I tried to explain, 'No, I called you once too… once too few', but they had… they had people on the outside who were telling them all the time what was happening. They had con… continual contacts with sailors on the outside. I don't know how. I… I mean I always had my suspicions about who it was, but what I did at that point was to see to it that another guard came over. I didn't care to be there by myself being challenged by this great enormous black guy who, you know, could have smashed me on the wall. But I must say it has always tormented me that he… that he would think I was deliberately adding to his torments at that… well anyway, having been a brig guard is one of those things that you cannot be very proud of, and… well in… all right, let me interrupt all that and come forward back to myself back at school.
My marriage was going to hell. I hadn't been able to write anything for two years, I… I had this block, and a lot of the writers there at Iowa were blocked that way. They… they would give you help with your poems, they were very generous about this, and… and wonderfully bright guys. I've never been so surrounded by bright people, bright writers anyway. And I mean it was things… there were a number of things like this… I went into treatment and… and I… I went to the psychiatric hospital to see if I could do any… get any of this straightened out and get myself writing again. I was surprised to find that the doctors didn't say, 'Oh, you… you've got to get out of… of writing poetry, that's no job for a man', you know, 'do something that will make you some money, become an accountant like your father'. And… but no, they… they actually said, 'Well, what can… what can make it better?' They said… well first of all, I mean it became clear that you have to write about the things that you really care about, and that above all I mean… some of that had to do with the war and about feeling guilty about having, you know, having done those things, although I didn't… I didn't kill anybody myself. I helped other people kill people.

When I finally got to a desk, that's what I was doing, I was sending people to duty on other ships or on other islands where they were fighting and... and things of that sort. But this… I’ve recovered there one day the scene where the guy was giving us a lesson in how… how to kill a man with your bare hands after blinding him, and I really broke up. I went… I went just to pieces. I… I just went all to hell, and I… I did become a conscientious objector after that, you know, when we then got into the Korean War and so forth. I became a Quaker for a while, but… I found that most Quaker groups, not the ones there at Iowa, they… it was full of people that I truly admired who had done very brave things, who had… who had gone to jail as conscientious objectors, who… who, you know, went into poor… into poor sections and really… really helped people out. But when I got to Cornell later, they talked about God, and oh hell, I don't want to go and listen to people talk… talk about God, and… and so I dropped out… out of the… the Quaker thing.
But recovering that scene… and the other thing of course was then being separated from my daughter, and the… where they were telling me you ought to write poems about the loss of myth in our time and the… the role of society in our poetry and all those big abstract things. No, what I cared about was… was not being allowed to see my daughter and… and I wasn't being allowed to see her. Every excuse that was possible was being used to… to keep her away from me, and… and I just couldn't… couldn't bear that, and so that's… that’s what I started writing about, and… and also then I wrote a poem about the voice of that man giving the hand to hand combat instructor… instruction, but combining it. I… I tried again and again to write about that. I would go off and get it up into some kind of disguise like Odysseus blinding the Cyclops or something like that, and that, you know, I finally decided to hell with this, let him say just what he said! You know, boy, it was hard to beat, and… but I balanced that against somebody else that I had discovered just at the same time and that was the great Jewish philosopher, Baruch Spinoza.

And so what I'd do is I… I composed a poem where you get two lines from the… from Spinoza, two lines from the combat instructor, two lines from Spinoza, two lines… back and forth, and I must say that's… that’s one of the poems from that first book that I… I still feel, you know, I still like and that people mention to me most often, and then the poems about… about my daughter. And those… I went on writing those for about, it must be two and a half… yeah, it is two and a half years because there are 10 poems and one… there‘s one for each season of that. And everybody thought that was awful, to do that. You weren't supposed to write about things of that sort, about your private life, and so you keep your private life private; whereas you know, poets always wrote up till TS Eliot's time, people… that's what you wrote about, what you… what you were really concerned about, what you cared about, and I thought you know, some… I was very much moved by Mahler's Kindertotenlieder — Songs for the Death of Children —, and I thought well, you know, we don't lose our kids through… through early disease the way they… everybody did then. We lose them through divorce. And… so, I decided to write poems about that and I had great trouble publishing those poems or… or getting them any notice.
I remember once I was at the… I went to the University of Rochester for a poetry conference and I was going to read a paper about how I wrote one of those poems and… and what things that had happened to me and how that related to what I put in the poem, and they said, 'Oh you mustn't, you… you mustn't read that, you know, you just can't…' besides which I was a professor and professors aren't supposed to have any private life. And so, maybe… in a sense they aren't supposed to have any life. You know, you are supposed to live as a pure spirit or something of that sort. And… well anyway, but those were the poems I think which first got me notice, the ones about my daughter, and Louis Untermeyer liked them very much and… and he gave me the Pulitzer Prize for them. It cost him his job as judge of the… of the Pulitzer Prizes.

Schools that would not have taken me as a student the week before, now would want me to come and give poetry readings or to come and take a job. It completely changes the… the status of your life, and… and any change, I mean a change for the better is… is as… is almost as often damaging to a person as a change for the worse. They… they did a… a studies one year of how many people had died of heart attacks and cancer that year, and it was a shocking percentage who… who in the year before that had had some major change in their life, and it didn't seem to make any difference whether it was a change for the better or for the worse. You win… you win the lottery and your life goes to hell. Anyway, it's very hard… it's very hard to live… to live with that change. You wonder: Can I do that well again, can I… and it may well be that I am not particularly pointed toward winning, that there may be something in my background that says well — and it says this about a number of things, you know — you don't win wars by doing decent things, you win wars by doing indecent things. You don't want to lose wars. On the other hand, it's going to be kind of hard to… to live with the bombing of Dresden, it's going to be kind of hard to live with some of the things that your mates will tell you that they did and to whom and how… I don't know. I… I do know that up to that… now let's see.
My…that first therapy that I was in, the one in… in the mirror room, that seemed to get me going again and I was doing pretty well; I got a job first at Cornell, then Rochester, then I went to Detroit, and again I… now let's see. My first marriage had ended, I… I came together with my second wife there at Iowa while I was still there, and then we went to… to Detroit together, and… but by now I was getting… I… I got the Pulitzer while I was there. Louis had said — Louis Untermeyer — had said something to me earlier at a meeting which made… he… I think he said, 'I… I begin to see that you have some chance of maybe getting the Pulitzer Prize'. I didn't realize for some years afterwards that it was because he gave it to me, he and a southern newspaper editor, whose name I block on right now. They were the only two people on the board who really read poetry, and they… they voted for me and the other people… well, it cost Louis his job as judge. He was fired for that.
What it did was… I… I was by now getting offers to read poems and… and I would be paid for that. It meant that I was able to support my wife and her daughter — as she had a daughter by an earlier marriage — and also our baby then, when it came. I could… I could support these people, and in a way when we got married, I remember I had said I think I can supply about two thirds of… of what we will need. Now suddenly I could do it all. Okay, I'm going to give you my view of this. It's a very one-sided view and maybe no one else would see it the same. It seemed to me that she liked me as long as I was poor and unable to support a family, and weak. Now I was stronger and soon there was a lot of trouble between us, and the second marriage started going to hell, and I think that probably came pretty much directly as a result of… of winning the… the Pulitzer. When…. after Louis had said that to me about… 'I think you have a shot at it', one day the phone rang. I wasn't home, she got it, and it was the news… a local newspaper — a Detroit paper — and they said, 'Is this the Snodgrass who just won the Pulitzer Prize?' She said, 'I sure hope so'. But she… I think she ultimately… ultimately became quite unhappy about that. And it… well it also meant that other women were possible, not necessary; but I mean, that… that didn't have to follow, but it could have followed. It created a lot of difficulties; and so I went into… into deep analysis — into deep Freudian analysis — I was in there for… in for about eight years there with a quite marvelous doctor, I must say.

Well, Detroit is wonder… is a wonderful town in… in some ways. It's the most violent place I have ever lived. I mean compared to it, New York City is just serene. But the interesting thing about Detroit is that it's all marked up into sections ethnically. And for instance, Greek Town in Detroit is quite wonderful, and… and most of the… most of the intellectuals, like our… like people from the universities, and I was teaching at Wayne State, they hang out there at night. They go to the belly dance joints, which are wonderful, and the dancing is wonderful, the air of it is… is very free and open, and there is good Greek restaurants there, but there's lots of other sections also. I mean as a matter of fact there are also Arabic and Armenian belly dance joints.
There's… I mean, the Polish community is… has a whole separate city surrounded by Detroit, — Hamtramck — and they have a big academic society where… where they have all kinds of programs and wonderful things going on; and then there are… then there are Polish weddings which go on, and you know, they are always, you know, they’re always a week long and… and a wedding is considered a failure unless it has broken up three of the… three other marriages in the course of that and there has been a fist fight or so. I… The… the Russians have… have a large bal… and terrific balalaika orchestra which give… which gave concerts all the time. The Bulgarians have night… night places and, well, I… I went to Bulgaria some years later, I was sent there and I… I met the head of what was then the Bulgarian folk community, and he said, 'You’re from Detroit?' He said, 'Wonderful', he said… he said, 'When we want to learn Bulgarian folk dances, we send someone to Detroit'. He says, 'They've kept the dances better in Detroit than we have here in Bulgaria'.
And… and all of these… there was a… there was a Romanian community, I would get students… some of the most beautiful girls I have ever taught in my life, were Lithuanian girls who came from there, one of whom had… had lived for some years as a thief. I… I came to be… be having dates with her when my… when my second marriage broke up. She… she — let's see — she… she would be… they came in a… ahead of the Russian troops. They had a cart and were… and were withdrawing into Germany, and every morning her… her parents would send her out to steal from the farms, and she said, ’The… the farmers would look the other way, they knew how hard up we were and... but she never went anywhere that she didn't carry a little sack with her with a… with a sandwich. She was prepared.
There was one girl who — let's see — she was… she was there the morning that the German troops came in and took out all the Jewish students and then she had heard the gunfire and… and she wanted to write about this and she would never be able to. She… she never could. You had people who had, you know, terrible things like that in their… in their past.

Then the black section was… was very… was very tough and very violent. I ended up spending a fair amount of time there because I had a friend who… who played piano and he played in… in a… in a black joint, and the bouncer there knew us right away — who knew us — would always tell us, 'You… you take a seat over there', so he could keep his eye on you; and if you said, 'Well, I wanted to sit with these people', and he'd say, 'Oh yes sure, fine, you go over there'. He was always very well dressed, he was a former heavy weight contender who… who I think had killed a man, hitting him once, and his… his fists were now registered as weapons. He could… he couldn't hit anybody, although now and then he would throw somebody out of the bar. But anyway you know, you had… you had this… and… and there was lots of black music going on there, big… you know, big musicians, really terrific stuff.
All these different nationalities had their own neighborhoods and… and they sort of preserved their past. It was a hell of an interesting place. I was thinking of the black s… I had a black student, he came… it was a beginning writing class. He came, and he was… he seemed very surly. He was as big, or bigger, than that… the guy I was talking about in the brig, and… and he seemed a lot meaner, and, you know, finally I think, I guess… I guess I asked him to stay after class and I asked him, you know, 'Why are you here, what's this about?' And he told me he came from… from the, you know, the roughest part of the black area, it was called Paradise Valley, and where, you know, most of the… most of the girls were prostitutes and sort of had to be, and he'd got drafted and had gone to Korea and there was a Korean woman near where they were fighting or where they were stationed who had a daughter who I think had… who was quadriplegic — a child — probably under 10 and she would bring her out and sell her to the soldiers, and he had bought; and he wanted to write about that, and you knew he never would be able to. He finally stopped coming.
But it… it was wonderful having this kind of students. I loved… you know, I had taught at Cornell before there where everybody… the students had no experience beyond having spent their parents' money and they'd had every kind of advantage all their lives. They were pathetic in their own way because they had never had any experience with coping with the world, but they had been told: 'We're sending you to the best and most expensive school there is; you've got to come out of there ready to kill the world'. And they didn't even know, you know… they felt completely helpless. So… so… and they... they were pathetic in a way. They… they would go to classes and so forth and then every weekend they would get hopelessly drunk and they would bring in girls from other schools and they would have these orgy weekends and that was really… that was really very… you know, that was… that was pathetic in its way. Well...but when the students came in… in the class, they… they just opened their notebook and you were supposed to tell them the word of God; and so that was how I was used to teaching.

I got fired after my first year there. I'd been promised five, but the… the… we got a new… a new chairman who said… first he gave a lecture to… to the department and I guess to the school generally about integrity, and then… then he went from there to a meeting of the department and said, 'Well now, we're gonna have to do some things that are gonna look sort of, you know, unscrupulous to people out…. who don't really realize the real situation, and the chiefest of these is fire Snodgrass!' No, he said, 'We've got to get rid of people who don't have a doctorate because they're getting harder and harder to get'. So I was called in at the end of the first year and told, 'We are going to let you stay another year but then we're dropping you' and I said, 'Jesus, are… is there dissatisfaction with my teaching?' And they said, 'Why, no, I don't think we really know much of anything about your teaching, we just feel that you don't… I mean, there's a general feeling that you don't fit in'. And I must say that I had shared that feeling. Yeah, I really didn't fit in there, yeah.
You know, at the… at the annual MLA meeting we went to Washington and met in the Library of Congress, — The Modern Languages Association — that’s… that’s the flesh market for… for professors, but they had a concert for us and the Budapest Quartet came and played. Ah, Alexander Schneider —Sascha Schneider — was the second violinist. The first violinist was a man whose name I have forgotten; I… about a year after that he had a stroke, but he… he was the most flawless violinist to ever… the whole concert was so magnificent. They… first they played a Debussy and then they played a… a Ravel quartet and I… I was just ready to go through the… when we came out of there, these… these guys, all they would talk about was how much… how much I reacted to the music. I mean you're supposed to be cool and above it all and you say, 'Oh yes, the Budapest, they are quite good, I've… yes, they're not bad at all'. And… and you know, just the fact that I was so… so knocked out by this; that… that wasn't proper. That was very improper to… to act as if you hadn't known all your life how wonderful this was and how wonderful that quartet was.
It… it was an amazing… 'cause I remember Sascha Schneider — whom I later met — we were… we… we came out of… down the steps and out of this official building, and he came running down the steps by himself and sort… he seemed to… to leap into an open convertible car with about five girls in it and drove off cheerily. I don't suppose he really leaped over the open doors into the backseat, but... anyway, I didn't fit in there and… and they… they were right to fire me, but… but it left me with you know, a wife and child and no way to make a living, and… and I had to go on teaching there for the rest of that year after I had already been rejected, and that was very difficult.

Anyway, I… the next year George P Elliott, who was a very close friend at that time, you knew… you knew George. He… he helped me get a job at Rochester and I was told that would only be for… it was either one… one or two years. The… the lady who was in head… charge of the department said, 'We have already got one poet on the staff and I had to fight so hard to get him on that I can't fight to get another one on, so… so you can stay for a year'  — or was it two? — I don't remember. Well, in the middle of that I got a fellowship from the Hudson Review and so then I quit that year anyway, and it was from there that I went to Detroit. But Detroit was a… was a… a very reveal… especially after my second marriage broke up, you know, I was looking for something to do at night, and my students would take me to the belly dance joints and to the… to whatever their ethnic group had going, and it… it was… it was a very fascinating place.

The best student I… I had there I think was a great big thug named Rodzevic, who worked for Ford in a pickling plant. They pickle metals in… in acid, and what had happened was that his wife was dying of cancer and he was,  boy he was really feeling it, and so he had to have something else to think about, so he came to this poetry class. And he… when… when we talked about a poem, you… you know, he… he said things that were so brilliant but they were so couched in this thuggish language, that I think most of the people didn't realize he was the real sensitivity in that room. He… one day he said something so bright I had to send the class home. I thought: I can't… I can't rephrase that, I can't cap it; I can't do anything with it. I said: 'Go home and think about that!' I… I mean, I… I had to find a whole new way to teach there, which was that I wouldn't prepare. I could take a poet I did not understand at all, like Hart Crane. I would go in and I… I’d  just read this poem to the class and the fight would start, and it started every day, and it was marvelous… you had older people, you had people who were working full time at this, that and the other thing.
There were three… three girls in there who were models, people who worked in auto plants, people who… well, these… this school had been started by the Unions so that they could… that, you know, so that there would be a place for these people to go to college, and it was so much more fun and so much… I learned so much more. I… I really loved it there until this guy got a hold of it and started trying… he… first he threw out all… all the students who weren't… what's — I… I can't remember the term for it — who aren't going to finish a degree. They're just taking one class because they are interested in this. Those are people you want, for Christ's sake! He threw them all out. It was only people who were going to matriculate, and then he wanted dormitories and then there was to be a football team. We'd never had a football team; you know, these people are too busy, they are doing other… they are doing other things; they are working at every kind of job.
We had… one of our students was a bouncer at a gambling house, and when he got out of the… well, and also it was a great help… this was right after World War II, which was the great moment of American education. When he got out of the Marines, those of his friends who could, got on the police force. The other ones who couldn't, joined the mobs, and soon these guys who had been fighting side by side were now fighting each other. Some were… some were with the mobs and some were in the police force, and you… you got students like this, and that… it was marvelous. You were really learning something.

For a long time we just talked, person to person. I sat… sitting… both of us sitting at his desk, and finally we got to the place where I was ready to go to the couch, and I went to the couch and as soon as you do that, you do start dreaming; and I think by now dreams have been in as a way sort of discarded as… as revealing much, but the things that you say about your dream are liable to be very revealing indeed, and as a matter of fact, I… when I come to think of it, some of those dreams were very revealing. And mostly he listens to you talk and to let you define things. I mean he… one of the things he said right off the bat was: 'We don't know what health would be. You have to decide what health for you would be, and we can't take curing you as the real aim because we don't know what cure… what cure would be. We don't know what health would be'.

I… I had stopped writing again, and I was in a lot of anguish about this marriage going to hell and the struggles that had come up between my second wife and myself, and on… on the whole he said very little. He was not directive and was very careful, except now and then, if… if you said something that he saw as clearly wrong. We had a lot… lot of troubles with my wife's — my second wife, that is — she had a… a daughter who was, when she came to us, was about four years old. While my wife was in school at Iowa, this child was raised by her grandparents, and she had come to be in control of the household. She had a special meal made for her every meal, to her order, then refused to eat it. She… she would pick food up and bring it up to her mouth and then put it down again and... Her… her grandfather worked as a telegrapher for the railroads. He was a very sweet man. He would get home at midnight, so then she would have another meal made for her at midnight which she would eat with him, and that… that one she’d ate. Well, she looked like… she looked like something out of a concentration camp. I mean her hair had no color, she was… she was just simply skin and bones. You know, she was… she was starving herself, and she was a terrible behavior problem.
I mean there were troubles between my own daughter and her, and we managed somehow to manage some of that by as soon as… as soon as anybody made any move against the other one, they both had to go sit in the corner, and then… then they discovered how well they could work together, and the two of them took off to take on the neighborhood and you could hear the yelps down the street as they... the… the troubles between them got better, but well, very foolishly my wife had… had put her own daughter into the school where my… my daughter was already a student, and they started a terrible fight about, you know, he belongs to me… no, it's my father, you can't have him, you know, and… and when she got there all the teachers were in tears and oh, Jesus. But this got better.
But the fee… the feeding problems did not get better and also she was just very rejective of me, all the time, 'Go away, don't touch me… I hate you' and… and this went on and on and on. And we went and talked to a school counselor about this who said, 'You'll just have to be patient, you'll have to go on', and so I went on being patient and so forth, and one day I went down and she was already in the car with her mother and I got in on the… on the side beside her and she said, 'Don't… don’t you touch me' and I just blew up. I said, 'This is… God damn it, this is my car and… and I am not going to put up with this kind of stuff, you stop that!' And I looked over and she was smiling. You know, I thought: Jesus Christ, I've blown it, I've wrecked it; there goes the marriage. No, that's what she wanted. I mean she wanted some… I guess, what she wanted was somebody strong enough to handle her, and… and to give her attention without all that.
So, after… but it still didn't take, I… I didn't learn it yet, it took a long time, and the analysis came into this at points. I would talk over my problems with her, and the doctor’d have some… had some very... you know, I was doing some things wrong — quite wrong — and he would like… finally we went to… somebody else, another school psychiatrist or something who said that, 'Yes, this child wants you to show strength', and we finally set up a thing where we simply said you will eat the meal that is put in front of you, every bite, you will not hesitate with a single bite holding it up by your mouth trying to get somebody to tell you to… and… and so you can't do it, and if you don't do that, you will be spanked. And we had… and she was spanked I think at every meal for a week, and then began to eat, and began to… the… the flesh took on a glow, the hair began to look good, she be… became quite a happy child.

After the first book came out, you know, a… a lot of the poems in that book are formal, and they are concerned with my own affairs very much. Well of course right away there was a… came to be a kind of competition between the Formalist poets and the Beat poets, and they... they were always giving me fits because I didn't… I wasn't trying to tell how to run the society. I mean I… I don't know how to run my own life much less to… how to run the United States. I'm pretty sure that the way we're doing it now is not really… is not it, but I turn much more to social problems in gen… and other problems in general, in the second book. There is more free verse there, and no doubt maybe I was trying to compete with Allen Ginsberg and… and the other Beat poets. I think those are the two main differences there.
Oh, also it is during that time that I was… that I was doing this that I… that I was with the psychoanalyst in… in Detroit, and he was a great help to me in doing the poems about paintings, that are in there. In the way… in the meantime I think I was kind of casting about for a subject matter, and so it… it seems to me the second book is less unified. Also, that second book contains a number of translations at the end, and there isn't anything like that in the first book; the first book is all my own poems. And I think perhaps I was looking for another subject like that, and I… I obviously, I mean there… there was loss of my daughter — I thought — and... and the loss of my sister, and I thought, you know, well for instance then when the second marriage broke up, I… I lost my son and my stepdaughter, but I thought I can't write about that anymore, I've already done that, and I'm looking for something new and different to do, and I… I think the second book involves more sort of hunting for subjects, and the… the poems about paintings came up at that time, partly because I… I was… I… I was asked by the University of Rochester to teach an evening course out at a little mansion that they had in a small town nearby, and this was to be a course in modern paint… modern art, and I told them I don't know anything about modern art, I was… they said: 'It doesn't matter, this is adult education, you don't have to know anything'. Well, very luckily I… I had very bright students who said such… such clever things that… that it got me started doing the poems about paintings. But I… so I did five of those I think, but I… I was still, you know, casting about for… and… and doing all these translations was one of the ways I was looking for subject matter.

All along in there, there were things like books of translations and song translations in particular. When I got here to Syracuse, then it… then it was that I started doing the poems a… about the Nazi hierarchy, the… The Fuehrer Bunker, and I started working on those while I was here, and fou… I… I was reading all about World War II and… and about the… particularly the war in Europe, although I had been in the Pacific, and… but I think the first poem of that sort that I did was a poem about Albert Speer and I showed it to George El… George P Elliott and… and his wife and one or two other friends here, and they… they seemed to be very impressed by that, so I thought okay. The reason that… part of the reason that my first book was a success was that I had found a subject that nobody else was talking about, lose… losing your own child in a divorce or you know, things that happen to you personally. I thought okay, here is a big social subject that nobody is… well, everybody was writing books about it, there were more books about the… the leaders of World War II, including… including the big Nazis. There were more books about that than anything at all, except diet and cooking. So there was all kinds of prose about this, but nobody was writing poems about it.

When I came here to Syracuse I… for some reason I started doing a poem about Albert Speer. I… I decided to do a monologue and I had been reading Trevor-Roper of course, and then I think one of Speer's books must have come out, or in any case, I wrote about him. So I started and I… I wrote a poem about… in… in his voice, and my friends here liked it and… and this… this quite surprised me and… and I thought well you know, this is… this is material that nobody… nobody in poetry is writing anything about, and so I… I got started and got… got… I, in time, came to wonder why not go ahead and try some of these other characters, and then… then decided that okay, I will have a different kind of verse form for each one, for Goebbels for instance… now, I hadn't read Faust for a while and I was thinking that I… that I was putting his… his poems in the same meter that the devil in Faust has. I wasn't, I was putting it in neat little couplets and… and they’re… in… in Faust they are much more open couplets and it isn't so… the fall of stress and accent isn't nearly so much.
For Eva Braun — who was Hitler's mistress — I decided I would always use popular songs because… now she… her favorite song was Tea for Two and I'm not making this up. She… she liked Tea For Two so much that she had even made a German translation of it and could sing it in either language. I've never been able to get that translation, but in a way I… I thought, you know, this happens to me often.
I will discover what I am thinking by what I am singing. I remember going to a…  a sort of terrible reading by Robert Frost at the time of the Cuban Crisis when he was sort of gloating over the whole audience and how they were all going to be killed and they wouldn't have… finish their careers and he was at the end of his, he had finished his. Oh, it… it was weird. And I came out of there with the young lady that I had… had met there in the — I met her in the railroad… railroad station there — and… and I was taking her around to these different occasions, and I came out and suddenly I’m behaving very badly, in... in a way. R P Blackmur was there, and he… all the time that Frost was saying these things, he… I think he was one of the very few people who understood what Frost was saying, but he was saying: 'You old son of a bitch, you old… you old dog, you'. And… and I… I wasn't even aware how furious I was, but I came out suddenly singing, in a fairly loud voice, an old Scottish ballad of betrayal where the wife betrays the… the husband, and I was singing: 'She was singin' and dancin' and laughin' for joy, she's vowed that very night she would feast Inveray' and I think: What the hell am I doing, and suddenly I realized, yeah, I just feel so betrayed by this that I am singing this ballad about betrayal. Well, I… I find myself doing that all the time. I mean I wake up in the morning with a song going through the back… or… or it's usually classical music, and especially early music, and sometimes I… I have no idea what the connection is between that and what I am consciously thinking about. But anyway, so I thought okay, let's have her do that and she can sing popular songs and… and that can be a… give sort of a… an edge into what she is doing.

I… I thought Himmler, who was… he was the worst fuddy-duddy that ever lived. I mean, you know, he had everybody's… he had the whole continent scared blue. As a matter of fact it say… it says in the book he had them shitting pink, and… and he did. I mean, you know, he killed all those people, and… and yet he was always running round: 'What to do, what should we do about this or that', and… and became very indecisive. He tried very hard to make himself a strong, tough, you know, Nazi, but he… at heart he… he was anything else. He... he went to one of the executions that he had ordered and threw up, became sick at his stomach, you know, so… and… and he also had sort of very obvious codes that he would talk in, but everybody would have understood them. He called the banker — what the hell was his name —, I can't… the… the man who… who sort of got the… got the — I'm not thinking straight this morning — he got the money back on the up and up. He had big moustache. He always said, ’Now the walrus said’, well everybody knew who the… who he was talking about.
So anyway, what I did was: I will make… I... I will make a verse form, which I will call the platoon, and it's on graph paper and in every line there will be 30 letters and spaces, and then down the left hand margin it’ll be an alphabet acrostic, the first line begins with A, the second line begins with B, the second line be… and in other words it's a very rigid verse form that has no music, and there are two people in… in the cycle who have no music whatsoever in their voices. I mean he's one, the other is Speer, and… and to me this means a kind of… oh, mental sterility, and a… and a real lack of something emotional in their… in their makeup that their music… that there is no music to how they talk.

Now, I had already been working on a translation of a… of a play, which happened to be about the Nazis. It's the… usually called the Firebugs, or Biedermann and the Firebugs, and there are… you have the proper German sitting in his living room, Biedermann, and then there are these… these… first there’s this big thug who comes in, Sepp, which is a nickname for Joseph… actually it's Goering, and… and wants… and wants a room for the night or wants some place to stay for the night, and then he brings his… his crazy friend, Willi in, who is really Goebbels. I was never to get… able to get this, we… we were never able to get the rights. Some friends were doing this play and… and wanted me to do the choruses. I did the choruses and then they found they couldn't get the rights and I thought: Oh hell, I'll go ahead and do the rest of the play and maybe I can get the rights. Well, I couldn't, they'd all been given to a man named Mordecai Gorelik, a scene designer, and… and he ruined the play. He made his own translation of it and it was… and… and had so taken all the comedy out of it in such a way that you have to have… it has to be tricked up with choruses of singing firemen who come through singing, 'I don't want to set the world on fire' or else 'Smoke gets in your eyes', when they climb in and out of a balcony with ladders and junk like that. Whereas instead you've got this really wonderful play, the Max Frisch play, and… but I… I could never get the… Gorelik had the rights and was able to hang on… and he... he didn't even respect Max Frisch. He spoke of him in the most disrespectful terms always. But he had got the rights and I… I get tempted every now and then to try to come back because I’d like… at least 25 years have passed now and I thought okay, and… and Frisch has been dead for quite… quite a long time, and up until a year or two ago I… there was a chance I might have got the rights again. Then that Walt Disney thing came through because they were afraid that they were going to lose the rights to things like Mickey Mouse and stuff like that, so they had that extended to 100 years — the… the copyright thing — you remember when all that happened. And… and that's just all… I… I have a friend who’s a playwright who told me about this. I… I hadn't known, I was about to… get the script out again and see if maybe I could sell it to somebody. I saw it done twice, before they discovered we were doing it, and it played like crazy.
Oh, oh, was it fun, and a wonderful Willi… well… well you know, they go upstairs and… and next thing Biedermann knows they're carry… they’re carry… there… there's all this bumping noise and he goes out and he finds oh, they're carrying oil drums up into the attic where they sleep, and… and it finally ends up with Biedermann up there helping them lay the wire. He says but… but if I don't help them, if… if I don't be… make them my friends, they could blow up my house, and so he ends up helping them do this, and of course at the end, bluey! Everything blows up. Alright, right. And then there's a wonderful last scene that sometimes isn't played, but this… this is Biedermann and… and his… his wife in hell where they discover that these guys are Satan and oh, one of the other devils, I've forgotten which, and they’re… they’re  going back up to the world to… to see what else they can… I think it's a terrific play. Anyway, I had had that kind of approach to… to these… these guys, and, well I guess maybe I'd been reading a lot of Browning, whose… whose monologues are so wonderful, and especially the monologues of… of the villains. The same thing in Shakespeare; I mean, you know, who… who do you most love to read in Shakespeare? Richard III. Richard III or Edmund, the awful bastard son. I mean he is so… 'You evil are my goddess", and I… I think Goebbels is very like that. I mean, he sees himself as demonic and it's one of the few things that we'd all agree with him about. He sure was.

More and more, you know, as I got more and more poems I thought well okay, I've got to try to make a whole thing out of this and… and maybe try to take it through the whole period in the bunker when… when Hitler has... has come in from — what was it — the Wolfsschanze or something like that, where he had his headquarters, and now is under the chancellory in… in these underground tunnels, which incidentally are much more… much more extensive than anybody had had any idea for even 20 years after the War, nobody had any idea how… how… they had practically a whole underground city under there. And I decided okay, let's see if I can take it through that whole period, up to the… up to the surrender, and add more and more characters and.... Mag… Magda Goebbels, I didn't mention her earlier, she… she all sings in French, in very elaborate French love poem form… love poem form, you know, for lying in love. So… so, everything she was doing — as I saw it — was a sort of parallel to the things that the Nazis as rulers were doing. I mean clearly… clearly Goeb… Goebbels felt the important thing is to keep saying the same lie over and over, louder and louder. Well, she does the same thing, she has these repetitious French love poems where… roundelays and triplets and I don't know, I forget the names of all of them, but anyway, she’s using all of them — villanelles — she doesn't do a sestina because she had six children there and so they get to do the sestina, there's six parts in other words. But yeah, and… and you know pretty soon I had almost all the major characters that I wanted to… to deal with.

She's… she's giving her six poison… her… her six children poison. She had a… she had an earlier child by her first husband and in… in a way she is the most horrifying person there to me. I mean I'm kind of used to the idea that… that the rulers probably want to… are perfectly willing to kill off all… everybody they rule, they… they don't worry about things like that. But yeah, and… and I saw what she was doing in several ways parallel. She was… she…she was a woman who had been elaborately unfaithful. She had been raised by a Jewish stepfather who was very kind to her and… and treated her beautifully. She met a rich industrialist whom she wanted to marry. In order to do that she had to foreswear that man who had taken care of her, and her Jewish faith. She now became a Catholic, if I'm… if I'm not mistaken, and I may be.
Well, within a few… within a matter of weeks he found her in bed with a young student. This did not please him. He was going… he was going to divorce her. He made only one mistake; he didn't hide his tax books. Uh, uh, which means she was a very rich divorcee. I mean she came… she came out of the settlement with just fabulous amounts of money, went to Berlin, had nothing to do, looked around for a cause, joined the Nazi party. She sort… she fell for Hitler. She talked with some of the people in the… in the Party, and they said well no, no, no, we can't arrange that, you… no, nah, uh, uh, uh. What… what we can do though is for instance, if you would marry somebody like Goebbels, then things can always be finessed.

So she married Goebbels. I mean, she… she was just a pattern of infidelity. Meantime of course he was… he was the most unfaithful. I mean he was the head of things like movie making and so forth, so he kept a casting couch. He laid all the… all the actresses, and incidentally — odd, strange — they all report that he was a most thoughtful and generous lover. But you know… you know, he was a… he was a little man — crippled — and… and so he looked very funny alongside all of those big macho hunks. She was willing to put up with that until he fell in love with a Czech actress named Lida Baarova. She died within the last six months, I believe, and she was still just extravagantly beautiful. She… you just can't imagine how anybody can be 90 and still look that wonderful.
Anyway, they fell deeply in love. This wasn't just a… a you know, lay and get out of here business, they… they were like American teenagers. When he was working late at the office at night, he would leave the telephone open… his telephone off the hook and she, hers, they would make a phone call and then leave the phone so they could hear each other breathe. Can you imagine Joseph Goebbels being that sentimental? It's just incredible. That his wife would not put up with! And they were going to get married. She in the mean… in the meantime had become attracted to… to an army officer named Karl Hanke, who was a close friend of Speer's, and Speer also was attracted to her, although I… I have no idea whether anything happened there. He was… he was going to go with Lida Baarova, she was going… Hitler came in and said: 'No, you will be a proper Nazi family! This will not happen! You are an example to the… to the public, cut it out!' And they cut it out. Lida Baarova was sent back to Czechoslovakia, Hanke I think became… yeah, he was Gauleiter of Breslau, and in the last days in the bunker, they sat toge… rocking together holding hands like a happily married old couple.
I mean that the paradoxes are just so… meantime Hanke, if I could just —this… this doesn't come into… into my book anywhere — but he… he was the Gauleiter of Breslau looking after… as the Russians came in he was about to surrender, leave the… an open city and surrender it to save the city —- the man who had been Gauleiter of the city — Hanke came in, saw this, forbid it, and had his friend — the mayor — hanged in public. Then he himself, when the Russians got closer, flew out, saved himself.

At the time I was writing the first verse, I al… the first things — the formal verse — I also wrote lots of free verse then, but I… I… it didn't specially please me, and… and I thought: I'm doing better work in formal meters than I am in… I... I am letting myself go free and not turning up anything that I couldn't have done just as well in… in meter. That began to change, and… and when I came to the second book – After Experience – I felt that more and more of… of the free verse was… was printable and so forth, and so I… I don't know what the percentage in there, but… but there's a lot more than in the first book, there's a lot more free verse there. When I came to this, it seemed to me that I… what I… what I wanted to do was to try to make up new forms. I… I… there are some free verse people who… who always do things in free verse, but also there are quite a few nonce forms, like there’s this fancy graph form for Himmler, the… the fancy French forms for Magda, and… and not nearly so much free verse, which sort of bothers me. I had been thinking about my… my very dear friend, Anthony Hecht, who's a very, very formal poet in… in his early pieces, and then he did one or two poems that were just staggeringly powerful, in free verse, and then went back to formal verse, and I… I thought Tony don't do that, you know, go ahead with some… and since he didn't, I felt I should, but… but this… this… having got into this matter of form equal character, I had to go with more forms, and so I tended to make up new forms, nonce forms I think they are called, just made up for one occasion.

Boy, I… I tend to stay away from… from big abstract problems like this! I guess since I was raised, you know, at... at the time when formal verse was it, I started with it; and also above all, that is a form that has a built-in music, and I have written about this at… at some length in other places. That… and I started out as a musician — did… did I talk about this? — I started out as a timpanist in… but I had also worked in piano and violin and got into some other things then like guitars and lutes and stuff, and…and music was always of tremendous importance to me.
And the one thing that I admired about the Beats, the Beat poets, who, you know, completely threw out all forms and so forth, was that they read the poems aloud, and I think I began to think of myself — I think — sort of in the way that I thought of the sort of… of the classical composers, that they were composing for their own performance; and I… and I thought yeah, the Beats are right in… in reading out loud all the time, that the poem isn't something that a… a bunch of little things on a piece of paper which you turn into ideas up here someplace, that you have to hear the music of that in order to get… to get any kind of real richness. I came, you know, I came to feel you… you can do that in free verse if you have a really extraordinary… sense of rhythm.
Whitman had; and in… in his very best poems there is a very… a very definite music and it is quite his own. It isn't like anybody else's. 'Out of the cradle, endlessly rocking, out of the mockingbird's throat, the musical shuttle... down from the showered halo, up from the mystic play of shadow…' you know, and that… that doesn't sound like… like anybody else's music, it's entirely his own, and you know, being as far outside the society as he was, sexually and socially, I can see how that… the… the normal kind of form wouldn't fit him. It didn't fit him in any… no normal form fitted him. Well, I wasn't that far outside… outside the… you know the social limits and forms and so forth, and… and I… so I thought I'm going to try working in both of these things and see what I can do. But you know, if… if you pick up most of the poetry magazines now, you look at it and you think there… there is no music. Now, music can be a fault.
The…They used to say the more music the less meaning. Well, if you are a bad poet, that's true. If you’re… if you're a good poet, you know, the music is the meaning in a… in a very basic way. I was talking to somebody the other night about… about Rilke, oh, and about Lowell telling me to translate… take some of Mrs Norton's Rilke translations and try to kick them into form. You know, you read her translations, and… they… they’re very literal translations of those poems, one… which you know are among certainly the very best of this century, or of last century. I forget which century I'm in! You read them and you think: Why did anybody ever think this was a poem? Then you get a friend who… who is a German native and have him read it. You don't understand German, but you have him read it to you and you know right away why everybody thinks that's a poem, and you'll know that nobody ever rhymed those two words before, ever. Nobody ever thought of that. You know that there is great originality in… in that and there is something that comes from very deep inside him someplace, and… and how did I get off into this subject?

You know, I… I was very good friends with Al Poulin, who… who was the head of a… a poetry press  — BOA — which sort of stood for Boo and Al — that was him and his wife — and I did a reading for him someplace where I think I read one or two of these poems. And I was beginning to get bothered because everybody seemed to be saying, 'Well, Snodgrass used to write poems, and we never see anything of his in print anymore, and he's just faded out'. And mean… meantime, I'm working like hell on these… these poems about, about the… the big Nazis. And so I decided I'd… I'd like to see some of these in print. And I talked to Al and to his friend Bill Heyen about whether they… they would like to do that, and I said, but you know, I don't know whether it’s…  whether I'm through with it or not. He said, 'but we'll… we'll… we could do it as a… a… we'll call it Poems in Progress, or something like that'. And so they did that first book that way. And then, much later, I... I felt that I had finished, and I hope I'm right about that, although I still get urges now and then to go back and do… do some more different… but… but anyway, then… then  we decided, ok, we're through with this. We're done with it. And that's the one that had as its cover the sort of… it's… it’s like a… an X-ray of a skull. And… and we… because there… there are surviving X-rays of Hitler's skull, I believe. Yes, there are. And… we tried to get a hold of those. We couldn't get them. So what… what they did was they used just a… some… some wanderer, hobo, tramp that had been hauled up from the river there in Rochester… figured okay, good enough. Who else… who's going to know? And there is a, you know, sort of equation suggested by that.

There wasn't a great deal, but it was almost all anti. And there began to be suggestions already that there was something pro-Nazi about doing such a book. I… I, you know, I… I don't remember clearly enough to answer that in any detail. Later on, of course, the reviews got ferocious, with one or two exceptions. But they… they were on the whole not… not favorable, certainly.

I know what I think they meant, but I don't remember what they said. This is a long time ago, Bill. What they meant was: you're suggesting that we are able to understand these people. In other words, that we are enough like them that we could understand anything about them. That was my understanding of what… of what they said. Those weren't the terms in which they said this. Well, as a matter of fact, Hugh Kenner did say: ‘Snodgrass cannot understand anything about these people, and… and he has no business writing about them and should good… should get other material’ or something to that effect. And in general, they were… they tended to be anti. Sometimes they would say that they were very virtuoistic… you know that they're very fancy verse forms and interesting invented forms and what not.

I… I was on a stage for a conference with… and… and one… one of the people was Jules Feiffer, one of the people was Ralph Ellison. And we got to talking about Madame Nhu. And… you know, I… I was kind of fascinated… I'd been fascinated with gamelan orchestras and things like this, so I… and I had read up a little bit about her and whatnot. And Ralph said suddenly: 'You know, I get to thinking about it. If I had been raised a strict Roman Catholic as she was, and I was in that position and… and had the things that she had had all her life, I'm not sure how differently I would have behaved'. And I suddenly had this surge of, you know, hu… humanity. You know, I think, Jesus, there's a real man talking. There's a… there's a real person and somebody who knows himself, and… and isn't trying to pat himself on the back all the time and tell us how moral and... and so forth he is, and the rest of the world is not. And I think that… that had a big influence on me there. And… and, and I thought: Ok, let's look at some of those sides of oneself.

I'm not sure that I can ever say what the poet's job is. And I think every… you know, as a matter of fact, I think the only thing I can say about poets in general is that they are supposed to do the thing that only they could do, the thing that… that is specific to their particular brain. And you know… you know, every brain is different. And so every personality is… not only do you start with the different arrangements of neurons, you also then have different things that happen to them. And so… and that I'm inclined to think it's your business to find the thing that is specific to you. That will also have its echoes in other people's brains and in what — you hope — and in what they could have become. But, uh… no, I think it's… it's the individual above all that you're looking for.

I must say that when I… when I wrote these poems, I thought that I was on their side. I mean, I am picturing these people as so wicked that I… I had felt, you know, I'm on the Jews' side here. They didn't see it that way. Or that isn't exactly true. Some of my best supporters, indeed, were Jews. But in general, the Jewish intellectual community… and without the Jewish intellectual community, it’s…, it's a question of whether we would have an intellectual community, almost… the… that community as a whole took the opposite viewpoint of this. They almost never attacked me because then someone could have… could have defended me and say… and show that this is not so, that I am in no way sympathetic to these people.
On the other hand, I think, you know, there are certain African tribes that have, you know, more or less continual wars with their neighbors. They'll have a war every year, you know, the yearly war with the… the whoever it is living over in the next valley. After the war is over, they have a large ceremony begging forgiveness for the people they had to kill. That seems to me not a bad idea… that maybe I had to kill these people to… but, you know, they're humans. They were trying to kill us. We were trying to kill them. It's wrong, but at the same time, that's what we do. And it seems to me that that would not be a bad attitude. Also, a… a very good friend of mine- I… I expect you knew him, Milton Kessler — Jewish, obviously — and a… a very good poet who taught down here at Binghamton. You know, some of these complaints against me had… had been brought to my attention, and he asked me about it and I... or I asked him. And he said, 'But you know, of course, you can't expect Jews to be reasonable about that'. And of course, you can't. I… well, I knew that some people would… would be very much upset.
I didn't know how long it would last, I must say. You know, I became a pariah for… for really quite… for 20 years or more, 25, maybe. I… when I would go to give readings, people would turn their backs on me when… if there was a reception afterwards, would not speak to me. These were people I had known well. And there was almost never a printed attack. That… that is fading. That's very definitely fading now. There… there isn't much else I can say about it that I …I think I was concerned with the depths of human depravity. And I don't think I see it, you know, more in one group than another. It so happens right now that… you know, I was going to say that we are being less depraved than… but then… then I forgot this morning's paper. But you know, the… you know, the… who lived here four centuries ago, and where have their descendants gone? I mean on this hill that we're living on. We did it.

I ran into an old friend named Wynn Handman, who… who was the head of The American Place Theatre for a long time, which did a lot of wonderful experimental work, and… and some of the very best actors around now sort of began work with him. And we had… we had become friends. Then Lowell had a… had a play that was done there, and I was brought in to review it and ended up being in a big fight with The New York Review of Books about… about my… my review and things. But… so… but it… it… I had fairly close relations with Wynn, who was a very, you know, very good guy, and very, very bright, a wonderful teacher. And he said, ’Why don't you make… we'd like you to make a play for us’. And I… I said, you know: 'I… I've tried making plays. They're terrible. I'm never going to do that again'. He said, 'But look, what are you working on?' I told him about this. He says, 'Can't you make that into a stage piece?' So that's what I tried to do. And he… he cast it. And let's see. He got… for the director, he got Carl Weber, who had worked with Brecht for about 10 years. So we had a German director, but at least two thirds of the cast and the crew were Jewish, and many of them very dedicated to Jewish, you know, projects and aims. They… I… I thought they did a quite wonderful job on it, although I should say this. They mounted it three times. The first time they mounted it, it was rather like… it was rather like a play, and it was all done in a single set there. And I felt rather pleased with it. The musician, Richard Peasley, — who… who's done an awful lot of stuff on Broadway — he wasn't. He says: 'I don't think this does a service to the text'. I was astonished. But as I… you know, as he talked a little more, I came to see, yeah, I think he's right. And they came to… to think he was right.
So some months later, they — and with a partly new cast be… because, you know, people get hired and go off to Hollywood or disappear someplace — they did it the second time. This was very experimental. They had now… they had a Moog synthesizer and a percussionist right out on the front of the stage. Each of the parts might be taken by two or three actors who might move in and do things. There were microphones hidden on stage and speakers hidden in… in the auditorium. So you could never tell from what direction a voice might be coming at you or if… if it was coming… and this, I must say, fit with my thinking about the thing because I thought of it not as being like a play but… but as like a sort of speech oratorio or something of that sort. And of course, these people's voices were very good, and I had composed some choruses for them and things like this. And now they only did about maybe the first third of it this way. They got through it. And I… I was absolutely delighted with it. I thought… I thought, this is wonderful. This is the way to do it because that's what it is. It isn't a play. It doesn't have the… I talked about, you know, I'm not very good at direct conflicts. And this gets away from that. I mean, the conflicts here are all inside the people. They… you've got these guys who have done all these terrible things, and they know that, that they're going to have to stand trial, or that they're just going to be shot or… if they're lucky. Otherwise, they may get hanged or just ripped, you know, limb from limb. So how do they… how do they react to this sense of their own guilt, which they cannot entirely ignore anymore? And it seems to me, this worked just splendidly. Then… but I was still teaching back here.
So after that… they had finished that part of it, I came back… back here and didn’t… couldn't go in until they were fairly well into the third mounting of it. And there I saw… there I saw something that… the stage manager's girlfriend came over to me about that second thing and… or, no. She came… it was later. I'm sorry. Cancel that. I didn't say that. They now had broken the stage up into little… several little compartments and different rooms and were now doing it again rather like a play. And I… I protested violently, well, as loud as I can, anyway.

You know, I wanted them to do this, but… but this seemed to me a terrible mistake and didn't have the force and vive that that other thing had had. And… but Carl — the director — had said: 'No, to have that much amplified voice used through the whole length of time of the theatre would be too tiring to the audience. They… they wouldn't accept that'. And… so they went ahead and did this. I felt they're going the wrong way. At the same time, it was such a delight to watch Carl work with the actors, that, you know, I was… it was just… it was just a joy to watch… to watch how he worked with these people and the things that… that he… the business that he came up with them to do.
And anyway, then the show… the show went on. And it got… got very bad reviews everywhere except from Clyde James [sic], who had been the New York Times reviewer until two weeks before. He'd got fired. And he was now with some little junky newspaper. If he'd… if he’d still been at the Times, that thing would still be running now. It… it was a… it was a beautiful review which really understood what it was about and understood the aim of it, got the whole point. And… but it… but it appeared in a place that had no… no real influence. There were two other favorable reviews written by absolute idiots. And… and, you know, you… you had the feeling: if they like… if they like me, I've got to be no good at all. The… the other ones were all very anti. It… it ran for the full time that it was supposed to. They had hoped that if it was selling a lot of tickets, that then they would extend the run. They didn't do that. And of course, as soon as they announced the cancellation, thousands of phone calls came in for tickets.
But I must say the… the one thing that convinced me of the total prejudice of the people who were reviewing was that not one mentioned the brilliance of the… of the actors. And they were superb. They were just splendid. And you know, at least they could have been give… given credit for that. They enjoyed doing it. They all said they just loved it. And that… that's about it, I would expect. Ok. And it… it ended my career for at least 20 years. I mean, you know, I was completely ostracized. Not completely, but I… I was kept out of the anthologies. I was kept out of critical discussions. It just… in general… everybody just said, if we don't mention him, maybe he'll go away. It may be… you know, that's my view of it. It may just be that my poems got worse. I… I sort of don't think that was the case. I… I think that… well, the… well, as a matter of fact, I used to think, I'm… I'm being paranoid about this. Probably my poems aren't… aren't that strong as they were now, you know. The early poems were about losing my daughter. Well, you know, that's got to be dri… grief dripping. I never could read those poems in public because I'd break up. I… I fall apart. I… I don't feel that way about… about this. Maybe my feelings aren't as strong. Maybe these poems aren't as good. And then, several times people came to me and said what they had heard people say at… at conferences, at mee… meetings where they got together to award… to give awards. For 25 years, I didn't get an award — of any kind — they wouldn't tell me who was involved in this, but that someone had proposed my name for this or that award, and someone got up and said, ’Over my dead body does that man ever get an award'. Well, Robert Lowell wrote to me and said, 'You are hated in certain ver… in certain…' he said: 'Count me on your side here. But you are hated in certain areas here'. And yeah. Well, as a matter of fact, Al Poulin said, 'They will never forgive you'. He's… he was the editor of this… this volume. And so you know, I thought no, I'm not making it up.

I had been warned by… by Wynn Handman not to expect anything from the critics. You know, they did some… some really marvelous experimental plays and, and things there. And people like Dustin Hoffman, Frank Langela, Roscoe Lee Brown got something very close to their start right there and… and first got much notice from performances they did. But… but they never got any credit… credit from the critics. So we didn't expect anything. To… to our great surprise, the one really good review came from Clive Barnes, who up till two weeks before that, had been the… the reviewer for the New York Times, but for some reason had been thrown out and was now with some… some little paper off in the way of… a New York paper, but one that no one paid any attention to. And the funny thing about that… he gave a… an extremely good review. I mean, it… I don't know whether you'd call it a rave or not, but he… he liked it very much. And… and his review showed a real understanding of it and what it was aiming at and what it was doing. And the funny thing about that is that he appeared to sleep through the whole performance. Of course, when he came in, everybody was: 'There's Clive Barnes'. And… and so everybody was watching him, and he seemed to be asleep through the whole thing. And he got every bit of it. Well, there were two other positive reviews, people that liked it. But they were obviously such idiots that, you know, it… it made you wonder if it could possibly be any good at all if they liked it.

At the time that this was being put together I was with my third wife — whom you knew — a Polish-American girl. And for a dozen years, we had got along beautifully, just marvelously. And all of a sudden, in a period of six weeks or a couple months, she came to hate me, to hate everything about our life, to just totally reject the whole thing. I… I must say that… that, you know, the great traumas in my life were, A, to… to go… the war, losing my daughter, and then losing Camille. That was the Polish girl. Her… her father was a cop in Detroit who played the violin and had this very romantic side. So he had named his daughter Camille. And for… for 12 years, we had got along better than I ever got along with any… you know, anybody up till then. And just overnight, it went to hell. It may be that this… you know, there are… I… I never did know why. In a way, I had taken her in some ways as the model for Eva Braun because I wanted the most faithful person I could think of, you know… that Eva Braun insisted on coming there to the bunker in spite of Hitler's order, where she knew she would be killed. But if she would be… if she was killed with him, that was all right. And, you know, I had… I thought Camille was the most faithful person I had ever known. That didn't prove to be entirely the case. And… but I wondered, maybe she was insulted by that. There were… you know, there were probably other things.
Do you want to say any more about that?
I… I don't think I probably should. Well, it may be that she needed a baby. And having lost two babies myself, I… I just felt I can't have another child. I can't have another child ripped away from me. I had had to fight so hard to get to even see either my daughter or my son… you know, go back to court and… the terrible fights, and… meantime, you're not seeing your kid. I thought, I… I just can't do that again. Well, that's maybe a cowardly approach to it. May…maybe you've just gotta… gotta be willing to… to go ahead and love something, even though you'll lose it. That's true of everything, of course, everything in the world. So you don't quite dare cut yourself off from everything. But I guess I had, in this case. I mean, when we got married, I wanted to have a child. But then… then the fight started over my son, and I thought: I just can't do that again. There may have been other things, I… you know. I could suggest half a dozen.

I feel it's my… it's my major effort. I worked at it for 35 years. I read all those awful books, all those lying books. And sometimes, when I go back to it now and again, I think: Hey, this is pretty good, you know? And I'm… and I'm surprised because, you know, I tend to believe what other people tell me about it. They say it's rotten. I think well, you know, you never know for 75 years whether it is or not. Maybe they're right. But whe… then I go back and I… as a matter of fact, there… there… it's been 23 years since that performance. That was 1981. Some former students of Wynn Handman's are putting together a new one now, you know. And it is funny because my reputation is beginning to come back now that I don't need it so badly; I'm retired. I… I don't really need a career. I can… can live on my retirement fairly well. But… and every now and then, young kids will come up to me and say: 'Hey, I've been reading The Fuehrer Bunker, and that's my favorite of your… of your work'. You know, I kiss them and give them… give them every cent I've got. I really… Jesus, have they got nerve. I… I don't usually read them in… in… when I give readings just because I don't want all this controversy, I… I just get sick of it.
You know, it's really funny. I… I gave a reading once at Philadelphia for Phil Berg. Or, Phil… Steve Berg, you know, who… who edits The American Poetry Review and who has always been a supporter of… of mine. He's a lovely guy. He said… he had me do a reading. And I did one or two poems out of the Bunker. The one that I almost always read is the Eva Braun poem where she sings Tea for Two. And then I think I did one other. A man got up at the back of the auditorium and said, 'How dare you glorify these monsters.' My jaw dropped down to here. I thought… I mean, I just… I thought, glorify? I mean, these poems say such… say worse things about them than any historian has ever said. Fortunately, I didn't… Steve was there, and he sort of set his hand on… on my arm and said: 'Just wait'. The audience… the rest of the audience sort of rose up and answered this, and answered it very well. I didn't have to say a word. The very next day, I got a letter from that same man repeating all those accusations except that he had changed 'glorify' to 'humanize'. You've humanized them. Well, I wrote back to him and said, 'You know, one of the things that we… that… that we really basically accuse the Germans about is that they claimed that the Jews were not human. I don't think we ought to imitate their manners… by saying that whoever we see as our enemy was not human.'

A funny thing happened at… at one of the readings at… at Wynn's… at… at the American Place Theatre. And… and I see this as sort of typical of… of the things that happen. There was a discussion period afterwards, which I stayed for. And in the back of the auditorium, a… a rather small, dark man got up and began to… to attack the thing violently because he said there were choruses in which the German… the sort of German public is speaking, and they're being bombed. They're being bombed out, and they're bemoaning this fact. Also, he did… he didn’t men… they're saying, the things we did to others are now being done to us. I mean… but, they're… and he says… he says, 'I don't feel sorry for those people. I was in the… I was in the camps.' Now, as I figure it, he cannot possibly… unless he was a baby, he could not have been in one of the camps. Maybe he's visited them. I visited them. But anyway… and… and he was ranting against this. Again Wynn… Wynn stopped me. I was going to answer this. I was going to say, but, you know, they… they have said, we are guilty, and… and we're paying for it. And… but you don't expect people… you don't expect people who are getting bombed to… to rejoice, do you? I mean, what… what are they going to do except bemoan their fate? What happens when… in The Persians by Aeschylus, the Persians come on and say 'Whoa, we're getting killed. We don't like it.' When… and then when we left the theatre, we came out, and… and he had a group of people around him. And… and he was going on with this same rant against these choruses, or against the play in general. Wynn pulled me aside and said: 'Come here. He read for the part of Goebbels and didn't get it'. Inside the theatre, when the… when the… the… the talk sort of ended about his complaint against the play, Wynn turned to another man who was sitting down front, who was a big, heavyset guy… I mean, both these guys were… were Jewish. He turned to the other guy and said, 'What did you think of the play?' He said: ‘I think it's a masterpiece’. That's the way it's gone for me.

There's one thing that would have made everything different. None of this would have happened except when that first book came out, it was the second year for the New York Book Critics Circle Award. Now, this award was set-up because all… all of the other awards were given for extraneous reasons, like, this guy should have got it for his last book. They didn't recognize how good that last book was. Or this guy should have got it because he's broke, and he's got to have his teeth fixed, and, you know, there was always some other reason than the excellence of the book that… that really led to the… nobody said… said this out loud. But… but all of the awards, the… the Pulitzers, the — what else was there — there was the National Book Award. And so they set up the National Book Critics Circle Award. And the first year, they did this. The second year, my book came up. And a person who was on the staff there told me, 'Your book had already been picked'. The Fuehrer Bunker had been picked to win it. Then Lowell died. So he had to have it. And it isn't, I think, one of his strong books at all. But that would have changed my income, for the rest of the… what schools I could teach at, whether people would speak to me or not… all of those things would have been different. That's the way it goes.

I don't know. I mean, I… I could see that I… you know, I… I was being more and more held in obscurity. And people weren't liking me… but I was used to that. I mean, you know, the stuff I'd done all my life, everybody said, don't do that! You know my… my father said: 'For God's sake, I mean you can't just… just go and… and be a poet. You know, you'll… you’ll starve to death, and… and your work will never come to anything'. Well, two weeks after that, I got the Pulitzer Prize. And, you know, the… so I figured that, ok, The [Fuehrer] Bunker… everybody says it… it's no good, and I'm no good for writing it. They told Frost the same things. And when he got to be 60, then they all changed their mind. I thought, maybe they'll all change their mind. Well, I'm almost 80, and a few have changed their minds. I don't know. I just had… I figured I… I'd do what I have to do. And that's all I do have to do.

You know, I felt a little bit… that was a little… oh, I'm not trying to com… compare myself to the giants. Maybe I am. But pretend I'm not. You know, after Rilke… after Rilke finally is able to… to write the great elegies, then… then he writes a whole bunch of little poems, and they're light poems — The Sonnets to Orpheus — and wh… whereas you feel that the elegies — The Duino Elegies — are… they're necessary. Well, I felt that way about The Fuehrer Bunker. It… I have to do this. And as a matter of fact, if… if I die, and… and I haven't finished it, I… I will feel I'm a failure. I felt I'd finished it; I can do some light things.
Well, along came an opportunity. A man named DeLoss McGraw wrote me… wrote me a… a letter and said: 'You…' he said: 'You don't know me; I'm a painter. I'm going to go spend a couple days at Cranbrook, the… the art institute outside Detroit. And I want to make a couple color lithographs'. Frankly, I don't think I knew even what a color lithograph is. But he said, 'and I want to use your name'. And I thought: use my name? How can you use my name in a color lithograph? You know, I feel like… that old… that old joke — Oh, who was it — Henny Youngman who used to say: 'Take my wife, please!' You know, I feel like, take my name, please! If you have a name like DeWitt Snodgrass, you know, take it in vain. Take it away. Take it, just take it! And… here he… he said… so I… I wrote to him and said, 'Yeah, yeah, sure, go ahead. Help yourself. But you know, if you take any pictures as slides, we'd… we'd, we'd love to see them.' To our utter amazement — we were living in Newark, Delaware, then, and I was with Kathy — and here came a package in the mail about this… this wide and about this long. And we couldn't imagine what the hell it was. We opened it up; there's two color lithographs. And one is… is called WD Snodgrass, You Sentimental Fool, and the other one is called, WD Snodgrass, You Silly Man, Come in out of the Rain. And we just thought these were wonderful. And we said, 'Jesus, this is just marvelous. Anything else, you know, anything else you take pictures of, give… send us copies, please'. And he sent us a whole bunch of things then, which I took to Mexico with us… we were on our way… by now we had started wintering in Mexico.
And… and we… so we took… we didn't really look at them while… while we were up there in the… Ah, you know, we ran through them, but we didn't really look. When we got down there, we got really fascinated with these pictures. And there was one in which it… it showed, WD… by now, I'd got him to drop my last name. The name WD was… WD Attempts to Save Cock Robin. And there was this man carrying on his back a bird upside down… a great big bird, a bird as big as he is, which has not only wings, but arms. And the arms are dragging over backwards. And he… he's laboring under the weight of this bird, which is either dead or injured. You don't know which. And I… I you know, I thought, he can't have all the fun out of this. I mean, I'm going to get in this game. So I started doing poems based on his paintings. I had earlier done some, some poems about the real modern classics, you know, Van Gogh and Matisse and… and so on. But this here, I was doing… got interested in doing something about somebody… that somebody's doing right now.

Now, he’s… he's a very interesting man. He had… he had been a teacher of painting and also of the history of painting and iconography and things like that. At a certain point, when a marriage of his broke up and he had two or three children that he had to help support, he suddenly decided he was going to be a full time painter and give up teaching. I mean, jeez, what nerve. And what he did was to set out to teach himself… to unteach himself all the things he had learned and decided that from then on, he would paint the way a child paints. Well, there is something in him that admires children and thinks of them as innocent and, you know… children don't seem that way to me at all. But he… he feels that way. And he wanted to paint innocently, like a child. The result is that when he did a painting like this one of WD carrying the dead or injured bird on his back… well, we would argue about what his paintings were about sometimes. He misunderstands my poem; I misunderstand his paintings. This often happens… it does no harm. I… I remember, I… pointing out that the iconography of this painting is very much based on a number of Renaissance paintings of Christ carrying the cross. You can see how that might well be the case, yeah. He said, ’'No, no, it's nothing like that at all.' He says, 'I had a buddy who was in the… who was in the Vietnam War who… who carried a friend of his four miles to get him help, and when he got there, the guy was dead.' So all those things that he had learned had now become unconscious, and it's still affecting the painting very deeply.
You know, some people would look at a painting of his and think: oh any… any child could make a painting like that. Oh, yeah… any child who had studied iconography for 30 years. It's made a very interesting thing there. And he's tremendously inventive. He's coming up with new ideas all the time and all the time. And we've ended up doing — let's see —- two books together and a couple other projects. Sometimes, like… like he decided at one point that we should do a… an alphabet together. He had found a… somewhere, a sponsor who… who was interested in something like that. So as always, he never calls me up. He calls Kathy and says, ’Now don't tell De about this, but…’ and of course, as soon as she puts the phone down, she gives me… ‘Guess what he's up to now!’ So… so I made an alphabet.
And, you know, I work very, very slowly. Nothing comes easily to me. It never amazes me if a poem takes me eight years. He will turn out five paintings in a week. And I mean that literally. You know, sometimes it's more than eight years. Sometimes for me, it's… I decided to try to get as fertile as… as he is. And so at… we were in Mexico again another year, and I thought: ok, I'll do an alphabet. I'll do one letter of… of the alphabet each night. Pretty soon, I found myself doing two and three a night. And on the very last day, I did five all in one night. Well, he never painted them. But I got an alphabet out of it. And you know, that… that was fine. And I like... I like some of the parts of it. I think the… I think the reason he didn't want to do it — we never talked about this… I don’t… because I don't want to seem, you know, seem as if I'm blaming him for something about that — but it would've, I think, reduced him to being an illustrator. And… and like most painters, he… he doesn't want to be thought of as being an ill… illustrator. And it's a specially touchy point for him because much of his painting is based on literary sources. As a matter of fact, he did… he did a set of illustrations for Alice in Wonderland, which won the biggest prize for art illustration in the country that year. But anyway, it didn't leave him enough room for… for his imagination. I don't… I don't mind in the least if somebody reads a poem of mine and thinks it's an illustration of that… that painting. Fine. You know, so long as you read… it's like, you know, call me anything you like, but spell my name right. Read the poem as a… as a map. Read it as a… a set of instructions, if you want. Just read it. Just buy it and read it.

I think… did… did we say… say the other day that Robert Lowell had said to me at one point, 'You know, if you're having trouble with your own work, and… and it's gotten too painful for you to handle it, take some of Mrs Norton's Rilke translations and try… well just ruffle or… a… and kick them around and try to make a poem'. And I finally did get to doing that. And I… I got to thinking: gee, these are better than a lot of the other translations that I see around. I did… I did that from time to time, and… and I liked what I was producing. And also, I… I really fell in love with… with the poem as I was working on it. But I feel like I can never really get a poem in another language. You've got to take that with your mother's milk. And so, in a way, I am making a new poem if I'm doing it in another language, even if… and I go to a considerable extent to preserve the literal con… the dictionary sense of the poem. It… I don't do like Lowell does, who’s… who'll sort of go off and make up his own poem just as a… take it… take the other poem for a springboard and go off. Yeah. No, I don't do that.

I do try to find… stay very close to the literal sense. But I'm sure that the music of the poem and the way the language gears together… does something different. I mean… I mean, and you know, the brain is trying… the poem is trying to in… involve as much of the brain as possible in there. And a good many of the parts of the brain are going to be doing different things in a poem that's been translated into another language. So I found myself doing that. And I… I spoke also of… of how I was moved by the songs of… of Hugues Cuenod. And… and I wanted to sing those songs. But I can't learn other languages. I'm… I'm too dilatory or too lazy or something like that. The only other… the only language that — aside from English — that I've ever been able to learn at all is ancient Greek. And… and I've never published any… any translation from ancient Greek. I… I once did one, but I didn't publish it. I… I've done translations from at least 20 other languages, none of which I'm able to read or speak. I love to work with somebody else on… on this, a native speaker or a… or a scholar of the… I mean, I've done a lot of the troubadour songs. There I'm working with scholars. Well, you know, a lot of this stuff that I… that I'm working with are things that the ordinary reader will think: Oh, that stuff's deadly dull. Only the scholars really know how… how vitally interesting the stuff is. And they… when they see a chance to have the poem come to life again, they're… they’re really anxious to work with you. And… and it's very nice not to be locked up at your desk by yourself all the time. Also, this way, A, you… you meet some really dandy people and some very learned people. You also get to know the poems in a much more intimate way than you… than at least I would be able to otherwise. And also, you learn something about what… what poems are… how… what go… what goes into them.

How do you learn that?
By getting closer to the sense that a… a native speaker would… would find there, the things beyond literal sense. For ins… they can tell you about them, or you can feel them. And… and also, you can hear the thing read in the original language. I… I don't know. It happens in ways that I… I don't quite understand. I remember doing a poem of Rilke's once. And it was with a lady who happened to live across the street from me who was a… who was a German native. And she read the poem once or twice, and I suddenly realized, ok, at this point there has to be a kind of pun happening between this word and that word down there. I didn't understand German. I just knew that that had to happen in the poem, and so I asked her about it. She said, 'Yes, how did you know that?' I don't know. That's just the way those things work. I… I worked for years and years on a poem of Rimbaud's, the… Le Bateau Ivre  — The Drunken Boat  — wonderful, long, long, marvelous poem. And I just felt… the… well, for the first time I saw how… how much you can talk about things like… his dissociation from his family… how his father fled from his mother, how he became a homosexual and now feels sealed off. And somehow, in… it… it's left with a… a picture of a… of man in a little boat, a scow out in the water, anchored in the mud, unable to reach this flower or that flower. And suddenly, these little, local details are telling you about the whole nature of this man's life. What… what images of that sort can do. And I… I don't think I ever would've got that if I hadn't been working with it so intimately that I was trying to translate it. I don't think I can say more about it.

I think I mentioned earlier a trip that… when I didn't go to Russia — couldn't go to Russia — because they had cancelled the cultural policy one year… they weren't very mad at us, it's clear, because all they cancelled was Hello, Dolly and me. In… then they called me in a coup… up in a couple weeks, and they said, 'How would you like to go to some of the small, eastern European countries? We… we could start out by sending you to Belgium, and then Hungary… or, and then Romania, then Hungary. And maybe we can get you into Czechoslovakia; we don't know. No… nobody's been able to get in there for some years. And… then… but then you'll come to the good part, and… and you'll go to Paris and Berlin and Portugal. May… maybe we can…' And well, how could… you know, who says no to a thing like this? I didn't even know the names of the capitals of these countries, many of them, or what… what the currency was or… or what language they spoke, any of this.
But anyhow, I… I went on this trip, and the first… the first country was Bulgaria. And I think I’d… I was the first American who had been… been in… had got into there for man… many years except for people who were in the consulate there. And then from there, I went up north to Romania. And of course, I'd known a lot of Romanians when I was kid… immigrants to the United States and so forth. But I didn't know anything about Romania or about its language. And when I got there, I… they said… they said, 'Oh we're terribly sorry'. Now, they couldn't mention Christmas then. But… but obviously, they were celebrating Christmas. And they had tree… decorated trees, and people wear… you know, they had… they didn't have Santa Claus; they had Father Christmas. And… and they said 'But it's… it's the vacation season, and all the poets are gone. And so we can't introduce you to the people at the Writer's Union'. I said, 'Well, that's fine'. You know, I've met a lot of poets. Some of them I liked; some of them I disliked. But we can't really discuss poetry because we don't speak the same language, and… and no interpreter's going to be able to get to the subtleties of this kind of thing. Tha… that's fine. They said, 'Well, what would you like to do while you're here?' I said, 'What I'd really like to do is meet some folk musicians'. I said I had started translating songs of one sort and another. As a matter of fact, I think I had already sort of taken a vow that… there were… there were so many American poets that were translating all kinds of fine poetry already, I thought may… maybe I should try to translate only songs because I have that background in music, and I… I want to sing, and so forth. And they said, 'Ok, yeah, we… but… but there's a problem. There's a… there's a very fine folk…' well, ok, I should say this.
The Hungarians adore the classical arts and classical music. And many of the greatest supposedly German comp… composers and conductors are really Hungarians… Fritz Reiner, just, you know, one after another. They… they probably grew up in… in Hungary, but in a German family and… and following, you know, the German arts. The folk arts mean that much to the Romanians. And they said, 'the… there's a wonderful folk institute here, and the head of it is a Dr Pop — Mihai Pop — but… and…and I'm sure he would love to talk to you. But if we apply, it'll take six months for an ok to come through, and… and you'll be gone from here, you know, a thousand miles, several thousand miles away. Instead, one morning, you just walk over there as if you didn't know any better and knock on the door’ which… which I did. And the… the lady who answered the door was really nonplussed. She… I… I said, 'I… I'd like to speak to Dr Pop. I'm an American poet'. I don't know whether she understood this… much of this. But she took me indoors and sent me down in a hall, and she went into his office. And pretty soon, she came out with him speaking perfect English, delighted to talk to me, you know, wonderfully learned and warm and lively. I came out carrying two enormous piles of books, like, books and records and music and all… all this kind of stuff. I mean, it… it was just a grand experience. And it's wonderful to have met him. He's dea… dead now for many years.

And so… I… and I came back often and worked on… on folk songs. And every time I came there, people would say to me, 'Have you been to the gay graveyard?' Now, gay didn't mean then what… what it means now. It meant lively, not comical exactly… but, you know, the old meaning of the word gay. As a matter of fact, I… I don't know what that name is in Romanian. I only know maybe three… three words of Romanian. But I… I would keep saying, 'no I… no why would I want to go to a graveyard.' I mean, you know, I've… I've seen graveyards. What… They’re dead. Yea… and… but finally, somebody asked me again, and I went.
You know, I had developed really… really pretty close… very close friends there. People are tremen… highly… highly literate and… and you know, at one time they had had a wonderful educational system, and… and there were some terrific poets, and I got to know them. And went… we went with a friend to go to this gay graveyard. Well, I was just stunned the minute I saw it. I thought, you know, I… I've got to… I've got to do something about this. The usual thing they have for a grave there is a plain cross of wood, and probably they carve on it the name of the person and dates, and that's about it. Well, there was a certain man who lived in a little village up in Transylvania. It's called Sãpânta. And his father had been killed in one of the wars. But when he grew up, he then inherited the job of grave carver. And he decided that that's just not enough. And… so what he did is, at the point where the two arms of the cross meet, and he made a much fancier cross than most of them did, with a little roof over it. And where… where the two arms of the cross meet, he would carve a scene out of this person's life. And he would… he would carve it in… in depth. Then he would paint that whole scene in brilliant colors. And then he'd go over the whole cross and decorate it in fancy patterns, usually in… developed from the… the patterns of embroidery. And you know, the peasants wore wonderful embroidered… I mean, the … the… I used to have a couple of these wonderful shirts that came down to here, and it was all embroidered all the way up and down, and… and… well, it was patterned like that. And then he painted the whole… the whole cross in these colors. And of course, this was a little village where the… the major thing was sheep herding. And of course, he knew everybody, so he knew all about their lives. And one of the things he said was, the trouble with… with my job as grave carver is that they all want a different kind of scene, but they've all had the same lives. Well, he knew the… he knew the minor details of their lives, and… and they… he manages to get them all in… into these little scenes. Then, he had been through only third grade, but he could write a couplet underneath there about them.
Well, one day it… it hit him: if I can write a couplet, why not two couplets? Why not four? Why not six, eight? You know, and he would go clear down the cross telling about this person's life. Sometimes he goes over onto the back of the cross, and he goes on there. And he doesn't hold anything back. He tells it all as… as he see… as he saw it. It's like an illustrated Spoon River Anthology. Yeah. Everybody com… compares it to that. I think it's much better. Ah. And… because it doesn't have any of that kind of sentimentality about it. If he thinks you were a lout, he says so. If… if you were a layabout, or, you know, he will say that. In fact, one of the… one of the grave markers says: 'When I was young, I used to think that having good… good drinks and goo… easy women next… or good… good women… pretty women around me was everything'. Says: 'But now that I've got old and grey, they all hate me'. Anyway, and… and you can see three women at the side. I mean, he's sitting there with his little glass at the table, and three women are… are looking in the window and sticking out their tongues at him. And so that many of these… many of these scenes are really quite funny.

A… and people used to come from all over the continent to see this. Busloads of tourists would come from France… from different places and… and come to see… to see this graveyard. And you'll see them going around from grave to grave and breaking up into laughter. Yet, at the same time, I've got to say that the effect of the whole graveyard is… is very tragic and very sad indeed, even though the individual graves — some of them — are funny. And… I'd say another thing, too, that for him, the ultimate sin is laziness. He'd much rather you were wicked. And… and so he'll show a guy who's been a policeman all his life. And he says: When I, you know, when I was a kid, I thought… I thought policeman were the greatest. So when I grew up, I became a cop. And… and since I was no fool, everybody hated me. In other words, I was a pretty smart cop and knew how to… how to work it. But it… or… or he'll say: I was a wicked man here in town. There were lots of women. He says: But… but I think I did some good here in this town even though I… there were lots of women who laughed every time they got together with me. And… and in a way, he likes that better than somebody who just hung around the main square and talked all the… all the time and… and… but he would show these kind of things on… on the… on the grave markers. And there's a whole lot of them. There must… oh, there's several. There might be as many as 500. I… I don't think...two or three...
So how many did you translate?
I translated, of those, probably 50 or 80 and made a collection. Then Kathy and I went together, and in one week, we took more than 1000 photographs. It was really fun… we went with a friend of ours, a very literate man that I had worked with on some… some translations, a Ioan Popa, who's a professor. And the three of us worked together on this. What we would do, many of the… the paint will… will grow faded on… on these markers over time. And we found a way to bring back the color was to dampen it. So we got… do you remember flit guns? Oh. They're insect killers. It… You have a little tank here and… and a tube, and… and you pump it like this, and it… well, we… we got… somehow, we found a store where they had flit guns. And we got a couple flit guns, and we carried them around full of water. And so while one person is setting up the camera and getting in focus and… and so forth, the other two of us are spraying away at this thing like everything and trying to get it evenly coated so that the color is all bright and new. And, and we took 1000 photographs in… in a… in a week. And we always had to do that before 11:00 in the morning because by then, the sun was so bright you couldn't take photographs anymore. And anyway, it's… it’s in a lovely area full of fruit trees and… and all around the churchyard, there's these church… and then the pretty little church there beside it. And after… after our full week, the rain broke for the first time. And so… so we went.
And by… by now, the grave carver was dead. He was known as Patras, which means… it… it's related- it's like, pet… 'petrified'. He was a woodworker — Patras — His real name was Ioan Stan, meaning Stan. Stan was his family name. Ioan  — John  — Stan. But nobody called him that; he was always called Patras. Well, the way a doctor, you call, doctor, how are you? And… and he became really quite well to do. And he's probably the wealthiest man in town there. But he was… he was dead the last time we went there. And one of his disciples had taken over. And we went and had supper in his... had our lunch while it was raining in his cabin, in his house. And his disciple brought us over examples… what the… what they drink, is… it's a brandy. It's like Slivovitz, called… they call it Tzuica — plum brandy — and it's very strong. And if you get the stuff the peasants make, it's… it’s really great. And then, if they add… sometimes, they will add a fruit flavor to it. And I forget what it's called then. And anyway, the disciple brought us over some bottles of this that had been put up by Patras himself 10 years before. And… and we got very, very looped and we went out with the flit guns and were chasing each other through the graveyard in the rain.

I have thought about what a poem is, and it seems to me that it's a crystallization of… of one particular brain which preserves the qualities of that brain. I mean, and… and if it's a good poem, you read it, and you know it's Bobby Burns. Or you know it's Shakespeare. Or you know it's Sir Phillip Sidney. You know it's Pope. Because certain… certain qualities of mind have been crystallized there. And it allows another person to identify, to broaden their own mind by identifying with your brain's limits and possibilities and so forth.

There are a bunch of different things. Only one poem about the political situation and… and Bush and the war and all of that. I would like to do more of those, and I think as soon as I get to Mexico and… and am not doing things like this, that's one of the things that I… I want to be working on. Otherwise, a… a lot of... has gone into the stuff about aging. The first was a poem called Post-TURP. You know what a TURP is? No. Trans-Urethral Resectioning of the Prostate. If your prostate is swollen, of course, you can't urinate. So they drill a new hole in it — through it — that's the trans… all right? My doctor, when this was done, didn't tell me that you would no longer ejaculate. The son of a bitch. He was… he was angry at me because I… I… he wanted me to come over and talk… talk to him, to be prepared for the operation. And… and I said, 'I don't have time to drive over there. We're getting packed to go to Mexico. Can't you please tell me over the telephone?' Well, so he told me a thing or two, and he never mentioned this. What happens is that the semen now goes into a little sac, and then you pass it during urination. But all of a sudden, I was finding that there was no… that nothing was being ejected. And this rather surprised me, and I had to call up the doctor and ask him about it. No, that's perfectly normal after this operation. So I have a poem about that. I have a poem about getting a pacemaker. Wait a minute; there's one other poem about something that happens to you as you get old. I can't remember what it is because one of the things that happens to you as you get old is that you can't remember.

I did a poem about packing up my… my best lute and putting it away and feeling badly about that, but I can't play it anymore, so there… there's no use. A lot of poems about Kathy, some of them funny — all of them a little funny, I think — sort of flirting with her through the poem. I… let's see. There's one that I like about our neighbor kids here — farm kids — there's a… one about fast foods. And usually I don't write about that kind of, you know, subject that you would… you would expect to find either in a health magazine or in a women's magazine or something like that. But the… I call it a… a rap rondo. A rap rondeau, rather… you know, a rondo's a musical form but a rondeau is a french poetry form where you have only two rhymes in the whole thing. It's 16 lines long, only two rhymes. You've got… however, the first half line has to be repeated twice in the poem at the end of the sec… stanzas. It's also the only poem in the world that has managed to get the name Simone Weil and the word 'fucking' in the same line. I don't know; there's one… one based on a poem, a painting of Del's called WD Chasing Fireflies. So I have one about chasing fireflies and trying to catch fireflies. A lot of them are full of jokes now. I think in general that as the sort of high rhetoric and… and sense of elevation and stuff like that has gone out of poetry, what has come in tends to be a kind of comedy — Jim Tate, certainly. But in general, a lot of these poems… well, where I used to have to make footnotes on things like Greek gods or stuff of that sort, now I have to make footnotes on old dirty jokes that people have forgotten. There's one about finding a… a dead cat in our ceiling here.

There's one of… one to Kathy. You… you know the… the most famous poem during the English Renaissance was Christopher Marlowe's Come Live with Me and Be My Love. Well, I wrote one, Come Live with Me and Be My Last, for her, obviously. And so… so, I don't know. A… a lot of humor has come. I'm not all… I yea… I feel I can make the complaint that... that some... somebody made to Dr Johnson, you know, I can't be a poet, cheerfulness keeps creeping in. I must say that my life with Kathy has been so much better… has just really changed so many things, that many of the poems get cheerful, if I don't turn to the international situation or to our government or things like that.

You know, we do live out… out in the middle of the countryside here. And there's woods all around us, and so forth. And… and we get a good many kinds of wildlife. The first night that we were moving in, out here, it was the middle of January because I was starting a semester teaching at Syracuse — the semester, the winter semester —and we were carrying boxes and stuff into the house. And all of a sudden, a great horned owl spoke from the edge of the… from the hedgerow right over there. And I… I guess it sort of became our… our — what would you call it — totem, or something of that sort. We could… we could watch that nest until… until the leaves got up. And… and we would watch the mother over there in the early morning sort of doing her nest work and tearing up fish and stuff. They… they lived especially on fish from the lake down below there. And… and we would watch them. And we watched them go out to… to hunt every… every night. Or we would hear them, by then it was dark. They… they would go out around 11 or so and then always… you know, I… I said that we were moving in right… right in January and just in the dead of winter. That's when the male's voice takes on tremendous resonance. He's much smaller. He's not nearly as fierce as the females. I'm told that happens in certain species. But the… but he… but he… he speaks first, and bigger. And… and it's five notes called, hoo hoohoo hoo hoo. And then there's a pause. And then she answers about a fourth higher — from across the field, probably — hoo hoohoo hoo hoo, which probably only proves that winter nights here are so bad that not even an owl would go out by himself. They always travel together, and they come back about four o’clock. And, now that nest, we got to… we had the babies for about two weeks when the nest came down in a storm.
The next year, I had a baby. The… the local post master is the wild bird man here. And he called up and says, 'I've got a baby owl, and you can have it if you'll… you’ll… but you'll have to… to go out and get a lot of dead things for it to eat, drive around the back woods and pick up all the dead stuff off the highway.' And he says, 'Then you'll have to teach it to fly and to hunt'. And… and I remember certain of my friends really got very nervous when… when we would go together into… into the cabin where I was keeping it.

What I would do is I would take the… I… I had a freezer full of chopped up robins and groundhogs and all kinds of dead junk like that, and I would take pieces of that and… and tie it on a string and then pull it across the floor in front of them and make them come… make him come chase… or her — it was… it was a female — come chasing after… after it. Then once I… I knew that she'd got that under her belt, we would tie it up on string so that it was up in the air, and she would have to fly to… to get it.
So what happened to that owl?
That owl went away. I… I took her out. I… I mean, getting her out of that cabin was a really… a real job. I had to get around behind her and get a hold of the legs real fast because those claws are… well, her claws were as long as my… my little finger and the… and with a needle point and then a razor sharp edge down one side. You know, that's how they pierce things when they... And so I had to get her legs from behind like this and then get somebody to open the door and take her out and turn her loose. And at first she seemed quite… quite helpless. Then she went away for about five or six weeks, I would think. No, it couldn't have been that long. A couple weeks, anyway. And… and I must say, I… I felt a devastation that I had never quite felt with my children. I mean, I would go out and call. I'd give that call, and nothing would answer. I mean, nights have never seemed quite so empty. And… but then she came back, and… and I fed her for quite a while. And… and pretty soon then, a male came along, and one night when I called her, she didn't answer. Instead, a male answered. And I realized, ok. Then… then that was all right. Everything's ok.
And nine years later she came back to… and… yeah, Kathy came running into the room here one day and, and says, 'Owl, owl, owl, owl!' And we went out, and there's this enormous owl up in the tree. You know, it looked like… my… my usual description of this is, she… it looked like a St Bernard with awnings. I mean, you can't imagine how big she was up there. But you could tell it was the same owl because if you gave that call, that 'hoo hohoo hoo hoo', she'd answer with a baby screech. And she was absolutely obviously full grown. And… and, you know, I had… at the time I started raising this, I was with… I was with Camille, with a different wife. But now Kathy went out, and she… she stood out there and practically froze to death talking back and forth to that owl for… for hours. And… and that lasted for several days until we left to go to Mexico.

Well, it was a wonderful owl. I mean, she was so beautiful. When I… when I had her and I was feeding her, it was… it was kind of interesting because there was a little shack that was still standing up… up here that was part of the farm that this once was. And I would feed her on the back side of that shack thinking that… hoping that my neighbors wouldn't know she was there. They're farmers, and they would shoot her. And I… I can sympathize with that. I mean, you know, they've got ducks and geese and all kinds of small animals, cats and… and… anyway, as… she would come and sit in the tree out here and, and holler and screech and yell. And so I would go to… go to feed her up there. As I got about halfway up there, I would feel this whoooosh right past my head. And… and you know I knew… I knew she wouldn't… she wouldn’t hurt me. But she… she could have… she could have really done for me. I mean, you know, those… those claws are so terrific. But she never… never did; except one time, I went up there, and there was the wreckage of the barn, was there. The whole big barn had fallen. And when I got up… when I got up there, she didn't come immediately to the feeding station. She went over into the barn first and was sniffing around over there for something, maybe… maybe mice or something. I don't know. And so I was standing there holding a… a flashlight, and I had something else in the other hand. I guess it was the food I was going to… and... and I got to waiting for her. And in the meantime, I had to take a leak. So I stepped over to the side and started to do so, whereupon she came and started to light on my head very slowly. But… but that was where she was coming down. And so… and since my left hand was busy, I reached up with the flashlight and shoved her away. And she… she moved away. But... but the… but the idea of having her light on the top of my head did not really appeal to me greatly.

This is just called Owls.
 
Wait; the great horned owls
Calling from the woods' edge; listen.
   There: the dark male, low
And booming, tremoring the whole valley.
   There: the female, resolving, answering
High and clear, restoring silence.
   The chilly woods draw in
Their breath, slow, waiting, and now both
   Sound out together, close to harmony.
 
   These are the year's worst nights.
Ice glazed on the top boughs,
   Old snow deep in the ground,
Snow in the red-tailed hawks'
   Nests they take for their own.
Nothing crosses the crusted ground.
   No squirrels, no rabbits, the mice gone,
No crow has young yet they can steal.
   These nights, the iron air clangs
Like the gates of a cellblock, blank
   and black as the inside of your chest.
 
   Now, the great owls take
The air, the males' calls take
   Depth on and resonance, they take
A rough nest, take their mate
   And, opening out long wings, take
Flight, unguided and apart, to caliper
   The blind synapse their voices cross
Over the dead white fields,
   The dead black woods, where they take
Soundings on nothing fast, take
   Soundings on each other, each alone.
 
So. I mean I think you can hear that… that call coming in again and again and variations of it. That… I… I was- I… I know that I was imitating Whitman in doing… when I did that. Now and then, he will… he will establish a rhythm quite different from the rhythm that you get in metrical verse or someth… and… and then work variations on that. We… I think we talked about that yesterday… We did…if I… if I'm not mistaken… We did… talked about Out of the Cradle. Yeah. Well, I was sort of trying to imitate what he was doing in Out of the Cradle.
 

That was a poem in… in monologues by a bunch of British agents who were sent to the Continent to… to, you know, to spy on the Germans while… while France was un… under German domination. And… but they were sent there really to be caught as a prot… as a way to protect the other real secret agents. They… they were sent there with full knowledge that they would be caught. And… and they were, and mostly executed. One or… one or two escaped. And… and they are interviewed near the end. But… but they're quite bumbling secret agents, and… yeah. And… and that… that did indeed become a kind of model for me.

I know Thomas Hardy had some affect on your early work.
Oh, an awful lot of… yeah, yeah, I love Hardy immensely. And… oh yes, he always had… I suppose, all along, he did. Well yeah, sure. He also had an influence on The Fuehrer Bunker since, after all, he wrote The Dynasts a… about the Napoleonic wars. My… my complaint against the… The Dynasts — and I love… I love almost everything of Hardy's — I didn't… I wasn't specially taken by it because it… it's filled with a kind of Shakespearean language and… that, you know, that just doesn't work now. Old… you… that… that isn't what you'd expect from Hardy at all, a kind of high-flown, old out-of-date language of that sort. But, that's what he did.
What else did you find in Hardy that was useful?
Oh, gosh. Partly that other… the other kind of language. I mean, the lower, more conversational language, the structure above everything, the way this word doesn't exist as a word by itself. It… it reflects into this word, and then the two of them reflect into… into that word, and… and the dealing with, you know, sort of intimate emotions. And surely his… his poems about the dead wife, who… who had been such a… an overwhelming figure to him. He was rather… a rather shy and withdrawn man. And here came this great, regal woman riding a horse. And he… he was just sort of overwhelmed by this. And… and then gradually, the thing grew colder and colder and colder. Finally, one day… well, finally, he had a… a stairway built — an outside stairway built on the house — that's always a sort of… a clue that everything may not be entirely happy in there. And he went out to see a… a rehearsal of one of his plays. And when he came back, she was dead; although I'm not sure… but what he may have gone… not realized that then and gone back to bed… gone… gone straight to his own bed. I… I'm not… I'm not sure about that. But yeah. It… as a matter of fact, if I had read those poems, really… I… I had read one or two of them in a class or something like that, but if I had really known those poems, I probably never would have dared write the poems about my daughter. They were so much influenced by that.

That's a much more recent poem, and… and it is about some children who live right nearby around here. We have a neighbor who's a farm laborer. And… and the farm people here are having a terrible time right now. They lose their… their machinery, their animals, and finally, they lose their… their family farms. And there's… there's a guy who sometimes does some work for us. And he — let's see — when we first met him… I mean, now he… he's a guy who's maybe 45. He looks 10… 10 or 15 years older than me. I mean, he has… has practically no teeth left. He's banged up his fingers. Well, he's has… he’s hit his… his hands with chainsaw from time to time. They're still more or less intact. But boy, he has a really rough life of it.
And at the time that we first met him, he was… he was living with three… three children in a… a little trailer up here. And one of those was particularly… was of particularly interest to me. She looked like a… what do you call those little, those little dolls that have the freckles all over it and the little round eyes? Raggedy Ann dolls, yeah. She looked just like a Raggedy Ann doll, and she was… she was very cute. And it was clear that already at the age of maybe four or five, she was going to be quite… quite handsome. The body was already very attractive. But she was not his daughter. Her mother — who was a very attractive woman — had, you know, had got pregnant. And she needed a husband. So she married Joe. Then they had two kids of their own.
Now, the illegitimate child… it was probably a little retarded. At least, the teachers said so. I… I couldn't help wondering if that didn't have to do with her position in the family and with… I… you know, we'll never known whether she… whether she's illegitimate or not. But now, she was… she was never particularly friendly to me. She was a little more friendly to Kathy. Then… then the... the two… the two other children were quite friendly. By now, I've… I've recently seen this, this girl. She's grown. She's… she’s much older. And again — and this is very unfortunate — she... she did grow up to be as attractive as I thought she would, which is very… very dangerous for her. It means that she can get kinds of attention that she never got before, but that will not be good for her. I… I continue to be worried about her. Meantime, the… the other little girl has grown up to be almost — who… who was a little hoyden — she was, you know, loud and yelling all the time and screaming and carrying on, jumping up and down; she… she has grown to be almost equally attractive.
They're now in the… in their middle teens. And the… and the little boy is… is very cute and funny because he has the biggest ears I've ever seen in my life, and they stick straight out. I certainly hope that none of my neighbors ever see this film. But it… it is about the… and… and the thing that strikes us about them… these kids, is that they have nothing, and they're very happy. And… and they're so respectful and… and sweet-tempered. Well, not always to each other… I mean, they, you know, they have kid fights. But you know, when older people come around, they… they address them respectfully and, and in a friendly fashion, and… whereas our… our, the aca… we still have academic friends who live nearby here and — or who live in the cities — and we go in and see them. And their kids are always disrespectful and… and complaining. They have everything. They've been given… you know, when I think of, you know… I used to feel guilty for the amount of things I was given when I was a kid. My family had a little more money than most of the people around. And… and that got to feeling, you know, kind of unjust. Well, these kids have so much… so much… many more things than… than I had ever imagined, dreamed of having. And… and they aren't likeable very much, usually. But the funny thing is that, because they are dissatisfied, they can become dissatisfied with themselves and with their own performance and so forth. And they may be, you know, they may make something out of their lives. Not that they necessarily will. Most of them won't. But… but the people who do probably will come from that… from that area. And… whereas our… our farm neighbors, just to get enough to eat and a… and a roof will seem like a major achievement to them.

This is called Farm Kids.
 
Our neighbor's slim rag doll of a daughter (not,
we're told, of his own getting) breathed out: "You've got
so many cookbooks!" - each eye a startled O
as it skimmed our kitchen shelves - "And so
much food!" Later, straight-faced, she said her mother
lives now with her new boyfriend in another
county. Hard up for farm jobs, her "Dad" has to drive
60 miles to the factory, getting up at 5
AM to leave them where his folks watch them
until he gets back home - sometimes 5 PM.
 
We go for long walks every evening. If we pass
their trailer, they all tumble out shouting, "Snodgrass!
Snodgrass!" The slim, straight-faced one is thought slow
by her teachers. There's much she'd do well not to know.
The cool offspring of our city friends are driven
to special schools, sports dates, parties, given
phones, computers, cars, the insatiate stuff
that will guarantee they can't ever get enough.
Our neighbors' less keen hungers and kinder drives
make sure they'll make nothing of their lives but lives.

Ok, this is a kind of poem that I… I don't… kind of thing that I don't usually write… write about. You know, it's the sort of topics of… of the moment in ladies' magazines and health magazines and newspapers and all stuff like that there. This is called Fast Foods: a Rap Rondeau. Not a rondo, that's a musical form. It's a rondeau; it's one of those French fancy forms. You've got 16 lines and only two rhymes. And I call it a rap rondeau because, well, like… like rap lyrics, there's a lot of extra rhymes and sound echoes in it of different sorts. And it is about fast foods.
 
With fast foods, you've got to feast since you can't fast-
In next to no time, you feel famished, though
You're looking paunchy, fat-haunched, and flab-assed
And by now the force-fed figure you've amassed
Hamstrings your frame. Getting enough comes slow
With fast foods.
 
Like fast fucking. Simone Weil warned: we know
Appetites from addictions by an acrid contrast
In their satisfactions: that is, by how long they last.
You can get too much bread: there is no
Such thing as enough cocaine. Hungers turn vast
As lunar landscapes, where you range, aghast
At your own emptiness. With time, those faux
Fixes that should fill lust's vacuums cast
-rate you. Both flesh and flesh's cravings grow
With fast foods.

It's very fortunate that that's one of the things you can learn. You know, there's an awful lot of things, either you're born with them and you've got them, or you don't. That isn't one. I gue… I suppose some people can… can improve more than others can improve. But, you know, almost anybody can get… get it to, you know, a decent competency. I… I had a student then. A… and then, she and I were writing a play together. And she taught speech at the John Robert Powers School in Detroit — a beauty school — and I mentioned to her, I said, 'I'm doing these readings, and… and my voice is just awful. It… it just goes way up in the air and… and I'm not getting the poem across. I know that'. This was partly because I tended to just separate every word. I, you know, I… I'd been taught that every word in a poem counts. Well, of course, it does. But when you read it, you don't… you don't read every word with equal importance. You know, the meaning comes in little packets. And… and there's a… there's a peak in that packet someplace, you know. Well, we started working on that.
But there's another thing that an awful lot of poets do when they start reading. They will iron the same phrase over and over and over again into phrase after phrase after phrase after phrase. And after you've heard this same phrase three times, no meaning is coming across. You might as well be reading, you know, Greek, Lithuanian. You might, it might as well… just… totally different… none... nothing comes across. And so she worked with me on this sort of thing... she also taught… taught me a lot of breathing exercises. And this makes a… this makes a great deal of difference. You know, when I had… then I came to be teaching oral inter… interp myself at… at the schools where I taught. And when I came in the room, everybody must be on their feet doing breathing exercises. Otherwise, I'd tell them leave. And you just, you know, it just makes an enormous difference; the breath control is of tremendous importance and the breath availability and knowing which muscles you must… you must drive with and which you must let go of. You've got to let go of everything in this area. There's noth… there’s nothing you can do here except strangle the voice. It all comes from down here. One of my sing… well, after that woman in Detroit, I always worked with singing coaches because I… I hoped I might someday be able to sing. That didn't happen. But my… my teacher would say, 'Madame Lamoigne says: this is the singing muscle'. And it's where you drive the sound from. What kind of breathing exercises? Oh, for just holding breath for long periods, being sure that you're opening out the… the intercostal muscles… the muscles in between the ribs here. Also, that it's going into the period in the back. And then you do all sorts of elaborate things with your breath and… and with breathing and… and with focusing the voice forward into the face.

First of all, you just simply do take in a deep breath and, and hold it out. You don't try to make it uncomfortable or something because that'll mean… tightening up, straining other muscles. But you're straining… you're developing these muscles here as the driving force. In here there's a kind of valve, and you… you do a lot of huh, hee, huh, ho, things like that. Then you're bringing the voice forward, so you do things like… let's play tennis. Let's play… breeze will ease the trees. Send the weather west. Fawns upon the lawns. Moats will float the boats. Now this I learned from my singing teacher here. This is his tribute to a New Guinea tribesman. Toot the snooter flute.

You know, when I first started teaching this, I had it sort of half theatre people and half literary people. And that was a wonderful mix. I… I loved that. But an awful lot of them, especially the theatre people, were looking for what we used to call a Marvin Mellowbell voice. And… and that's ruinous… a voice that has too much gorgeousness in itself. That's the voice in which you sell people refrigerators, and you don't want that. What you want is the greatest variety possible. I… I must say that the… the actors that I most admire have both a… a sort of chest voice and… they… it's like they have two voices at once, and… or… or two sounds that… that are happening at once. And, and one is face… facial voice. The other one is the one that's… that is in the chest and has them both geared together. But the one that really counts is the one up here. That's the one that's going to make people understand what you're saying.

But also, there's something else. And that is that I try… try to read the poem differently almost every time because well now the… wait a minute. One… I once or twice had a student who… the best way to work with them was that they would find the right way for them to read this poem and then always do that. Most people — and for me — it… it isn't at all that way. I just keep changing it. And even if I read a line or a phrase all wrong, that's better because it'll make you do the thing you do in conversation. The next phrase will be right because it'll come in answer to that. So even if you mess up that one line, you'll keep the poem alive and the movement of the… of the line. And people will get the sense of that line even if you read it all wrong.

It was… it was the course I loved to teach. I would've paid them to let me teach that. You see, I wasn't supposed to be teaching that. I was supposed to be teaching English. And… and so what we did was, we gave this course a different name every semester so the theatre people wouldn't suspect. It was called Reading the Modern Poem or something. And also, this way, I got to have the same students semester after semester after semester because they… they could sign up again for this… this course that had a different name. And it was really the same course all over again. And I must say that, yeah, these were people that… that I became very fond of. Well, became lifelong friends, as… as you might guess.

You know, if you're… if you are blessed with a name like Snodgrass, a name that did… that made perfectly good sense, you know, in Scotland; Snod is a word that means neat or t… or cut, trim, even castrated sometimes. But it… especially, it means neat and… and clipped and proper, which I sup… I suppose meant that they… they were… well, I… I think it meant that they were herdsmen and that they had to keep their… the grass cut to a certain level so that the animals were… were better able to eat it. But after of course, the English came more to be in power, it probably meant that they just had to cut somebody else’s lawn. But, you know, but if you come through school with a name like that — and especially if your first name is Dewitt — If you have a name like Dewitt Snodgrass, I mean, you know you have to do something about this, and… and if you’re opposed to throwing yourself under taxicabs, you probably end up writing poems about it. And… and I always do. Now, this… you remember that Iago ha… has a wonderful speech, says: 'Who steals my purse steals trash. Who filches my good name takes that which not enriches him and makes me poor indeed.' Well, the great irony of that, of course, he’s… he’s right about the business then of filching the good name of Casio and… and of Othello; men very… in every way his superior. But he’s… he’s stealing their good name. Well, our… my good name got stolen when we were in — my good name. I say that in quotes — We were in Mexico, and we were using a debit card. And they have a… a device there by which, if you go to a hotel or a restaurant and use your card, they manage to get the number off of it, and… and they can make a new card with their name and, you know, and their picture. So when we got up back up here, we were aiming to rebuild our kitchen out here. You know… you know, you see it’s now rebuilt. But when we got up here, we talked to the bank. We didn’t have any money. The… somebody had done this, and in five days spent $11,000. We finally got that money back. But it was a… it was a very long time. And in the meantime, the work was held up on our kitchen and so forth. So anyway, this is Who Steals My Good Name, and it’s addressed to the person who obtained my debit card number and spent $11,000 in five days.
 
My pale stepdaughter, just off the school bus, scowled.
Well, that’s the last time I say my name, Snodgrass.
Just so.
 
May that anonymous Mexican male
Who prodigally claims my clan lines,
Identity, and the 16 digits that unlock
My bank account think twice.
 
My not quite proper name’s been
Taken by three ex-wives,
Each for an amount past all you’ve squandered,
Each more than pleased to change it back.
 
That surname you affect may have
More consequence than getting teased
By dumb kids or tracked down
By bank detectives.
 
Don’t underrate its history.
One of ours played piano on his prison’s weekly broadcast.
One got rich on a scammed quiz show.
One made a bungle costing the World Series.
My own past could subject you to guilt by association.
 
If you write anything beyond false checks,
Abandon all hope of large press publication
Or prizes. Critics shun that name like sex
Without a condom.
 
Whoever steals my purse
Helps chain me to my writing desk again
For fun and profit.
Take thanks, then, with my curse.
May your pen name
Help send you to your pen.
 

This is a poem that goes way back in… in my history to the time when I was in the Navy during World War II. And one morning, a man took about 50 of us out and gave us a lesson in how… how you can kill a man with your bare hands, after having blinded him. And I cared an awful lot about that voice. I tried again and again to write poems about it, but I usually got it up into some kind of disguise or some kind of mythological getup of some sort and it never seemed to work. Finally, I just decided, no, I'm going to just write a poem in which he will just say what he said to us. It's a little shortened and so forth. But it doesn't happen here by itself. There's another voice that comes into the poem, and that's a voice I discovered at the same time. And that's the voice of the great Jewish philosopher, Baruch Spinoza. And he too is saying things that he said in two… two different places in his works. And you hear two lines from the… the combat instructor, two lines from Spinoza, two lines from the instructor, two lines from Spinoza, and so forth, back and back… back and forth. And insofar as I… in… insofar as I understand why this collision is… why I'm causing this, it isn't just that I… I did encounter them at the same time. It's that in terms of idea, they are saying the same thing. And this is very frightening to me. In… in terms of idea, they are saying whatever you do to save your own life is justified. But that means something very different when… when it comes from the voice of a man like Spinoza, who was one of the kindest and most gentlest and decent and also very brave men that ever existed, and… and this other man who… who probably is one of the least humane of humans. And… or at least, he wants you to think he is. And he wants you to become that… that way too. So that… well, I don't think you'll have much trouble telling which… which speaker's speaking. And… and the ultimate meaning, the real meaning of these things is… is tremendously different from… from these two different men. But… but in terms of abstraction, they're saying the same thing. Then there's a third voice, and that's the voice of the man into whose… in whose head these things have collected and… and collided. And he's trying to understand…. make some kind of sense out of that. And it goes just by its first title, which is out of Spinoza, After Experience Taught Me...
 
After experience taught me that all the ordinary  Surroundings of social life are futile and vain;
 I'm going to show you something very  Ugly: someday, it might save your life.
 Seeing that none of the things I feared contain In themselves anything either good or bad
 What if you get caught without a knife; Nothing — even a loop of piano wire;
 Excepting only in the effect they had  Upon my mind, I resolved to inquire
 Take the first two fingers of this hand;  Fork them out — kind of a "V for Victory" —
 Whether there might be something whose discovery  Would grant me supreme, unending happiness.
 And jam them into the eyes of your enemy.  You have to do this hard. Very hard. Then press
 No virtue can be thought to have priority  Over this endeavour to preserve one's being.
 Both fingers down around the cheekbone  And setting your foot high into the chest
 No man can desire to act rightly, to be blessed,  to live rightly, without simultaneously
 You must call up every strength you own And you can rip off the whole facial mask.
 Wishing to be, to act, to live. He must ask First, in other words, to actually exist.
              And you, whiner, who wastes your time                   Dawdling over the remorseless earth,              What evil, what unspeakable crime                   Have you made your life worth?
 

Some… some poets read well, some reads very, very, very badly. Yeah, that means that it's now being filtered through another psyche and probably is going to cast other colors and implications and so forth. That's why I… that's why I loved teaching that course in oral interpretation… that I was getting interpretations of the poem all the time, that… that wouldn't have come to me by themselves. Yeah, and hearing somebody… well, it's the same thing, you know, I started out as a musician. You can't imagine saying, 'They're playing Beethoven's Third tonight', you say, 'Oh, I heard that'. You know, come on. That's what the conductor is there for, is… is to… is to have a different vision and a different reception of it to pass on to you. And of course, there are some interpretations that are just plain wrong, just plain dumb. But I… I don't know.
I… that's why I like teaching that course. You know, people were always reading things in ways I couldn't have suspected. And… and it was often people who didn't have much literary background and… and thought they didn't know much about poetry. And suddenly they would come out with an interpretation which… which, you know, which would leave me boggling. That's, you know, that… that's the nature of a work of art, I think, that it's subject to… it's related to all these different… it's a product of one particular mind, but it also then has to pass through all these different minds, and it's changed again and again and again and again. And it's, you know… there isn't one right way to hear it. You know, if somebody reads something like that or somebody plays something, a piece of music in a way that you don't expect, maybe you wouldn't want that to be the only way you ever heard it. And there may be such a thing as a reading which you'll decide is so definitive you don't… you don't need to hear it anymore, but I… no, not likely. More often, you will hear it again and again and again and with different emphases, different… well, yeah, that's the difference between a literary translation of a poem — we were talking about the other — and  you know, a real translation into a poem, it's going to have new and different emphat… kinds of emphases and… and possibilities and echoes, stuff like that there. I hope.

You know that the cycle called Heart's Needle is about thinking I had lost my daughter in a divorce. And finally, after a lot of trouble in the courts and so forth, you know, you… you get rights of visitation, which they're always trying to cut off. And they're finding one way after another to stop them. But very often there in Iowa City, I would take my child… my child over to the park and… and there were swings and things of that sort there. Well you know, if you're any good as a parent, one thing that you learn, or that you have to do — maybe you don't learn it — is to let go. And there come times when you, you know, you… and sometimes you have to be pushing the child away from you; You keep wanting to grab it. Well, you can't. And on the swing, this is very much the thing. You're always pushing the child away from you but hoping it comes back. Ok, let's take a couple minutes while I get over having said that.

This is from Heart's Needle, that cycle of poems. And it's number seven, a summertime poem, and a playground poem.
 
Here in the scuffled dust    is our ground of play.  I lift you on your swing and must   shove you away,  see you return again,    drive you off again, then   stand quiet till you come.    You, though you climb  higher, farther from me, longer,    will fall back to me stronger.  Bad penny, pendulum,    you keep my constant time
 to bob in blue July    where fat goldfinches fly over the glittering, fecund    reach of our growing lands. Once more now, this second,    I hold you in my hands.
 

When I was a graduate student at the State University of Iowa studying writing, well, I had just been there forever. I was there so long, they said I was the only graduate student with tenure. But that tenure finally ran out. You know, they called me in and said, 'Look, Snodgrass, it isn't that we don't like having you here. But if you're going to stay this year, take the PhD exam'. Well, I knew that if they were going to act that way about it, I… I had to get out of there. I mean, in 10… in 10 years as a graduate student, I had learned one thing: I wasn't ready for that exam. And… and if anything, every… every year I was a little less ready because, well… well you know how other people make resolutions on January 1st? Graduate students do it on September 1st: they will learn PhD German; they will learn PhD French; they will read Beowulf; they will read The Battle of Malden. You know, and… and I would make a list like this and start out on it, and for a week or two, you know, I… I would be very busy doing these things. And then other things would come along, and I'd… I'd get busy with my family or… or I'd read things that you don't have time to read. I mean, instead of reading an authoritative book about Anthony and Cleopatra, I would read Anthony and Cleopatra. And you don't have time for that. You're going to be doing that the rest of your life. And so, you know, by… about 10 years, I was one of the best list makers they had there. But I wasn't ready for that examination.

And so I had to get out of there. But… but you know, before… before getting out, I had to take… you know, I decided to take a kind of inventory of my own qualities and decide, ok, what had… what… what parts of me had caused this real failure, and I felt it as a real failure. You know, I wanted very badly to be a scholar. I'd have done anything, except read those books and… learn those opinions. And on the other hand, I… I must have some good qualities somewhere that I could maybe build on. And so I wanted to try to get this sort of, you know, listed up so I could not… not do that again. And it's called April Inventory.
The green catalpa tree has turned All white; the cherry blooms once more. In one whole year I haven't learned A blessed thing they pay you for. The blossoms snow down in my hair; The trees and I will soon be bare.
The trees have more than I to spare. The sleek, expensive girls I teach, Younger and pinker every year, Bloom gradually out of reach. The pear tree lets its petals drop Like dandruff on a tabletop.
 The girls have grown so young by now I have to nudge myself to stare. This year they smile and mind me how My teeth are falling with my hair. In thirty years I may not get Younger, shrewder, or out of debt.
 The tenth time, just a year ago, I made myself a little list Of all the things I'd ought to know, Then told my parents, analyst, And everyone who's trusted me I'd be substantial, presently.
 I haven't read one book about A book or memorized one plot. Or found a mind I did not doubt. I learned one date. And then forgot. And one by one the solid scholars Get the degrees, the jobs, the dollars.
 And smile above their starchy collars. I taught my classes Whitehead's notions; One lovely girl, a song of Mahler's. Lacking a source-book or promotions, I showed one child the colors of A Luna moth and how to love.
 I taught myself to name my name, To bark back, loosen love and crying; To ease my woman so she came, To ease an old man who was dying. I have not learned how often I Can win, can love, but choose to die.
 I have not learned there is a lie Love shall be blonder, slimmer, younger; That my equivocating eye Loves only by my body's hunger; That I have forces, true to feel, Or that the lovely world is real.
 While scholars speak authority And wear their ulcers on their sleeves, My eyes in spectacles shall see These trees procure and spend their leaves. There is a value underneath The gold and silver in my teeth.
 Though trees turn bare and girls turn wives, We shall afford our costly seasons; There is a gentleness survives That will outspeak and has its reasons. There is a loveliness exists, Preserves us, not for specialists.
 

When I was young, I… I went for a long time studying different musical instruments thinking I'd become a musician and finally realized that I… I really wasn't good enough. And for about 20 years, I didn't touch any of that. Then I… as the folk music thing came along, I… I got interested in… in guitars and… and got a guitar and started twinkling at it. And… but then also, I got much more interested… I got interested in the lute. And, and I have… I have several very fine lutes. I have a beautiful one made by David Rubio, a really… a really marvelous instrument. And the trouble was that, when I started playing, I played in… in what… in what's the normal guitar position. They call it the Segovia position, with your hand across the strings sort of at right angles. Well, then I had a teacher for a couple lessons, and he said, 'No no no, you must play like this with your fingers back and your thumb up here'. Well, that was easy for me to do because of the way my hand… hands are built. I have a rather long and… it… it isn't just that it's long… my thumb reaches out further than a good many people's do. So that… that was a comfortable position, and… and using your fingers this way on the string gives you a better tone. Then, about 10 years ago, people got to looking at the old paintings of people playing the lute and saw that, no, the painters really meant that… that the way that they played was with the thumb underneath the fingers. And so I started trying to do that. That was a severe mistake, I must say. My… it doesn't fit my hand at all, especially after these years of playing in… in other ways. On top of that, I was using computers a good deal, and between them, I managed to get carpal tunnel and tendonitis and all kinds of things like that. I had to quit playing altogether. Well, this is a poem about, about getting older and not being able to play the lute anymore. I was never any good at it, but I… I really loved doing it. And this is a poem about… it's just called Packing Up the Lute.
 
I ease you down, your strings set loose  A tone or three, all twinkle gone,  Into this snug case shaped like a goose  Or casket for some crook-necked swan,
 Your head [sic] wrapped in satin cloth, Head nestled between blocks of foam, Lid latched against woodworm and moth  Then stacked in our attic catacomb
 While I, who used to warm and tease you  Thumbing your belly's deepest cords,  Wonder if we could deepfreeze you  Or lift you on some rocket towards
 The icy waste space beyond Mars Unfingered by Earth's atmosphere To shine out with the clearcut stars  In some show-stopper of the spheres.
 Just keep cool, love; no fault of yours  Assigns [sic] us to this long exile;  Medical science may yet find cures  For age and carpal tunnel. Meanwhile,
 There's not too much left up this sleeve.  I growl like Melchior, lingering  On stage to ask: "When's the next swan leave?"  And what's left now I could still sing?   Go lie with love notes and snapshots. You  were just too fine a vice to last.  Condemned to virtue, we thumb through  Evidence of our misspent past.
 

The… the joke that gets into that… into that poem of course has to do with Melchior, who…who did sing Lohengrin frequently. And Lohengrin, of course, is the knight of the swan who arrives in a swan boat sent… sent from the other world to rescue the Brabantians from something or other and… and finally gets betrayed and has to go back. And the boat comes in, and he gets in and goes off singing heroically and… and sadly. Well, what happened one night at the Met is that the… the… one of the stagehands must have fallen asleep because the boat came right up to Melchior and then went right on past. And he looked at his wrist and then out toward the audience and said: 'Anyone know what time the next swan leaves?' I don't know if it's true, but it… it ought to be true.

Well, I'll read a… a not very happy love poem. It's called A Valediction, meaning a forewell — farewell — and you know how… political people have learned a long time ago, if they want to take you captive, what they… the best way to do that is to tell you that someone else has taken you captive, and they know how you can be free. They will set you free. All you have to do is exactly what they tell you from now on, and… and you'll be very free and happy. And this is the kind of thing that lovers do also. And it… it works for both… both of those rascals. And it's called A Valediction, a farewell.
Since his sharp sight has taught you To think your own thoughts and to see What cramped horizons my arms brought you, Turn then and go free,
 Unlimited, your own Forever. Let your vision be In your own interests; you've outgrown All need for tyranny.
 May his clear views save you From those shrewd, undermining powers That hold you close just to enslave you In some such love as ours.
 May this new love leave you Your own being; may your bright rebirth Prove treacherous, change then and deceive you Never on this earth.
 Now that you've seen how mindless Our long ties were, I pray you never Find, all your life through, such a blindness As we two shared together.
 My dark design's exposed Since his tongue opened up your eyelids; May no one ever lip them closed So cunningly as I did.

This is a poem from a cycle of poems about the death of my sister. She was just two year… two years younger than myself. And she had had trouble with asthma and complications thereof for quite some time. And finally one morning, she just got up and fell dead. And this is a poem about her and a recollection of something that she and I had done together many years before that. And it's just called The Mouse.
I remember one evening-we were small- Playing outdoors, we found a mouse, A dusty little gray one, lying By the side steps. Afraid he might be dead, We carried him all around the house On a piece of tinfoil, crying.
 Ridiculous children; we could bawl Our eyes out about nothing. Still, How much violence had we seen? They teach you- quick- you have to be well-bred In all events. We can't all win. Don't whine to get your will.
 We live with some things, after all, Bitterer than dying, cold as hate: The old insatiable loves, That vague desire that keeps watch overhead, Polite, wakeful as a cat, To tease us with our lives;
 That pats at you, wants to see you crawl Some, then picks you back alive; That needs you just a little hurt. The mind goes blank, then the eyes. Weak with dread, In shock, the breath comes short; We go about our lives.
 And then the little animal Plays out; the dulled heart year by year Turns from its own needs, forgets its grief. Asthmatic, timid, twenty-five, unwed- The day we left you by your grave, I wouldn't spare one tear.
 

You know, Shakespeare was… was… wasn't the most popular playwright of his own day. He wasn't even the most popular playwright – he didn't write the most popular poem. That was Christopher Marlowe, who wrote a sort of little pastoral called Come Live with Me and Be My Love, and we will all the pleasures prove, and so forth. Well, this became so popular and so well-known and so… so admired that everybody wrote imitations of it and… and parodies of it, and… and just version after version that would turn it one direction and another. Sir Walter Raleigh did one where the… the nymph answers back. John Donne did one. The list of people who did versions of that poem is very long. I decided to try to add my name to the list. And this is a poem that is to my… to the lady who became my fourth wife. And… or at least I tell her it's to her, and she tells me she believes that. I… I have to say that four is at least enough.
Invitation
 Come live with me and be my last  Resource, location and resort, My work day's focus and steadfast  Distraction to a weekend's sport.
 Come end up with me, close my list;  Blank my black book, block every e-mail  From ex-loves whose mouths won't be missed;  Let nothing else alive look female.
 Come couch by me mit Freud und Lust  As every evening's last connection;  Talk to me; prove the day like Proust;  Let what comes next rise to inspection.
 Come, let old aftermaths get lost,  Let failures and betrayals mend,  Cancel repayments; clear the cost;  Once more unto the breach, dear friend.
 Come lay us down to sleep at least, Sharing this pillow's picture show;  Who's been my braintrust and best beast?  Who else knows what I need to know?
And I suppose maybe the note that I should have made about that is that my son once, when he was a little boy — maybe three or four — woke up one morning and said, 'Hey, put your head down here!' He says, 'There's pictures in my pillow!' Maybe I should have explained that first.
 
