walter.murch

Born in 1943 in New York City, Murch graduated from the University of Southern California's School of Cinema-Television. His career stretches back to 1969 and includes work on Apocalypse Now, The Godfather I, II, and III, American Graffiti, The Conversation, and The English Patient. He has been referred to as 'the most respected film editor and sound designer in modern cinema.'    In a career that spans over 40 years, Murch is perhaps best known for his collaborations with Francis Ford Coppola, beginning in 1969 with The Rain People. After working with George Lucas on THX 1138 (1971), which he co-wrote, and American Graffiti (1973), Murch returned to Coppola in 1974 for The Conversation, resulting in his first Academy Award nomination. Murch's pioneering achievements were acknowledged by Coppola in his follow-up film, the 1979 Palme d'Or winner Apocalypse Now, for which Murch was granted, in what is seen as a film-history first, the screen credit 'Sound Designer.'    Murch has been nominated for nine Academy Awards and has won three, for best sound on Apocalypse Now (for which he and his collaborators devised the now-standard 5.1 sound format), and achieving an unprecedented double when he won both Best Film Editing and Best Sound for his work on The English Patient. Murch’s contributions to film reconstruction include 2001's Apocalypse Now: Redux and the 1998 re-edit of Orson Welles's Touch of Evil. He is also the director and co-writer of Return to Oz (1985).    In 1995, Murch published a book on film editing, In the Blink of an Eye: A Perspective on Film Editing, in which he urges editors to prioritise emotion.

I was born in New York City, in Manhattan on the... what's called the Upper West Side. Specifically, Morningside Heights which was known as the Acropolis of America because it had Columbia University, Barnard College, Teachers University [sic], Union Theological Seminary, Jewish Theological Seminary. There were all these institutions within a couple of blocks of each other. IBM, I think, began there and for me, of course, it was perfectly normal because that was where I grew up. In retrospect, of course, it has an aspect to it that must have informed how I approach the world.

One of the peculiarities of that neighbourhood at the time was that 60 years earlier, Thomas Edison had electrified Columbia University and this was the first University ever to be powered by electricity. Edison was a fan of direct current and he was in competition with Nikola Tesla who was the proponent of alternating current. And as a result, Columbia University and the entire neighbourhood, which was where we lived, was very early, electrified in New York. It was very modern but it was direct current and we, as a neighbourhood, got locked into this infrastructure which was still in place when I was born, which meant that we could not have refrigerators or washing machines or anything that had a motor attached to it. The only thing that we could have in our apartments were electric lights and irons and for some reason, fans. There was some peculiarity about a fan that allowed it to use direct current. So here we were, in the 1940s in New York and up until the early ‘50s, with, in the kitchen, an ice box so that every Friday, there would be a knock on the door and the ice man would come and deliver this big block of ice. And of course, for a kid, this was very thrilling because it was such a dramatic event and I think my father enjoyed it because he had been born in Canada in Toronto and had… that’s the world that he had lived in. And it was less exciting for my mother, who saw her friends elsewhere in New York who had all of these modern appliances.

The crisis in that neighbourhood happened in the early '50s when television hit and television needed to have alternating current. Radios could work with direct current but not television, for reasons I don’t understand. So there was an uproar in the neighbourhood which was, we have to finally connect up to the rest of the world rather than be this isolated island of late 19th century technology. And so over a single weekend, everything powered down and people came in and did mysterious things with screwdrivers. And then on Monday, we joined the rest of the United States, the rest of New York, with using alternating current and everybody except for us bought a television. My parents didn’t believe in television. They liked radio and they liked records but television was… they were very hesitant about it which I kind of understood as a kid, but I had to put up with my school mates talking about the latest television program and I had no idea what they were talking about.
In retrospect, of course, I think this was a good thing. There’s lots of negative things to be said about overexposure to television, especially for young, developing minds and this is now a mega crisis with things like the iPad and the iPhone and other screen technologies. So this was an early version of this.

This was simultaneous with me seeing my first jet plane and the elevator in the apartment building, now that there was alternating current, being retrofitted with cybernetics so that you could walk into the elevator and press the number four button and it would take you automatically to four rather than having to have an elevator operator who would operate these things. So emotionally, for me, I felt like I was yanked into the middle of the 20th century from some earlier time. Again, in retrospect, I think this was a good thing that I did experience that all of that old technology and that old way of doing things. As a kid, being seven years, seven or eight years old at the time, it was very exciting because suddenly, I was joining the rest of humanity.

Prior to being born, I lived in the womb as we all do and as we all do, I experienced the world through sound. The sense of sound turns on, they think, about four-and-a-half months into your journey through the womb. So halfway through gestation, you begin to hear the world. Necessarily, the other senses are either completely absent or in a very diminished form. You can’t really see anything. You can’t really taste anything, except a kind of… I don’t know. Maybe in some form, you can say, I think mum had some garlic. You couldn’t feel anything. A kind of slippery, mushy feel. Certainly nothing like the high texture of everything else once you’re born. So we live in a… we are pickles in a brine of sound during our last four months. And now that we can do sonograms in real time of developing foetuses, we can see absolutely that the kid in the womb is responding in an intelligent way to sound. They, we know the sound of our mother’s voice. We know the sound of our mother’s heart and the sound of her trumpeting intestines at times and the womb, the wall is only that thick. So that’s really no barrier to outside sounds. So it’s a very rich, 24-hour a day sonic environment. It never stops making sound and it was only recently, amazingly enough, that curious scientists figured out a way to measure how loud that is for the developing child. And it turns out to be 75 decibels which is approximately the sound that you would get if you were travelling in a car at 60 kilometres an hour and you lowered the window. So this loud rush of sound which has these interesting data points of heartbeat and breathing and intestines that make interesting bugle sounds and human voice and other things.

Once you're born, the windows to these other senses – sight, taste, touch – suddenly turn on and sound seems to take a back seat to this. We are primarily visual creatures. That has to do with our evolutionary past. I think something like a third of the brain is in some form dedicated to processing visual information and a much, much, much smaller part of the brain is dedicated to processing sound. It's still significant but nothing in comparison. However, the fascinating thing is that our consciousness is developing against a background of sound. So we become conscious in the womb, in some way and we become conscious in the presence of sound so that our consciousness is... at the moment of birth, there is something already there that has been analysing the world and reacting to it in some preformed way and it’s that intelligence, that consciousness, however primitive it is by our later evolution that then analyses the world.
So that... I think this goes some way to explaining for me why sound plays the emotional role that it does, because when it touches us – and music is the best example of this – it touches us in a place that is very hard to articulate in terms of words. We can talk a lot about visual things. We can analyse them visually, but it's very hard for human beings to talk about sound with words. I think because the sound and our basic consciousness are inexplicably, inextricably tied up together. This happens to all of us and not all of us become musicians or, in my case, somebody who works creatively in sound. So it's not a determining factor. My mother did sing to me in the womb, she told me and I remember that song. That song that she sang, which was My Darling Clementine, has a peculiar quality to me when I hear it because I heard it before I knew who I was or that there was anything other than me and that my mother existed. It was just something in the environment. So this is my own base-ground and I think about things in that way but as I said, this is something that is common to all humanity. We all emerge into consciousness in this way.

I was very enamoured, in New York at the time, with trolley cars and subways and buses. I still love public transportation. I love being in London because, relatively speaking to the United States, there's great public transportation here. The trains on the tube come every two minutes instead of every 15 minutes, which is what they would be in San Francisco. And I could think of nothing better to do in life than to be a trolley driver or a subway driver or maybe a bus driver, but I loved trolleys. Anything that ran on tracks I loved as a five-year-old. So it was one of my early disappointments with the world when New York City removed all of their trolley cars which happened in 1948, thereabouts.
And what is it when you're growing up? Of course, you emerge into the world and you think: this is the world, it's always going to be this way. And so it is something to take on board when something that you love is removed from you. This is completely trivial compared to the experience that kids in Syria are suffering at the moment or any children in a war situation. It's on such a scale that it's very hard for us to really understand how this is going to affect that generation of kids and their children. So the Holocaust, its effect on Jewish people, is very similar and we're still reeling from the effects and the aftereffects and the after, aftereffects. Anyway, the tragedy, in small letters, of the removal of the trolleys from New York affected me and I was left with the subways. And I remember about that age waiting for a subway train to arrive at the station with my mother and out of the blue, she said, 'What do you want to be when you grow up, Walter?' It was the kind of question that mothers dangle in front of kids to wonder, and of course I said, 'I want to be a subway driver'. And she hesitated for a moment wondering, what's the best answer to this? And she said, 'Well, I think you would like it for two or three days and then you would begin to get bored'. And just then, the subway that we were waiting for came into the station and I looked very carefully at the face of the man who was driving the subway and I saw something there that I had never seen before, which was boredom. And I hated that. I hated... I knew my mother was right. I knew that this thing that I really wanted to do was now blocked. I could not do it because she was right. It would be boring and I also hated the world that would present something that was so clearly wonderful as being a subway driver and then say: it isn't so wonderful. So I didn't like the duplicity of the world and I became suspicious of certain things in the world from that very small beginning that made me think, hmm, not everything is what it may seem.

Much, much, much, much later, meaning just a few years ago, I learned that in Tagalog, the language of the Philippines, there's actually a word for this which is layogenic and this is a hybrid word. The 'genic' part is English, like photogenic and 'layo', the root in Tagalog means distant. So something that looks good at a distance but when you get up close to it, is not so good. So people would say of somebody else who might look attractive from a distance, oh that guy is very layogenic. So subway driving became one of these layogenic things for me and I'd taken that on board.

Another experience that I had right about that same time was my parents left me alone one day. I was old enough to be left alone so I was probably six, and I said to myself, I am now going to make the most delicious drink imaginable. And I'm going to put into one glass everything that I love which at that time was milk and chocolate syrup and Cheerios, the breakfast cereal, and peanut butter and to top it up, a little bit of water. So I assembled all of these things in the kitchen and concocted this drink and stirred it up and it didn't look too good, these Cheerios floating on top and the peanut butter kind of globbed in the middle, but these are all good things. It must be good and I took a sip and nearly threw up. I didn't but the lesson for that, which I use to this day, was that good, plus good, plus good, plus good does not necessarily equal better or even good. That the good things in the wrong combination… things that are good on their own in the wrong combination can actually produce something that's really disgusting. So when, certainly working in film, it is a principle that is always in the back of my head.

As all of this was happening to me, I was also learning to express myself through language better and better. But for some reason, and I don't know what the reason is, I didn't feel limited by my lack of knowledge of language and when I didn't know how to say something, I would imitate the sound of it. If I didn't know the name of something, I would imitate the sound it made. Is it because my ears stick out and when I was a kid, they stuck out even more? And you hear the world differently when your ears stick out. Occasionally, even now I will do that [pushes ears flat] and I don't like how the world sounds. It has a kind of muted, dull sound to me. This is more alive and I think when I was a kid, and my hearing was better and my ears stuck even more, it was even more alive and I was teased for my ears sticking out as a kid. So this, in a sense, was my comeback to being teased. And people found it very amusing and in the neighbourhood, I was nicknamed Gerald McBoing-Boing, who was a cartoon character at the time who had a similar quality, which is that he didn't say words, he said sound effects. This is 1950, 1948, '50, '51. And my love of sound probably took another twist at that point and it became part of who I am at a very fundamental level. If I make sound effects, people like it and that's what I do today in some form.

Not long after that, I got wind that there was such a thing as a tape recorder, so I was seven. And a friend in the neighbourhood, whose father worked in some business and could afford these things, he bought a tape recorder, I guess - I don't know, to take business notes or something - and soon as I learned about this, I would knock on Alex's door at the slightest opportunity and say, 'Let's play and let's play with the tape recorder'. And his father was indulgent of us and I don't know where I understood these things, but I immediately understood how to work a tape recorder and how to record sound, and then the fact that once it was on tape, you could cut the tape and you could paste the tape in different positions. You could turn the tape upside down. You could flip it over and play the sound through the back. It was like a wonderful playground for me and to the extent that I began to lobby my parents that we should get a tape recorder. And I kept at this for a number of years and one of my justifications which… in today's terms I would say, 'and we can sample music off the air', meaning, we won't have to buy records anymore. We can… I can hook the tape recorder up to the radio and we can tape records that are being played on the radio and record them and think how much money we will save. And so one Christmas, shortly after, we got a tape recorder and of course, it no longer belonged to the family. It belonged to me and so I squirreled it into my room and just started playing with it.

And shortly after that, I came home from school one day and turned on the radio in my room and heard something coming out of the radio that sounded like the kind of things that I had been concocting on this tape recorder, which were collages of sounds, naturally recorded sounds, put in different orders. And my first thought was: how did they get hold of my tapes? And my second thought was: they didn’t - this is somebody else’s work. So I turned on my tape recorder and started recording off the radio, whatever this was and listened very attentively to... Who is this? What is this? And the announcer came on at the end and said this was the first panorama of musique concrète by two French composers. And I turned the tape recorder off and just sat back thinking, what does this mean? Because up to that point, I thought whatever I was doing was just my 11, 12-year-old equivalent of building model airplanes or something. Now, something that to me sounded very similar was being broadcast over the radio and it was from a record and the record was from France. So suddenly, I had this realisation that the world is much bigger than I thought it was as regarding this... whatever this technology was, and so I began to dig into, what is musique concrète? And what can you understand of this at the age of 12 or 13? But I tried to understand it and became a big fan of these two composers, Pierre Schaeffer and Pierre Henry. I think Pierre Henry is still alive as we speak because they were in their early 20s in the early ‘50s. Schaeffer, I think, has passed on.

In retrospect, this dovetails with an observation that I made about my own kids and about the children of friends and looking at the world, which is that there is a developmental 'sweet spot' sometime around the age of 9 to 11. Maybe 8, maybe 12 but two years or four years centred around the age of 10, where you have enough experience of the world at age 10, you've been around for a decade, so you know certain things. You know what you like, you know what you don't like and there's still a huge amount that you don't know, but you have enough to give yourself a foundation of who are you. On the other hand, you are not yet caught up in the swirling rapids of adolescence where hormones and the opinions of your friends account for much of your behaviour. And I think if you can tap… later on in life, if you can tap into something, some aspect of what really made you excited at the age of 10, you have a better chance at being happy with what you do. Because what you like at age 10 is something that is deeply you because you know enough about the world to have an opinion and you're not yet swayed by the opinions of the world. So there's a little window that opens up around this time that gives you a glimmer of who you really are and in adolescence that window closes down and you become whiplashed by the hormonal events of adolescence. And hopefully you emerge not too… unscathed, not too scarred as a young adult.

So I spent my middle, teenage years plunged into this world of tape recording and I remember my father, who was a painter, and he had his studio in the apartment and he worked at home, mostly at night. My mother was a church secretary, working at the Riverside Church which was a few blocks away from us, from where we lived in Morningside Heights. So again, this was a normal... this was the world that I had grown up in and it was normal. In retrospect, of course, it's not normal to have a father who is a painter who works in what used to be the dining room of the apartment. So in my own way, with sound, I was kind of recreating that... his environment because I had my own little mini studio and I was doing whatever I could with sound, and he would come in occasionally, my bedroom was right off the kitchen of the apartment. It used to be what was the maid's room of this apartment which was built some time, as I said, in the late 19th century. And he was encouraging and he could easily not have been. Not when you knew the kind of person he was but what does a parent say about what a kid does? He said, this is really great, what you're doing here and that, along with musique concrète kind of made me think, this is something. And I later on, got a job at a local radio station, cataloguing their record collection and doing odd jobs. This was as a teenager. So that was the world that I was living in as a teenager was that world, but I saw no way to continue this into some other... what would I do for real? We had nothing to do with that world. My father was a painter, as I said. My mother was a church secretary. So I... the path from here to there was not very clear.

In my late teenage years, I began to think, well now I have to get serious. The world is a serious place and this is kid's stuff and now I have to find a real job, and I didn't know and I played with the idea of being an engineer. I didn't know what that meant but Sputnik had just been launched and the world was saying, there must be engineers in the world and so, okay, I'll be an engineer. The... I thought of an architect. I don't know, really, what that entailed but that seems to be a respectable thing and maybe I'll be an architect. And somehow, the roulette wheel of these things ended up and I thought, I'll be an oceanographer. I don't know where that came from but it got me and the university that I went to, one of the reasons I chose that university, Johns Hopkins in Baltimore was that they had an oceanography department. So I arrived there, as an 18-year-old and they said, 'Well, what do you want to do?' And I said, 'I want to be an oceanographer' and the admissions person said, 'Well, yes, we have a graduate department in oceanography, but there is no undergraduate. So you have to... like medical school, you have to take a kind of version of pre-med for this and there are two divisions in oceanography. There's biological oceanography and geological oceanography. What do you want?' Well, I had biology in high school so I thought, well, I'll try geology. So I signed up for that program and I enjoyed it but I didn't really enjoy it.

By the end of that year, I thought, this is not working out for me, this... this geology stuff. Although I like science and I like mathematics, I'm not a scientist or a mathematician but my mind does think in those kind of directions, which is why, I guess, I wanted to be an oceanographer.
And again, in retrospect, this was 1961 and plate tectonics had not yet been accepted by geology. The idea that continents travel around like blocks of ice on a lake and they crash into each other and then separate and one goes under the other. This was proposed in the early 20th century but it was laughed at because it was impossible but... And it was still considered impossible in the early 1960s. It was accepted in a big revolution in geology in the mid-1960s when they began to see the upwelling of magma in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean and the middle of the Pacific Ocean. And this upwelling would push the continental plates to one side. The lightbulb went off.
Without plate tectonics, geology to me, didn't – and I didn't know this – but it didn't have a compelling story to it. It was like, I beg geologists' pardon, but relatively speaking, it was like a kind of stamp collecting. What is this rock? What is this rock? How do these rocks compare and contrast? And it just didn't get me. If I had been five years younger and plate tectonics had already been accepted, I might have wound up being a geological oceanographer, which is right now, obviously, a very exciting thing because of everything that's happening in the world but it didn't.
I missed that particular train and I thought, at the beginning of my second year, I'm just going to go and listen in on classes and find out: who are the interesting teachers? Forgetting what the subject matter was and do I want… This sounds exciting and so I did that for about a month and I wound up taking courses in romance languages and literature and history of art and I fell in with friends who were also in that world and that seemed to me to be a very exciting field to study.
Exciting enough that three of us got together and proposed to our professors that we be allowed to go to France, Italy and France for a year and do independent study as 20 year olds and write papers that we would then hand in for credit and against all logic – because there was no organisation behind any of this, the university did not have anything in place to support this – they said, okay and our parents agreed and the three of us, three friends, Matthew, Andy and me, took off and Matthew and I studied in Italy for the summer, at Perugia and then we joined Andy in France, and we were living in Paris for the year of 1963-64 and studying history of art, romance languages, literature. But also, studying cinema because it just happened that we were in Paris at the very full flow of the new wave which is Godard, Truffaut and everyone associated with that movement. And European cinema, with Bergman and Fellini and in Japan, Kurosawa and world cinema was in a very good place in the 1960s. American cinema, not so much and so we got very excited and energised by this.
And when we came back to the United States for our final year in university, Matthew and I began looking for, are there such things as film schools? Are there graduate programs in film schools?

The other thing that was happening in the world at that time was the Vietnam War which had become a hot war in 1965 and we didn't want to go to Vietnam and the... At that time, the draft was not drafting people who were in school. So this was a life raft in a sense, to keep us from getting sucked into the maw of the Vietnam War and so we wound up...
I got married to Aggie, my wife in the summer of 1965. I had met Aggie as part of my trip to Europe. When I... when we were in Perugia, we got a letter from one of Matthew's friends who had been Aggie's boyfriend the year before, just... These are completely coincidental gearings of the way the world works and he sent us the registration for a motorcycle that he had left in Aggie's care. She was a nursing student in Guildford and he said, 'I'm not coming back to England. My grades are too bad and I have to go to summer school or whatever. So if you want this motorcycle, it's yours'. And it was a Matchless 350 motorcycle which was a very exciting thing for a 20-year-old. And one thing led to another and I wound up going to Guildford, to retrieve this motorcycle and I met Aggie and instantly fell in love with her and wound up with the motorcycle and the girl. And she and I, we travelled around North Africa on a 6,000-mile trip with Matthew on another motorcycle and another friend of his, in the summer of '64 and we...
Our bonding... bonded even further and she wound up travelling to New York to get a job nursing in White Plains and we decided to get married in the summer of 1965 and we've now been married for 51 years.

We went to Los Angeles and Aggie got a job at the nursing school at USC [University of Southern California]. She was a nurse at the hospital at USC and I got a job... I mean, I was studying film and it just happened that 1965 was the absolute low point in the number of films ever made in the United States.
They had been diminishing ever since the late 1940s and now they had hit a new low and our first day at film school, the head of the camera department came out, Gene Peterson and he looked at us for what seemed like an hour but it was probably two minutes. And he had these cornflower blue eyes and he just kept looking at all of us because there was a wave of people who had come... who decided that film was something they wanted to study. This probably had something to do with Vietnam. It also had to do with the first surge of baby boomers who were now people born in the early 1940s, who were hitting the graduate schools and we...
Baby boomers were the first generation to actually grow up with television. We eventually... Our family did eventually get a television very late but looking at the whole generation, that generation was the first to have television as a pet in the home whereas the previous generation had... Movies had been something that was out there in the movie theatre. So the idea... That’s just, that’s all it is. It seemed to be more approachable. So there was a wave of people, myself included and Matthew, whose families had nothing to do with movies. Later on, I would meet Francis Coppola and George Lucas, who were part of the same wave. John Milius, Caleb Deschanel, we all were at film school together, all part of this wave of people who had no connection with the film business or industry, who were kind of assaulting the ramparts, exactly at the time that motion picture production was descending. And perhaps descending to extinction, which was the opinion of the teachers at the school.

And after this minute of talk, of just staring at us, Gene Peterson said, 'Well, probably, you should drop out now because you can still get your money back because I don't know what you're doing here. There aren't the jobs for you now and in the years to come, it will get much worse. So that's my advice. Drop out now'. And in our meeting the following day, about a third of the students had disappeared. And they went on to much more reliable forms of employment in real estate and I don't know what but his word had an effect, not on us because we wanted to... No matter what, we wanted to do this. We had no idea where it was going or what we could do and this was a constant low level source of anxiety for a long time, years.

The other thing that struck me was that I had spent my teenage years working with sound and then I had put sound aside as a... Something that I did when I was a kid and now I had to get serious. Now I was in film and of course, intellectually, I knew films had sound because actors talk and there are sound effects and everything but I had no idea, really, how this happened. How did it work? And if the teachers had pulled me aside and said, 'Walter, we have to tell you something about film sound which is that film sound is recorded at the time of shooting and it's embedded in the film, in some mysterious way, and we cannot change it later. So whatever gets recorded at the time, that's it. So if you want a sound effect, you have to make it at the time of shooting'. Of course, this was absurd in retrospect but I was innocent and if somebody had told me that, I would have thought, well that's a shame because I've seen how flexible sound is with what I had been doing with my tape recording but I guess, for some mysterious reason, film can't do that.
Of course, what I discovered was exactly the opposite; that everything that you do with film sound is identical to the kind of stuff that I was doing as a 12-year-old and it, in fact, is quite complicated how sound gets onto film. It... Especially then, you had to record it on a separate medium, you had to make sure that it was in sync, you had to maintain that sync and then of course, you had to add everything else that was not recorded at the time like sound effects and of course, music. And blending all of these things together into something that feels organic and of a piece, even though it's constructed kind of like a Frankenstein's monster, out of all these bits and pieces, is a real technical and artistic challenge which is one of the things that have defined the rest of my creative life in film. Has been dedicated to that process but I entered that as a relative innocent and it was only in film school that I saw these two interests really coming together. My 10-year-old, 12-year-old interest in sound and my newly ignited interest in cinema that really took hold when I was studying romance languages in Paris in the early 1960s.

One of the other students at film school at that time, at USC [University of Southern California], was George Lucas who was a... I think he had been at school for a year before we arrived, as an undergraduate. So Matthew and I arrived and Caleb Deschanel arrived the following year, the cinematographer, and George... We were graduate students. George had come in as an undergraduate, being suggested by Haskell Wexler that he should go to film school because George had a love of cars and racing and he had... That's what he wanted to do with his life and... but he was in a very bad accident in a car and barely survived, was hospitalised for a long time and emerged thinking, well, I don't think I can do this. But he would hang around fast cars and in one of those meetings or races he happened to meet Haskell Wexler, who also loved fast cars and they bonded. And Haskell asked George the same question that my mother asked me and said, 'What do you want to do?' 'Oh, I don't know. Something blah, blah, blah' and he said, 'Well, you should go to film school' and so George researched film and got interested in it and wound up applying and being accepted at USC. Anyway, George was another one of these pieces of flotsam and jetsam that the baby boom had thrown up, going to film school and he was immediately a star at the film school. I don't know where that talent came from but he had it.

I remember we were all in an animation class, learning how to do drawings and animate bouncing balls and we all... we had to do a project and we all did something that kind of was what you would expect somebody in early animation to be doing and George's film which was, I think called, A Look at Life, which was clips of photographs from Look and Life magazine animated in a kinetic way with moves on the photographs about the riots in Watts, the race riots which had just happened that summer, and Vietnam. And it was all with a great soundtrack and it was like when we had the film screening and we looked at it, we thought, where did this... This is fantastic. Where did this come from? It was electrifying and from that point on, his path through film school was... had booster rockets underneath it. Everything he did was new and fascinating and interesting and we were collectively just in awe of him and where his talent had come from but we were all pals.

Matthew and I had been working on a screenplay for a student film about a man trapped in an underground civilisation and you only learn that it's underground at the end, when the hatch opens up and you realise that he'd been living in a kind of submarine world. And... but then we got interested in something else, another fascinating project, and put that project on the backburner. And George had linked up with the Navy and the US Navy was sending people to USC film to learn audio-visual techniques. They had a lot of money compared to us. They had a lot of film; they were allowed to shoot in colour film. We were only allowed to shoot in black and white. Their budgets were an order of magnitude, larger than ours and he somehow linked up with them and they were not particularly creative. They wanted to learn how to operate the camera. So they needed to shoot something.
And so George at one point knocked on the door and said, 'Are you guys going to do that film about the guy trapped underground? Can I have it?' 'Okay, sure.' So we gave him the outline for that and he made a film, a wonderful film based on that called THX 11384 EB, was the original title, and it won all kinds of student awards.

George and I wound up being the finalists in a scholarship program to send a student from the film school after they graduated, to Warner Brothers for six months and they could hang out and just wander around the studio and absorb, do whatever seemed to interest them. And in the moments before we went in to have our final hearing, George and I made a kind of Huck Finn, Tom Sawyer pact which is, one of us is going to get this. Let's say if something good happens as a result of this, whoever gets it will turn around and help the other one. So okay. We shook on that and we went in and a day later, they announced that George won this award. So, fantastic, have a great time. And he wanted to go to Warner's to study animation.
He was very interested in animation and he arrived the day that the animation department at Warner Brothers shut down. So again, it was part of this thing that our camera instructor was warning us about which is that everything is going to stop. So this was not a very good sign but it turned out that there was one film, just one, shooting at Warner Brothers at the time. And so he wandered over to look at the film being shot and he had a beard and he noticed that the person who was ordering other people around also had a beard and so they had a brotherly beard bonding moment. George went over and introduced himself and that man turned out to be Francis Coppola, directing Finian's Rainbow and they hit it off because they're both very creative, talented people.

The following year, Francis had written a screenplay for the film The Rain People, which was an original screenplay about a wife coming to terms with a pregnancy that she did not really want. She wasn't ready to have a kid yet and so she travels. She gets in her car and travels across country with this baby inside her and along the way, she picks up a hitchhiker. Shirley Knight played the mother, the wife and James Caan played the hitchhiker and they travel across the country. She flirts with him but it turns out he's brain damaged because of a football accident. And the subtext of the film is that this brain damaged college student that she's carrying with her becomes the proxy for the child that she's carrying in her womb. And one thing leads to another and Robert Duvall enters the picture as a policeman and the football player in the end gets killed trying to protect her from this policeman who gets angry about something when... I forget the particular details of it but it's a kind of domestic tragedy. It ends with her holding this dead baby, this football player and promising to do right by him and you never know what her final decision is, relative to her own pregnancy.

They shot this film, travelling across the United States and George came along to shoot a 'making of' film and Francis said, 'George, why don't you write a screenplay and I'll produce it and we'll get Warner Brothers to make it? Why don't you do a feature version of your student film, THX?' And so George at night was struggling writing the screenplay for this feature film while during the day, shooting a 'making of' film and one thing led to another and in June of... No, in December of '69 [sic – should be '68], I got a phone call from George saying, 'Francis wants somebody to do the sound on The Rain People, the sound effects and the mix. We're all going to move to San Francisco and start a new film company, come on.' So this was the bonding that, the pact that we had made back before the interview with Warner Brothers and I thought, fantastic. Of course I was married and now I was a father. My son had just been born. I didn't... we didn't particularly like Los Angeles. It was the city that it is today but the smog was terrible back then and it didn't seem like the place to raise a kid and if you're ever going to leave Los Angeles, you have to leave it. If you don't leave, it eventually digs its claws into you and you wind up staying. So we thought okay, well, let's do it.

That spring, I wound up working on making the sound effects all by myself, for The Rain People. And then we piled everything into a big rental truck van and Aggie drove the truck up to San Francisco from Los Angeles, with me asleep, having worked all night, and the baby in a little basinet and we started American Zoetrope in a warehouse just south of Market Street in San Francisco and we were going to change the world.
Because we had all been pushed to film school by the excitement of world cinema. In my case, the new wave. Francis also was excited by that and we... He had seen a company in Denmark called, Lanterna Films and he thought, this is what I want it to be and so American Zoetrope is a child of Lanterna Magica Films. And the idea was that we would recreate a company that would be just like how we made films as film students. With everybody doing everything and it would all be very exciting and we would be able to infuse the films we made with the aesthetics of European and world cinema that we felt were lacking and this would invigorate American film making. It was like a graft of a new branch that could produce some kind of interesting fruit and that was our mission, to... And it was fairly... It was not just unconscious. This was very consciously... This was what we wanted to do.

We also wanted to change the nature of film sound and all of us were very excited by the possibilities of film sound because it was very flexible and relatively speaking to the picture, very inexpensive. If you did something really creative with sound, you could do something and do it relatively inexpensively. The crumpling of a piece of cellophane at the right moment in a film can energise an entire audience if the concept and the recording is correct and probably at an unexpected moment. And we felt that this was a woefully underutilised aspect of cinema and in fact, the technical nature of film sound in 1969 was identical to film sound in 1939. So the films we were making in 1969, the optical track of a film was exactly the same as Gone with the Wind or Wizard of Oz. There had been a behind the scenes shift from optical to magnetic sound in the 1950s but the ultimate release pattern of film was this optical track which had been frozen in place for various reasons and we were kicking against this, trying to push it forward.

One of the things that we saw in Hollywood in the late 1960s was an unfortunate collision in the workflow of film sound where the person who organised and created the sound effects turned this material over to somebody else, who sat at the mixing desk and mixed it. And sometimes it would work. There were many interesting soundtracks produced but proportionately, not enough by our likes. And what would frequently happen is that the sound effects editor and that team would hand this material over and then wait for the mixers to do right by it but frequently, that didn't happen. And the mixers would think, this is all very bad but I'll do the best I can with it. And the sound effects editors would be sitting in the back of the room saying, 'This person is making a mess of everything that I did and there would be arguments and, can't you do...  Raise this level, do this, filter that, shut up.' So the equivalent in photography would be as if there were no hierarchy between the camera operator and the lighting cameraman. So imagine the situation if the... Dougie Slocombe come, lights the scene and then the operator comes in and does whatever they want. 'No, no, no. You can't shoot that way. I didn't like... No, I'm going to do this', and so there would be a terrible friction there and to us, there seemed to be no reason to have this friction now.
Technically, there was probably a reason for that back in the '20s and '30s because sound was a very mysterious engineering and technical problem. With the invention of the transistor, that problem had begun to recede and the prices of equipment were now dropping. Now of course, they've dropped catastrophically, in a good way. Things are very inexpensive now but that process was beginning in the 1960s with the injection of the transistor into the process. So we thought, there's no reason that the sound effects editor cannot also be the person who mixes it. They made all the sound effects. They know how it should sound so just let them produce the final results. And so the largest capital investment that American Zoetrope made was in mixing equipment because we thought that this would pay off, very largely. This investment would double, triple, quadruple its power and I think we were right. And so that move which we started in San Francisco, in the late 1960s and carried through all through the '70s, now, that's generally accepted in the industry that somebody who is a supervising sound editor or a sound designer can also sit at the mixing desk and blend those sounds into the finished film.

All of the other departments in film work that way. When the director talks to the cinematographer, that cinematographer is responsible for the look of the film, the photographic look of the film. From the lighting of the set all the way through to the answer print. That's... he's the point man. Similarly, with the production designer, similarly with the costume designer, similarly with makeup. And that was not the case with sound. There was this... And if there was a problem, people would say, well, it's his fault or no, that's his fault and so there was this finger pointing which we just wanted to eliminate. So what now is something that we call, sound designer is the sound equivalent of production designer. That person, whoever it is, is the person that the director talks to about anything to do with the sound of the film. Just like you talk to the director of photography about anything to do with the photographic look of the film. This was revolutionary. In retrospect, it's kind of a basic... It seems logical but at the time, it kicked against all kinds of entrenched positions both artistic, technical and business, the way unions were organised and everything.
That's another reason we moved to San Francisco, was to get away from the overly compartmentalised union structure of Hollywood which, given the declining nature of Hollywood, was becoming even more entrenched. As the turf diminishes, people hold on even stronger to the turf that they have and we just wanted to get away from that.

We moved to San Francisco and I began... I was the sound person for American Zoetrope in the early years. After [The] Rain People, we did in fact get the go-ahead to make THX 1138 and George and I worked together on the screenplay because I had been part of the team that had written the original treatment of it. And that was a great opportunity as somebody writing a screenplay who is ultimately going to be doing the sound for the film. I don't know that that's ever been repeated. It's certainly not common. So somebody writing the screenplay is also somebody who is thinking deeply about the ultimate nature of the sound of the film and THX was a classic example of something where we were putting together a vision of an alien future world based on things that we were photographing now, in selective areas around San Francisco.
How were we going to make it into an alien world? Well, through judicious use of production design. There were no really visual effects in that film, to speak of, but through sound. So that with... with an intensely creative use of sound, we could leverage the film up to the place where we wanted it to be which was a vision of some imagined future. And that process took a good... Probably it took us about a year and a half to shoot the film and do everything. It was a... There were just three of us working on the film: myself and George and Marcia Lucas, George's wife at the time, and we were working out of a little house in Mill Valley, just north of San Francisco, and it was exactly the kind of challenges that we as film students could... If we had tried to imagine a possible paradise for us, as film students, rather than the kind of terrifying prospects that were seemingly on offer for us, what happened was as good as it could possibly be which is writing an original screenplay, shooting it for not very much money and then doing all of these ground-breaking, to us, creative things with the photographic approach and also, in my case particularly, with the sound.

At the end of the first semester of film school, a 3x5 card appeared on a bulletin board that said, 'Need a job over Christmas? Phone Grady at dah, dah, dah, dah, dah' and this was alongside other similar notices but we were all hungry and a job? Yes. Maybe that will pay for some Christmas presents and it turned out that Matthew Robins, my friend, and George Lucas phoned that number, talked to Grady and he told… gave them an address to come to which was just off Sunset Boulevard, near La Cienega. So it was in Beverly Hills but just and they wound up knocking on the door and Grady Sutton opened the door to this very nice house and you would recognise Grady as the sidekick from many Western movies. He usually played the slightly slow person who lost that poker or who was killed early in the film. And he was running the house at that time of George Cukor, the director, and this was who the house was and the job was: 'Follow me, boys', he took them up to the attic of the house and the door opened up and there was a large attic probably about the size of this room and there was a pyramid of Christmas presents in the middle of the room. And he said, 'Your job is to wrap those presents' and these were George Cukor's Christmas gifts to his Hollywood friends. And so he said, 'Lunch will be served at 1 o'clock. Get busy. There's the wrapping paper.' And so George and Matthew began wrapping Christmas presents.
And Matthew's version of the story is that George became increasingly prickly about this job because Cukor, it was known then, was a homosexual and maybe this was a honey trap to get two students, who wanted to wrap Christmas presents, into the attic of the house and that at some unforeseen moment, George Cukor was suddenly going to spring the trap on Matthew and George. So by the end of the day, George was not going to come back the next day.  George's version of the story is that he really had to go back home to Modesto and spend Christmas with his family and so he couldn't continue on this job.

That evening, Matthew phoned me and said, 'George is dropping out of this job. It's wrapping Christmas presents for George Cukor. It pays – whatever it was – $200', which was a lot of money. 'Yes', I said and so the next day, George was gone and I replaced George and there we were, two 22-year-old film students in the attic of George Cukor, who had won the academy award for My Fair Lady the previous year. And in today's dollars, it was probably $100,000 worth of gifts, at least, arranged in a descending pyramid from cigarette lighters at the bottom to fur coats and silver service for Audrey Hepburn, Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy. And we were designated to get our grubby mitts on this stuff and actually make nice wrapping. And we rose to the challenge and I learned how to wrap Christmas presents which is a talent I still have. To do it quickly and neatly and make the bow nice and we never saw George until late in the process. At around 12.30, the Swedish cook would say, 'Lunch is on the table' and we would wind up in the kitchen with this woman, the Swedish cook, eating Cukor's leftovers from the night before, which were delicious, and doing the best job that we could imagine doing.

At one point, [George] Cukor did pop his head in and he looked at us, 'How's it going?' We said, 'Very good. We'll be done in three days.' 'Excellent. So you want to be in the movie business?' 'Yes, sir.' 'Here's my advice: never complain, never explain.' 'Thank you, sir.' Click. What did he mean by that?
I later on found out this was something that Henry Ford said, so Cukor was passing it along to us. And never complain is like, don't grouse about the job. Just do the job and by explain, he meant, don't come up with phony excuses like, the dog ate my homework. If you make a mistake, just admit you made a mistake and everyone will understand and move forward but nobody wants to hear stupid explanations for why something didn't get done. I think, I think that's what he meant.
That was the only time we saw George.

Grady would check in with us every couple of days to see everything was going right and we wrapped up the expensive, the fur coats for the Hepburn women and Spencer Tracy. And Grady came and retrieved those because Cukor was going to give these presents himself and that left everything else. And so Grady came up one day and said, 'Do you boys have a car?' 'Yes, sir.' We had a VW bus. 'Okay. Here are the addresses for all these presents. Go deliver them.' So we had a piece of paper that had names and addresses of all of the Hollywood people, short of the Hepburn's and the Tracy's. And for the next four, five days, we drove around Hollywood and Beverly Hills and Brentwood and all of these fancy neighbourhoods, knocking on doors and: 'Present from Mr Cukor!'
There was one bobble in the otherwise well-executed plan which was, I took the present to Signe Hasso, who was kind of an Ingrid Bergman next generation. She was slightly younger but in the mid-50s, she had a moment of stardom, and so this was 1965 and knocked on the door. A sort of Erich von Stroheim character opened the door, 'Yes?' I said, 'Well, here's a Christmas present for Miss Hasso from George Cukor.' 'Thank you very much.' Click. I went back to the VW bus. Who's next? And I picked up a present, Signe Hasso. So I had delivered the wrong present. So we did a U-turn. I went back, knocked on the door. Erich Von Stroheim answered and said… I said, 'I'm afraid this is Miss Hasso's present. I gave you the wrong present.' 'Oh. Just a minute.' Click. So five minutes later, the door opened up again and he handed me a package that looked like it had been attacked by a wildcat. So the Christmas wrapping had been ripped off and the box had been torn open and he said, 'I'm afraid you're going to have to rewrap this present.'
So this was about a week or so before Christmas but Miss Hasso was so anxious to see what George Cukor had given her for Christmas. Because of this pyramid, you could determine what your specific gravity was. If the gift was a certain kind of gift, George Cukor thought that you were high on the pyramid. If it was a cigarette lighter, then you were at the same level as the guards at the gates to the studios. So I hope, and I don't know, I hope that the present I gave, the second present to Miss Hasso was higher in the pyramid than the first present that I gave her.

I can't think of a [better] story that encapsulates the shift in Hollywood over the last 50 years... Imagine somebody at the very height of Hollywood at the moment. Steve Spielberg or... Imagine that person putting a 3x5 card at the film school saying, 'Need a job over Christmas?' And allowing film students whom he didn't know into the house, into the attic to actually wrap all of these expensive, expensive presents and then deliver these presents to these printed addresses of all of these directors' friends. It's just... You can't imagine something like that happening and yet that was 1965. That was George Cukor and that was us. In that environment, it... Sure, it's fine. That's how it worked. It now is a story that seems as remote as a distant geological age, to me.

We were mixing [The] Rain People in 1969 and we were fighting a terrible deadline because the mixing equipment that we had bought was... This was the first time out of the gate for this equipment which had been imported from Germany and there were all kinds of issues with different voltages and stuff and the building in which we were mixing had not yet been finished. So there was a great amount of plaster dust and unfinished carpentry around us and we were working, not in a real mixing theatre, but in a large storage room that had been retrofitted with sound absorbent panels made of fiberglass. So a very improvised situation. There was no projector. We were... We put the film on one of the dubbers and had a video camera in a prism so that what we were looking at was a television set with images from the film on it. So we didn't even have the finished film to look at. It was a very low quality video image and the equipment broke down a number of times. We had to resolder various capacitors that were mismatched to the voltage.
We had to be on the plane at 8 o'clock in the morning to get the magnetic master to Hollywood so that an optical track can be made so that the film can go to the San Sebastian film festival in Spain. And it was 2 o'clock in the morning of that same day and we were far from being done and it was me, mixing, the composer, Ronnie Stein who would push an extra fader if I asked him to do so, and Bill Neil who was the technical person who had put all of this stuff together. Francis, who was in and out of consciousness, sleeping on all of the cardboard boxes in which this equipment had come. David McMillan, a sound recordist who was also working, helping to connect all of this stuff together and suddenly, at 2.30 in the morning, we all began to have what looked like, I'm sure, simultaneous seizures. Fits of coughing and it happened so quickly and the hit was so instant that it was as if a piece of film had been jump cut and one moment we were mixing the film, the next moment we were out in the corridor, coughing and gasping for breath. What was that? What's going on? And we're disoriented anyway because we've been working for 36 hours straight and it's 2.30 in the morning and we have to be done by 8 o'clock.
So after about five minutes one of us, Dave McMillan, went back into the room and he got hit again and he came back out. There's something in the air in that room that is causing this problem. Let's get a fan. So we got a big fan from somewhere and started blowing the air into the room and then every couple of minutes, one of us would go in and be forced back out. Finally, after about 20 minutes, the air was clear enough that I was able to go in, breathe and 'Okay, come back in. It's safe.' Whatever it was. We didn't even know what was going on and we just had to keep mixing. So at 3 o'clock, we started mixing again and luckily, five hours later, we were able to be on the plane with this magnetic master, heading to Los Angeles.

At 3:30 in the morning, Francis [Ford Coppola], who was a voice in the darkness of the room behind me, said, 'It was me.' And... What, what? 'It was me.' 'What do you mean, Francis?' 'I was the one who caused the problem.' 'What, what problem?' 'That problem, with the breathing.' 'What do you mean?' And he said, 'Today, I went to a store...' He was doing research for the script of The Conversation. And he went to a store that sold all kinds of mysterious security, eavesdropping stuff. And on an impulse, he bought a ballpoint pen that had a cylinder in it that was filled with mace, pepper-spray kind of a thing. And he absentmindedly, as he was watching the mix, took the ballpoint pen out of his pocket, and as you do with ballpoint pens, was going, clickety-click, clickety-click, clickety-click, clickety-click. Each time he clicked it, it was releasing a little puff of mace, until finally, the puffs built up to the level that they suddenly attacked us, and we jumped out of the room. So it was an interesting premonition of, sometimes, the relationship between director and everyone else on the crew. The director in this case is capable, absentmindedly, of macing his crew while they are rushing to meet a deadline that is an implacable deadline.

By the time we mixed THX [1138], the rest of the installation had been finished and we were able to mix it in relatively civilised circumstances. We were still mixing the video, which is interesting given the fact that it was 1970-71, black and white, and at the end of mixing the film, we would then project it with a higher quality film image. There was an interesting phenomenon that happened as a result of that, which is that when we projected the finished film, the soundtrack, which had sounded perfectly fine to us when we were looking at this small, low-quality black and white image, the soundtrack was unbelievably dense and intense. But why? It had seemed, when we ran the film with the video, it seemed fine. Why does it now seem wrong? What are we going to do about it? Why, and what are we going to do about it?
The why seemed to be a general principle, which is that if the visual information is small and poorly defined, and black and white and not coloured, so that the amount of information coming from that screen is very, very low, there is more of your brain available to cope with a very complex soundtrack. And so we wanted the experience to be intense, and so as we were mixing it, we would mix intensely, and everything seemed fine because the image was relatively simple. And that left large parts of your brain capable of dealing with the complexity of the sound. That ceased to be functioning when we were looking at a very large, very sharp, in-colour image. And then it just... The soundtrack was too much, because your brain was so busy processing all of the visual information that you didn't have enough left over to cope with the complexity.
So we went back, and for a day or two, we just... we remixed it, simplifying it, and making it less burdensome for the audio parts of your brain. I don't know where that version, that early version is. I don't think it exists anymore. It would be fascinating if it did exist somewhere, to play it and just see now, you know, 45 years later, what that effect really was like. But it's a general principle that there is a handoff between the parts of the brain that deal with picture, and the parts of the picture that deal with sound. They're not the same parts, and it's not almost, but not quite a zero-sum game, which was clear in that particular instance.

When we were mixing The Godfather, we were mixing in Los Angeles to a black and white print. So it wasn't video, but it was still black and white, and it was still a dupe, meaning a generational loss. Like a bad Xerox version of the film. And this was fine for doing the mixing, but a version of that same problem was present in any of this technology of the time. And the question comes, when do we show it to the producers? Meaning, the head of the studio, Bob Evans, when do we show this? 'We're not going to show it to him', said Howard Beals, who was the head of the sound effects department at Paramount at the time. 'We're not going to show it to them until we have a colour answer print.' Why? 'Because it will sound better when it's in colour.' Why? And he came up with a fantastically accurate emotional answer to it, he said, 'It sounds better for the same reason your car drives better when it's clean.' So if you'd have the experience, which we all probably have had, of putting your car through a car wash and cleaning it and polishing it, and then you get in. It's exactly the same car, the motor and everything, but you drive off and somehow, it seems to be driving better.
It's... When the picture is low in quality, again, more of your mind is able to pay conscious attention to the sound and you are aware of, inevitably, the technical problems that still remain that you haven't found a solution to. When it's in colour, there's this blooming of the brain. It now has more to deal with in colour, and less brain to deal with the problems, the fact that the equalisation wasn't exactly right there, or we still hear the click of the cut from one scene to another. Whatever they might be, these minor imperfections suddenly seem to go away. They haven't gone away, they are still there technically, on the soundtrack, but your brain does not have the ability to pay conscious attention to them. And so they are pushed to one side as if they didn't exist in the first place. These are problems that have disappeared from our world, because we now... When we're doing postproduction, we are always looking at a very sharp colour image of whatever it is that we're working on. And the distinction between what we're looking at and what will finally be seen in the theatre is negligible.

There's an argument to be made that it might be interesting to wilfully go back to an earlier technology. And if you're doing sound for a film, do it to a slightly degraded black and white image of the film, and see if that conjures up some kind of extra oomph from you to sort of fill in the gaps, that then will disappear, in a good way, when you see it in colour. It's a situation that was purely based on the conditions of the technology of the time.

The film THX [1138] came out and was not a success commercially. It was such not-a-success that Warner Bros., who had financed the film and had also financed the development of a number of other screenplays, among them Apocalypse Now and The Black Stallion and The Conversation, decided to cancel the contract. And not only to cancel the contract, but to hold Francis [Ford Coppola] financially responsible for all the development funds that had been spent up to that time. So no, Francis, that was not a development that was a personal loan to you, and you now have to pay it back. I don't know the particulars of how this contract got into that state, but the effect was, Francis had to pay back something like $300,000 of development costs, which is a lot of money now and it was a huge amount of money in 1969. And it was a desperate situation for American Zoetrope, to have made a first film, to have it be released, to have it fail, and then to have the rug pulled out from all the other projects that we were developing and intending to make.
And a life raft appeared on the horizon, which was a film project that Paramount was making about the mafia, called The Godfather. And many directors had turned this project down, because it seemed too low-rent a film. Fred Zinnemann was offered the film apparently, and turned it down. So it was directors of that calibre. And as Paramount was working through their list, they eventually came to Francis Coppola, who had directed a number of films, he was Italian, and none of his films had really been financially successful, but that seemed to be a gamble to them worth making. So Francis was approached, and because of the desperate nature of the financial situation, accepted the job. And so we, me and American Zoetrope, found ourselves working on this Hollywood film. And for a while, we were working on it in San Francisco, it was being edited in San Francisco. We shot in New York, but the editors Peter Zinner and Bill Reynolds moved to San Francisco and they were editing the film. And we were doing not the final mix, but the pre-mixes of the film at our mixing facility. And I was editing the sound for the film. And at a certain point in the film's evolution, all of that work got transferred back down to Hollywood. And this was the first time that I'd ever worked in Hollywood at a studio, ever, on such a high-profile film, because The Godfather had been a bestselling book and everyone was keyed up to see the film that was going to be made from it. So the stakes were high, and getting higher, as we worked on it.

And the problems that had... that my teachers had talked about at film school were still present in Hollywood, meaning everything was kind of down at the heels still, and entrenched, and technically could be better. So it was a fascinating, almost an anthropological venture for me, to be in that environment. I remember one time I went to... I was working in the sound effects department and I went to see Al Ruddy, who was one of the producers of the film, and he had an office diagonally across the studio from where I was working. I went and talked to him about whatever the issue was, and I came back and this same Howard Beals, the head of the sound effects department, who you know, we liked each other very much, he pulled me into the room and said, 'Whenever you go outside of this building, make sure you're holding something in your hands.' And I said, 'But I was just going to talk to Al Ruddy about the schedule.' 'Doesn't matter', he said, 'it can be an empty box. But make sure you have something in your hands.' 'Why?' I said. 'Because that son of a bitch', and he pointed up at a structure that was like a guard's tower at a penitentiary prison, 'because that son of a bitch is looking at all of us. And if he sees somebody walking around the studio without anything in their hands, you're going to get a phone call asking, why are you wasting time walking around the studio when you should be in your galley pulling on an oar?' And that person was the head of postproduction at Paramount, Paul Haggar, who sadly passed away, as has Howard Beals. But he was a stern taskmaster to a crew at the studio whom he always believed were trying to outwit and fleece him, and not do creative hard work. So that was the kind of environment that we found ourselves in.

A month or so later from that, we were playing back the sound effects of a reel at a special theatre that was capable of playing this back. And again, this is technologically very primitive to today, but in those days, you would... you had a Moviola, and you would cut one sound effect at a time. But if there were three or four sound effects intending to be played simultaneously, you had to imagine what they might sound like. You couldn't play them together at the same time. There were some Moviolas that had been retrofitted so you could play two together at the same time, but certainly not three or five. So there was a theatre that was not a mixing theatre, but it was a small preview theatre where you could thread up six soundtracks simultaneously, but not seven. And we were looking at a reel, and there was me, and Paul Haggar, the head of postproduction, and Howard Beals, and a couple of other sound effects editors, and the person who was sitting at the mixing desk. And we were just reviewing the work to make sure that everything was in sync and so that there weren't any surprises when we got to the final mix.
And suddenly, the door bursts open, a side door to the room, and in came the kind of the second-in-command of the studio, a man named Jack Ballard, who was the enforcer for things that Bob Evans wanted to have happen, that Evans didn't want to necessarily dirty his hands doing, he would send Jack to make sure that these things happened. And there was a lot of bad blood, consequently, between Jack and Paul Haggar that goes back probably into deep history that I didn't know anything about. But they were very at loggerheads with each other quite frequently. And Ballard came in, and he collapsed onto a sofa that was in the room, and he listened to what we were playing. And then after about three minutes, his head popped up and he said, 'These are the worst sound effects I've ever heard. If the sound of this film is going to sound like this, none of you have a future in Hollywood. I'm going to fire all of you.'
And there's a moment where you kind of sit there and a little voice in my head said, you have to defend what you did, with unknown consequences. So I said... No one else spoke up, and I said, 'Jack, you don't know what you're talking about, because this reel, most of the sound effects are being carried on the dialogue track, so the sound effects you're hearing are supplemental to the dialogue track. And this room is not equipped to play the dialogue track and these other sound effects tracks, so intentionally, we don't have the dialogue track up. So you're hearing only 30% of what the final mix will be. And besides that, you're drunk.' Which he was. And he sort of swayed back and forth, what's he going to say? 'Well', he said, 'you're right. I am drunk, and I don't know what I'm talking about. Keep up the good work.' And he left the room.
And you know, there's a big sigh of relief at that, and without my knowledge, I had secured a decade of good will from Paul Haggar because of the enmity between these two guys, and this person, who was then 28 years old, you know, who was a nobody in the hierarchy, had stood up to Jack Ballard, had accused him of being drunk, he had admitted that he was drunk, and he didn't know what he was talking about, in public, in the presence of his enemy Paul Haggar, and there were witnesses. So I had shifted some big power-play within Paramount Studios without knowing that I was doing that. But that was the kind of environment that was going on, and I'm sure there's... I know there's the equivalent of that today. But you know, it had its particular flavours like that at the time.

There was another crisis that was simultaneously with that, which was that Bob Evans hated the music for The Godfather. This is the music that we all know, and many of us love, the Nino Rota score for The Godfather. He felt that it was going to drag the film down, that the film was long, it was almost three hours long, it was dark, thanks to Gordy Willis's great prince-of-darkness photography. There was a lot of talk in the film, action, but not that much action, and the music was European and of a certain... It was not what you would call hard-hitting American music. It was on the romantic side of the score.
Anyway, Evans did not like the music, and there was a crisis, because six weeks before the film was to come out, Evans wanted to replace the music with music yet to be written by Henry Mancini, who was a friend of his. And Henry Mancini had written lots of hard-hitting music, notably for Touch of Evil, Orson Welles's film. And so a meeting was called at Evans's house, at which Francis was there, and Jack Ballard and Paul Haggar, and Howard Beals and me, and a number of lower-level executives who would make things happen if Evans said this or that. And the issue was the music, what to do. And Francis turned on the spigots of a... on an assault of charm and philosophy and passion that he is famous for and capable of under these extreme circumstances, that simply suck all the oxygen out of the room. Nobody can get a word in edgewise, everything he's saying is fascinating and passionate and full of belief, and he says it at a torrent, and his heart and soul are in it. And you just kind of stand there listening to this outpouring. And he threatened to resign from the film and create a... and take his name off the film. This music was the perfect music for this film, which it is, and this is a crazy idea, and duh duh duh duh duh. And at the end of his talk, there was some sort of, well, how can anyone go against that?
So all eyes turned to Bob Evans, what's he going to say? And he says, 'Okay, we'll go with Francis's idea. But here's what we're going to do. We're going to... You are going to recut the music to make it better, because it can be better. And then I'm going to recut your recut, and then we'll preview the film and the film will get a score. Then I will recut the music, and then you will recut my recut of the music, and we'll preview the film, and that will get a score. And whichever version gets the highest score, that's what we're going to go with.' The executives behind me, their eyes were going in different directions at the same time, because this was clearly impossible. There was no way, in the time we had left, to do something as complicated as this. The film was going to be in the theatres in six weeks. We had just dodged a bullet of the Henry Mancini score, which would have been very difficult to pull off. Not impossible, but very difficult. So the question was... it was clear that this was not going to work, and whoever got... whoever did it first would... That would be the version, because we'd simply run out of time. So the question was, who's going to go first? Was it going to be us, or was it going to be Bob Evans? And just at that moment, Ali MacGraw, who was married to Bob Evans at the time, came out with a plate of hot dogs, because that's what we were being fed. And she had heard the last part of that speech, and she said, 'Bob, don't forget, we're going to Acapulco on a holiday.' And he said, 'You're right, okay. Francis, you go first.'
And I looked at Francis, and Francis looked at me, and it was like, we... whatever's going to happen, it'll be okay. We have our... We get to get our hands on the film first, not Bob Evans.

And the meeting broke up, and Francis and I got in the car together to drive back to the studio, and Francis said, 'Well, good luck, Walter.' And I said, 'What do you mean, good luck?' He said, 'No, I have to go back up to San Francisco. I'm directing Private Lives for the ACT Theatre Company, Noël Coward's play.' I said, 'Francis, we're finishing The Godfather.' And he said, 'No, I know, but I agreed to do it, you know? You can do it, it'll be fine.'
So you know, I had this hot potato in my lap, which was, how do I... what do I do with the music to make Bob Evans happy with the film? Francis said, 'Call me if there's a problem', but you know, it was clear that he was not going to be at the coalface with me in this problem. And I sat there thinking, what would Sun Tzu, the Chinese general, do? And one of the things he advised was, get inside the mind of your enemy. If you're going to fight somebody, understand how they think. So I thought, okay, I'll pretend I'm the head of the studio. And I played the music for the film in my mind, thinking, is that a problem? No, that's okay, that's okay.
And then I came up against... I came up with the music for the horse's head scene. And I listened to the music for that scene, and I thought, okay, here, Evans has a point. The music... the music that was written was written in counterpoint to the horror of the scene, and because it's a horse, there's a kind of carousel theme. But it plays as a nice piece of music deep into the scene. And Henry Mancini would never have done that. It would be a hard-hitting thing. This is the music that's written, so we can't turn that into Henry Mancini music, but what can we do? And the structure of the music was what's called A B A. So there's an A structure to the music, and then a shift in key to another piece, and then it goes back to the first key. And I had another transfer of the music made, so I now had two copies of the music. And I shifted the second copy up into the area of the first, so that the A music plays, and then the B part of the music plays, but superimposed on that is the A music from the first part. And then the A music plays, but now it plays superimposed with the B music, so there's a dissonance between the two keys of the music, and things are playing against each other. And judiciously mixed at the right proportion, it adds a kind of horror distortion to the music. And I sunk it up so that the first elements of that distortion happened at the moment that you might see the first blood on the pillow next to his head. And then of course, as the sheets are moved and more blood is revealed, it gets progressively more horrible.

This was an unusual thing to do, to screw around with music like this, but we were in a desperate situation so that's what I did. And we... I took it into the mixing theatre, and we mixed it that way, and then called Bob Evans and said, 'Come down and listen to this cue.' So he came, and everyone... I knew it was going to work, but everyone else was, like, what's he going to say? And so he came in very impatiently, and he had a bad back at that time so there was a hospital bed in the mixing room, and he would lie down on the bed. 'Okay, play it.' And we played the scene, and when the scene was over, he jumped out of bed, forgot about his bad back, and he said, 'Fantastic. Give me a telephone.' So we gave him a telephone with a long cord on it, and he started to... 'Go back to the head of the scene', and he started dialling the phone, and walked up to the screen, and turned around and said, 'Roll it.' And he got... On the other end of the phone was Charlie Bluhdorn, who was the head of Gulf and Western, which was the parent corporation that then owned Paramount. And he said, 'Charlie, listen to this', and he held the telephone up to the screen, and we ran the scene. And I was sitting in the back with Dick Portman, the lead mixer on the film, and we looked at each other as if to say, 'This is one of those moments.' Because here is the head of the studio holding a telephone up to the screen, and his shadow is being cast on the screen. And what's on the screen is the fictional head of a studio who is pulling back the sheets, revealing more and more blood, and then this actual decapitated horse's head that has been put inside his bed. And the scene is over, and he talks to Bluhdorn, 'Yes, it's fantastic, okay, great. You know, click.' And then, 'Great work, keep up the good work.' And he leaves, and we never hear from Bob Evans again.
So somehow, that scene satisfied him that it was going to be okay, whatever the problem was. And we just continued to mix the film the way we had wanted to do it in the first place. But that image is still imprinted on my retina somewhere, of this guy holding a telephone up to the screen, with the horse's head playing in the background. I can't imagine what it sounded like to Charlie Bluhdorn at the other end, because you know, what would it sound like, going over the telephone line, without the picture? But the net result was all good as far as we were concerned.

So Francis [Coppola] went to considerable trouble and expense on The Godfather, avoiding what he perceived as clichés of Italian screen persona, mainly in the overuse of hand gestures, but other things as well. He wanted a film that was very family-oriented, the family of The Godfather, domestic, and sober, in the sense that the film was perceived as a metaphor for corporate America, but framed in the terms of the Italian mafia, making the observation that the two things aren't that different. So he didn't want to overstate the Italian-ness of it in any clichéd way. Because of his own experience with his family, he believed correctly that the adults in the film would have arrived from Italy, that they would have been born in Italy and come to America. So he didn't want to cast many Italian-American actors in some of the parts. So he brought Italian actors over from Italy. If they didn't know English, he arranged to have them taught English, to the extent that they needed to do it to speak, and instructed them that he wanted them to perform not in any clichéd, overstated way.
On the first day of the first... On the first shot of the first day, he said that his blood ran cold when the actor playing Nazorine, the baker coming to the Godfather at the wedding to ask for the Godfather's help in arranging a marriage between the daughter of the baker and the Italian prisoner of war who was working in the bakery... As soon as the clapstick hit, the actor's hands leapt as if they were separate creatures, from under the table, and he started gesturing in the air, exactly what Francis didn't want. And it was seen as a problem, because this was a talisman, this was the first shot of the first day. He was shooting over Marlon Brando's shoulder, looking at this baker. And as the take was coming to an end, Francis thought, what am I going to do? What's the right answer? And what he did was he said, 'Cut, very good.' And in fact, it was a good performance other than this, the hand gestures.
And he said, 'Very good, however, we have to do another take because I made a mistake. I realised, once the shot was going on, that we have come in in the middle of this scene. Formalities had already been exchanged, but we don't film that. And to set you at ease, Tom Hagen (the Robert Duvall character), would have already poured you a glass of brandy.' So Robert Duvall, pouring a glass of brandy. And they equipped the actor with a shot glass of brandy, filled right to the brim, put it in his hand, and now, action. And of course, he gave the scene, and now the hands were constrained by the fact that he had to balance this glass of brandy, and yet, he isn't thinking, 'The director just told me not to move my hands.' He's thinking, 'The director made a mistake and I'm helping to make things perfect, because I didn't make a mistake.' So it's a model for exactly the right kind of directorial intervention in a problem, which is generally, take the burden upon yourself, you're the one who made the mistake, and find the right answer to the problem that is not going to make the actor think, oh, you know... The old problem of, don't think of an elephant, you know? The actor is not aware that he is being corrected, and the results are there for you to see when you watch the film, you can see exactly what's going on.

The shooting of the wedding in The Godfather participated in an approach that Francis took both in The Godfather and in [The] Conversation, and in Apocalypse Now. Which is: when confronted with a large event like the wedding, or like the recording of the conversation in that film, or the Valkyrie's battle, what Francis would do would be to stage the event as something completely independent of it being filmed. So we're just going to have a wedding, and everyone has a role to play in the wedding, everyone has their identity, and here we go. And music is played, and food is eaten, and things happen, and people come and go. And it is captured on multiple cameras as if it's a documentary. So all of those scenes were shot as if they were documentary. At the end of one take, the cameras are moved to a slightly different position, and then another scene is done, another version of the wedding has happened. The result is, of course, you generate a lot of film, but the advantage is that it seems like something that is really happening, rather than something that is being staged for the purposes of the camera. Inevitably, once the main shooting is over, then a few extra shots are done that make specific points, and those are inserted at the appropriate place in the scene. But it has a reality to it that is, well, you can see how effective it is from looking at those scenes in the films.

For the wedding scene, I wanted the sound to also be real, and I was particularly taken with the sound of the playback music. So this is when the orchestra that is at the wedding is playing the music, what is actually happening is we are playing back pre-recorded music and the musicians are imitating this music. So that music is not actually being performed at the time, but it's being broadcast to the set through speakers, and it has this wonderful... The sound, the way weddings really sound. And again, this was early days, this was 1971-72, and I then got hold of the actual original recordings of that music, and did a kind of forensic, plastic surgery of blending the captured playback sound, and syncing it up with the actual sound. So that when we went into the mix for the film, I had two soundtracks running simultaneously. One of them, the chaotic sound from the set, and the other one, the real sound of the studio recording. And that meant that we could blend them at the appropriate level to get enough feeling of reality, and yet enough substance from the original recording so that the music didn't sound thin and too artificial. And that's a technique that I had already used to a certain extent in THX 1138, and it was a technique that was really going to come into its own in American Graffiti. My word for this is 'worldizing', because it's taking a sound and exposing it to the acoustics of the world that is being shown by the image. What is this world? Well, it could be the wedding in the garden of a big house, or it could be the gymnasium where a band is playing back, or it could be, you know, anything. Wherever the environment seems to indicate.
The advantage of this is not only does it sound realistic, but you can fine-tune the acoustics to match, and put the dialogue that is running simultaneously at the right level of understandability. It's the sonic equivalent of depth of field in photography, whereas if you're taking a portrait of somebody, generally what we do is use a fairly long focal-length lens, make the person's face be in focus, and then at the right f-stop, we throw the background out of focus, so that as soon as you see the picture, your eye knows exactly what it's supposed to be looking at. If everything is in focus, there's a hesitation where you have to see the person and see the background, and then intellectually make a distinction between the background and the foreground. If you're using depth of field, you do this automatically without thinking about it. And the discovery and use of worldizing is the acoustic equivalent of this. So it had both an aesthetic and a practical function to it. If we had played the music without this acoustic blossoming around it, it would have been harder to understand the dialogue that was being spoken, or we would have had to play the music so low that it would now sound artificial. So this allows you to play the music louder than you would normally play it, and yet because it has this acoustic out-of-focusness around it, you can still hear the dialogue which is clear and sharp, and in focus.

The Godfather had no intermission, although there was an intermission intended for the film. The midpoint of the film is the assassination of Sollozzo and McCluskey at the restaurant, where Michael kills these two people at point blank range. And after the killing, there was a big music that would come in, which there is in the finished film, but that music cue was going to take you into an intermission. You would have an intermission after about an hour and a half of film, and then you go buy your popcorn, use the restroom, whatever, and then you'd come back, sit down, and watch the second half of the film. And it was Bob Evans, the head of the studio, who made the decision not to have an intermission. And this was the first time that that had been made. Godfather was the first long Hollywood film of that length, almost three hours, to not have an intermission in it. And Evans' rationale was he didn't want to let the audience off the hook. He felt that the film was so strong that were we to have an intermission, then kind of the air would go out of the balloon, and when you came back you would have to fill the balloon up with air again. So don't let that dissipate. And this caused a great deal of consternation with the theatre owners, who were very anxious to get their hands on Godfather, but they make whatever... A very large percentage of their income comes from selling popcorn and other concessions. And if there's no intermission, then that cuts into their revenue. So there were screenings of the film, which did not go very well, because of this resentment by the theatre owners.
There was never a real audience preview of The Godfather the way we understand them now, or the way they were understood previously. And I don't know the reasons for this, but it just never happened. We had small screenings for invited guests, and we would screen the film and say, 'What do you think?' We would talk to the audience afterwards, but there was not a full-on test screening in which you get 400 people or so into a theatre, show them the film, and then get all of them to fill out little questionnaires. And the result of these screenings were that the theatre owners were looking at the film and not responding well, dovetailed with some of the problems with the making of the film. And Francis, at a certain point in this process, thought maybe the film is not going to work.
As late as two months or so before the film came out, I remember walking back from one session where we were recording extra dialogue, and he said, 'Well, maybe I blew it. Maybe I took a pulpy, juicy, over-the-top story, and I over-intellectualised it. I turned it into a long, dark film with a lot of people talking in rooms.' Because in fact, he had cut out a lot of the pulp, he and Mario Puzo had purified the screenplay of a lot of excesses that the novel had had. And now, he was wondering, maybe I did the wrong thing. So even a film like The Godfather, which of course is, you know, one of the big successes of the last 50 years of cinema and occupies the top slot, or close to the top spot of IMDB... There's always this doubt running around.

And I remember telling Francis a story about the... I was simultaneously watching a BBC multipart series about King Henry, Henry the VIII, starring Keith Michell, where a story was told about a prisoner who got to the king and said, 'Sire, if you let me out of prison, I will teach your horse to talk.' And the king said on a whim, 'Okay, let him out.' And the other prisoners in the cell said, 'Are you crazy? You can't do this.' And the prisoner, gathering all of his possessions said, 'Well, one of three things will happen. I may die, the king may die, or the horse may talk.'
And so that was my story, retelling it to Francis about this film The Godfather. Well, yes, at the moment, it seems like things are not so good. But if we keep going, the horse may talk. And this became, between Francis and me over the years, this was a shorthand for, in a desperate situation, you know, keep going, because the horse may talk. And when the film did come out and it was a big success, Francis would… He came up to me a said, 'The horse talked.'

The studio was very anxious, immediately at the success of The Godfather, to have [The] Godfather Part II. And this was never in Francis's plans. He didn't enjoy making The Godfather, it was a very painful experience for him. He was nearly fired from the film after five weeks of shooting, and only managed to save himself by desperate measures of firing a number of other people before they could fire him. And that so startled the studio that they didn't plunge the knife into him in time, and he was then able to show a number of scenes, including the Sollozzo murder scene, to Charlie Bluhdorn. And Bluhdorn put all of these attempts at firing Francis on...
Well, the kid stays in the picture again. So they wanted to make Godfather Part II, Francis negotiated very favourable terms for himself to do this. Among them working with, again, Mario Puzo, because they had a very good relationship in writing the screenplay, and he said, I want to make another film in-between Godfather I and Godfather II, and that's my screenplay of The Conversation. And the studio said, 'What?' This screenplay that, you know, one of the screenplays that he was developing for Warner Bros., and to get Francis to do Godfather II, Paramount agreed to do The Conversation. And so in the middle of considerable... activity, which included Francis producing American Graffiti the summer after Godfather, he was also preparing to shoot The Conversation that autumn, and preparing to prepare to start shooting The Godfather [Part II]in September of the following year. So there were many, many things going on simultaneously.
I was involved in American Graffiti doing the sound effects and the mix on that film. And George Lucas had written the screenplay, and it was based on his own personal experience growing up in Modesto, California, as a teenager. And it was set... Photographically, we set it in two towns. In Marin County, Petaluma, and San Rafael, which were stand-ins, anonymous stand-ins for Modesto. The name of the town is never mentioned. But it's an Aristotelian story told in one evening of the events that have happened around the lives of these four boys and the girls that they were associated with, drenched in music of the period, which is all pre-Beatles music. So rock-and-roll from the late 1950s to the early 1960s. And this was baked into the screenplay, in the sense that when George was writing the screenplay, he would start each scene with the name of the song that would be played for this scene, and then he would write the scene. And then change to the next scene, a new song, and in the end, it amounted to 42 different songs, all of which had to be... We had to get the rights to use all those songs. The rights and the performance. And this caused a great deal of consternation at Universal Studio, who was the studio backing it, because this would cause an unprecedented $80,000 to get this, which works out to be about $2,000 per song. By today's standards, this is orders of magnitude less than you would pay, but it was partly due to the success of American Graffiti that showed you could do this, that allowed this idea of using popular songs in films, to really take off.
However, there was a technical problem with doing this, and Verna Fields, who worked with Marcia Lucas and George in making the first assembly of the film, took me aside at one point. She later went on to edit Jaws, and she had been one of our teachers at film school. But she took me aside and she said, 'Walter, you've got to convince George to drop this idea of having all this music in the film. People are just going to go crazy. They're going to want to reach out and turn that music off, because he's ruining a wonderful story with all this music.' And I said, 'Well, Verna, this is what... We had some ideas of how to make it work, this is what we're going to try to do.' 'Well, I don't know.' And she had to go off... We were editing in San Francisco and she had to go off back to LA to start work on another film.

We decided to implement this idea of worldizing on a relatively massive scale. So we recorded a two-hour disc jockey program, including the songs and the commercials, and Wolfman Jack, a disc jockey, talking in-between the commercials and the songs, as if it was something you could just turn on your radio. So we had a two-hour tape of all of this, and then we took this tape on a Nagra recorder and another Nagra recorder with a microphone, and we went into the backyard of a house in the suburbs of San Francisco, of Mill Valley. And George stood at one end of the yard with the speaker from this recorder, it was a separate Nagra speaker, and I stood as far away from him as I could in this yard with a Nagra and a microphone. And we started simultaneously. I pointed the microphone at the speaker, and then George would rotate the speaker to the left, and then rotate the speaker to the right, and back again over the course of two hours. And I would do the opposite with the microphone, so at some times, the microphone and the speaker were pointing at each other, other times they were pointing at 180 degrees different than each other and then they would come back in. And then, we did it all again. So it took about four, four and a half hours to do this, but what we had at the end were two worldized, atmospheric recordings of this radio show.
And then in the final mix, I was able to sync those two soundtracks up with the original recording, and then I threw one of the tracks a couple of frames out of sync to give a little echo bounce to it. And then in the mixing, I had three faders. And I could choose to use all of fader one and none of the other faders, if I wanted the music to be upfront and big. And then if I needed to go underneath the dialogue, I would fade that down and bring the other two, or one, up and work with them in some proportion. And so again, this allowed us to have this control of the depth of field of the sound, which overcame Verna Fields' objection. Because without her being able to articulate what the problem was, she was referring to the technique that had been used up to that point, which was, play the music low, filter it so that it has a restricted filter, and maybe add a little bit of echo chamber echo to it. The problem with that is that that music still has sonically speaking, it still has sharp edges to it. And the result is that you start playing it lower and lower, and then you reach a certain point where you can't tell what the music is, but there's just something kind of scratching on the soundtrack. It sounds like music that's bleeding through from a print-through or something. It sounds like a mistake, and therefore you say, 'Well, let's just get rid of it.' And that was Verna's impulse. With our technique, we were able to play the music under dialogue, actually quite loud, but because it has no sharp edges to it, and the dialogue does have clearly defined words, that allows the ear to seize hold of the words without tripping over itself, so to speak.

We previewed the film, and we had a very successful preview. The head of the... The executive who had been appointed to the film, however, thought that the preview had gone very poorly. I don't know where he got that idea. And there was a wonderful scene in the lobby afterwards, where this executive was complaining about a preview that, by every other standard, the audience had gone crazy and started screaming about the film right from the beginning. Francis whipped out his checkbook and said, 'Ned' – to the executive – 'I'm going to write you a check for $700,000 right now, and I'm going to buy the film back from you.' And he started to write out the check, and Ned Tanen said, 'Oh, wait a minute, Francis, wait a minute, wait a minute.' And later on, Francis said, 'One of the biggest regrets of my life is that I didn't keep on writing that check and actually buy the film', because of course, it went on to make many, many millions of dollars. And Francis would have become even richer than he was, if he had done that.
Ned, after that, took me aside and, you know, I was just the mixer on the film, and he said, 'I'm very concerned. I think this is a terrible soundtrack, it's an embarrassment to Universal Studios.' And then he turned and walked away, and... What is he saying, why is he saying this? And I used the same technique I had used with Bob Evans, which is trying to get inside... Why would he say that? And we had made a decision in the film, at a certain point, to completely supress a line of dialogue. And the rationale was that the engines of the cars were roaring, the music was playing very loud, and an adult was yelling at one of the people, Terry the Toad. And we thought it would be funny if we just held the dialogue out, and the reason you didn't hear the dialogue is that everything else is so loud.
And that was the version that Ned, the executive, had seen. And I thought, well, if his attention to the soundtrack surfaced at a point, and he looked at the film and said, 'Somebody is moving their lips and I can't hear the dialogue, then this is wrong.' He didn't interpret it as a creative act, he interpreted it as a mistake. I was just guessing this, so I thought, well, okay, let's split the difference and we'll put in a little bit of this dialogue. We ran the film for him at another preview about a week later, and otherwise, it was exactly the same film. And he came up to me afterwards and said, 'I don't know what you did, but it's fantastic, just... What a fantastic soundtrack.' And you know, what's the takeaway from that? I don't know. It is a general observation that executives, harried executives, have a limited attention to various things. They're thinking about a lot of things about the film you're working on, but many other films as well, and so there's a traffic jam going on there. If they focus on some aspect of the film in a brief window of attention, and they detect a defect, they will extend that defect to the whole film. It's like if you're going to buy a house, and you go through the house rattling doorknobs, which is a relatively trivial thing. But if the doorknobs are loose, that kind of tells you, maybe the maintenance of this house is not what it should be. It's not, you know, it's just a conclusion that you try to come to, given the fact that you can't do a complete survey of the house. So it's some equivalent of that. Anyway, the good news is that approach worked.

I was mixing American Graffiti at the same time that Francis [Ford Coppola] was shooting The Conversation, which I was editing. So my attention was definitely split. So I would be mixing American Graffiti during the day, and then I would go to the dailies of The Conversation and watch what they had shot that day, and try to keep up with things. I wasn't able to do any editing on the film during the shooting, I mean, while I was mixing American Graffiti. So... And that certainly weighed on me. Up to that point, I hadn't edited a feature film, picture. All my work had been editing sound and doing the mix. And when Francis got the go-ahead to do The Conversation, he approached me and he said, 'Well, Walter, you work in sound, you're kind of like this Harry Caul character, and you have edited movies.' And in fact, I had edited short films and some documentaries and some commercials. 'And you've worked on features on the sound. So why don't you edit the picture of this?' And I wanted to be an editor of pictures on a feature, so I leapt at the chance, and then of course, I had to confront the reality of what that meant and how I was going to approach this. And I was going to work for the first time on these new editing machines. New to us, which to us, which were the German Steenbeck and KEM machines. THX and Graffiti had been edited on a Steenbeck, but I hadn't worked that way, George [Lucas] had. And now, Francis had bought, as a result of The Godfather, he had bought some new... These European editing tables, which require a very different approach to the editing than the machines we had been using, which were the... Called the upright Moviolas. Which really had not changed much since they were invented in the 1920s. So for 40 years, other than the addition of... a head to play the soundtrack , the Moviola was a relatively fixed and known entity.
Despite its antiquity, it is... The Moviola is a random access machine, in the sense that when the film comes from the laboratory, the first thing that happens to it is that it is broken down into individual shots, which last, let's say, an average of a minute to a minute and a half. Sometimes more, sometimes much more, sometimes much less. But on the average... And it's about that big, you can handle it, you can physically cope with it. Ten minutes is about that big, and that's problematical. But two minutes is about that big, wound up on itself. And all of these pieces of film, rolls of films are stored in boxes with labels on the side of them. And the editor's room is lined with boxes, and there is an assistant with you in the room, most of the time. And you're sitting at the Moviola, and you have assembled all of the shots that you're going to be working with, and if what you want isn't there, you say to the assistant, 'Could you bring me the close-up of shot 37, take two', from your notes. And the assistant goes to that box, pulls out this object, this roll-up, and gives it to you. And you put it in the Moviola, and find the right frame to cut on, and put it into the shot, into the scene. That is not all that different from what we now do with computers, where everything is broken down into individual shots, and if I want a shot, I double-click on the icon of that shot, and the computer says, here it is. And I see it in my viewing screen, and I get it ready to put it into the assembly of the scene, which is showing up next-door on the other screen.

The KEM, however, is very different, because it requires you to store the film in ten-minute rolls. So these one-minute takes are built up, and you can get maybe ten of them on a roll, and then that roll has a number. And if you want to look at something, you have to find out which roll it's in, get the roll, put that roll on, and then speed through the machine to get down to where you want to get. And this is a version of what we call linear editing, where things are not separated out into bits, but they are put together into larger chunks. And this is... On the one hand, it's kind of a disadvantage. On the other hand, I came to appreciate this system, even though on the face of it, it was more cumbersome, because on the way to look at a particular shot that I was looking for, I would see, at high speed, a number of other shots before I got to the one that I was looking for. And half of the time, before I ever got to what I wanted, I would stop, because now I saw something that I needed. The film would say, basically, 'What about me?' Or, 'I could be in your film.' So there was a little audition happening as you would roll down in this process.
Whereas the Moviola system, and unless you prepare it correctly, digital random access systems, something that is marked as no good, not good, can linger forever in a bin somewhere and you never look at it again. So I appreciated the extra work that I had to do with the KEMs and Steenbeck systems, these linear table systems. But there was an advantage, which is that you got to know the material better, because you were always going through these rolls. Seeing it sometimes with great attention, sometimes just out of the corner of your eye. But in a sense, the compost pile was always being turned, you were always taking stuff that was in danger of not being in the film, and reconsidering it. Because, as frequently happens and certainly happened on The Conversation, the premise of the film and the premise of individual scenes starts to shift. And what was not good for the original intention of the film now becomes good. And in fact, that moment where the actor looks at the camera, just as an example, you may say, 'Well, that's no good.' But if the scene changes and now, having that actor actually look at the camera is exactly what you might want. And yet, you might forget that unless you kept being reminded of it.

I was hyperaware on The Conversation of my inexperience as a film editor on a feature, and so I worked very hard, I worked very long hours, and I was as diligent as I could think to be, particularly because in the shooting of the film, Francis [Ford Coppola] had to abandon the shooting with ten pages of screenplay yet to be shot. They had run over schedule, they'd run over budget, everyone was getting on everyone else's nerves. It was a difficult, emotional film for Gene Hackman who was playing the character of Harry Caul, which was a very different kind of person than Gene really is. He had to kind of make himself be very wound up and internal. He now... Gene says he likes that performance very much, but at the time it was very difficult for him. Anyway... And Godfather II was looming over everything, and that production was constantly saying to Francis, you know, 'We need you.' So with ten pages of material to shoot out of 120-page screenplay, Francis stopped, and then he went off to do the preparations on Godfather II, and said, 'Well, Walter, do the best you can with the material that we have, try to solve the problem of these blank areas. And if we need to go back and reshoot something, then I will... You know, we'll be able to work out exactly what we need and then we'll go to Paramount and say: Well, we need to shoot another three days or something.' 'Okay.' And so I plunged into the editing. The first assembly was probably four and a half hours long, and the film itself is two hours long, so there was a lot of extra material shot, and much extra story. The screenplay itself was... I said it was 120 pages, but it wasn't, it was like, 150 pages long, so much longer than the average screenplay.
We would put together the film. I was working with an associate editor, Richard Chew, who went on to edit One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest and Star Wars. But he and I were working together, and we came up with solutions to a number of the blank issues. And then Francis would come back for a couple days and we would screen the film, and have meetings and decide what to do next. And then he would take off again, and we would work for another month, implementing the ideas that had been discussed and coming up with new ideas, which Francis definitely encouraged us to do. He's the kind of director who likes the creative participation of all these heads of departments. He doesn't have the film in all of its particulars in his head the way Hitchcock does, and doesn't want to do that. He loves the process of making films, and loves the things that the process itself makes manifest, rather than the Hitchcockian idea, which is, it's perfect up here. And the process of making the film, which is rather upsetting to me, I will decide how less-than-perfection I will accept, you know? Is it 10% less than what I have in my head? But you're always working at a disadvantage. The advantage of the Francis system is that there are times when something happens that's much better than you could have thought up yourself, but you can recognise that it's wonderful. And he does this with actors, and all of the people who work for him are encouraged to come up with new ideas. And the same idea would apply in the editing.

The challenge of the film, which was very conscious, was to make an alloy out of two metals that don't normally go together, which is a character study and a thriller. And Francis [Ford Coppola] would thumbnail this by saying he wanted to combine [Alfred] Hitchcock and Herman Hesse, like Steppenwolf. And these are things that, under normal circumstances, would fly apart. They don't really like to be together, but that was the challenge of making the film... is: take a character who, in other films, is a tangential character. The man who records the tape, who has maybe a two-minute scene where he hands the tape in and then you never see him again – I'm going to make a film about that person. What's that person's life like? This was similar to Billy Wilder's decision when he made The Apartment, was to take the character that appears in Brief Encounter, the other doctor who supplies the apartment in which the assignation might happen. I want to... Billy Wilder said, 'I'm going to make a whole film about that person, which is the Jack Lemmon character.'
The... So Harry Caul is a similar tangential character who becomes the main focus of... But what we found in putting the film together is that audiences were impatient if we didn't get it right, whatever that meant, you know? If we emphasise the thriller aspect, then the character study seems superfluous. Why are we... Who cares about that stuff? If we emphasise the character study, then the thriller seemed like a cheap add-on to try and increase the hormonal flow of the film. So we were... The principle challenge, other than getting four hours down to two hours, was how to make the right balance. My wife Aggie has a phrase from medicine which has to do with... In treating a patient, you have to... The question is always timing and dosage, which is, what is... How much medicine are you going to give, and exactly when do you give it? If you give the wrong medicine at the right time, that's fatal. If you give the right medicine at the wrong time, that's fatal. If you give the wrong medicine at the wrong time, that's fatal. What you have to do is give the right medicine, and the right amount of it, at the right time. And so this was a filmmaking equivalent. Enough character study, but not too much, and then just enough of the thriller, but not too much. So that neither one would overwhelm. And I don't... Every film is imperfect. We got close to where we were trying to get, certainly relative to where we had been. But this was frustrating for Francis, because he was trying to do two things at the same time. Direct Godfather Part II, and wrangle this difficult child that he had fathered in-between the two Godfather films, who was being a problem.

In October of 1973, Francis made the decision to stop work on The Conversation, to shelve it, and just do Godfather II, finish Godfather II and then go back to The Conversation. Because he said, 'I can't do both things at the same time.' Of course, this was a challenge for me, because here, the very first film that I was editing, now had this potential black mark, which was no, they had to abandon that film. Something's wrong with it, it's probably the editor, who had no experience editing a film before, a feature. So I went for a long run, which is what I do when problems surface like this, and I reached... The conclusion on the run was: I'm going to fight this. So I phoned up Francis and I said, 'Francis, let's not shelve it. Give me another week, I have some ideas, and let me implement those ideas.' And so I came into work the next day and talked to Richard, and we dove in, and were more ruthless with the film in certain aspects and also did some restructuring of this story.
So that... I took the scene where Harry assembles the tape for the first time, and I split it in two, so that there was an initial scene where you just saw enough of a scene to know how he does what he does. So this is how he has three tapes, and mixes from one to the other, and stops and replays, and does this. You don't really get deep into it, but you understand enough of what he does. Fade out, withdraw from scene, and then he's on the phone and he says, 'I've finished the tapes and I want to hand them in to get my money.' And he makes... He goes to see his girlfriend, and then he goes the next day to hand the tapes in. And the character of Martin Stett, played by Harrison Ford, young Harrison Ford, seems to be too anxious to get his hands on the tape. But the man who commissioned the tape isn't there, but this underling wants the tapes very badly. And that makes Gene Hackman, Harry Caul, suspicious. And he grabs the tapes back, and then goes... Without knowing why, why do you want this so much? And now he goes back to his lab and starts to scan through the tapes. What is it? There was nothing in this conversation that was problematical. And then he realises that there's probably a line of dialogue underneath some music, and he uses a new special filter that he developed that erased the music and reaches in and pulls the line of dialogue out from underneath, and it's the line, 'He'd kill us if he had the chance.' So okay, so that's why he wanted the tape, that there's something. It's not just an interesting tryst between two people talking about nonsense, which is all that he had heard. Now there's something serious. And the story goes on from there.
So it allowed the beginning of the film to have an articulation of it. Whereas written, Harry had already heard 'He'd kill us if he had the chance', and then he handed the tape in. And it was like, wait a minute, you just handed a tape in in which somebody is talking about killing, you know? So it put Harry in a more of a moral dilemma, which is that originally, even though he had heard the word 'kill us', he had handed the tape in. Whereas now, he holds the tape back. And a sub-clause of that shift was we turn Meredith, the girl at the convention who's a kind of borderline prostitute maybe, who seduces Harry, we made her steal the tapes that Harry had not turned in. Whereas in the script, she was somebody who was working for Harry's rival, who was merely there to steal the plans for some microphones. So we turned Moran and Meredith into... They were also taking part in this same story, but they were there to get the tapes back from Harry, that Harry didn't want to hand in, because 'He'd kill us if he had the chance.'

In the end, the problems of not shooting with ten days of shooting... we were able to turn one of the scenes that was partially shot into a dream sequence, where he talks to the girl in the conversation in the fog. So in the script, this was something that actually was really supposed to happen in reality, but we turned it into a dream that happens after he has been seduced by Meredith in his office. And the net result was that the ten unshot pages turned into one shot that we needed, and we had to reshoot this... We had to shoot this shot. And rather than some pieces of rolled up paper that were the plans for the microphone, we had to demonstrate that Meredith had taken the tape. And so the shot was an over-the-shoulder shot, past Gene Hackman onto the tape recorder, and he reaches out and pulls the keeper of the reel, and the reel falls apart and it's empty. And then you cut to a close-up of Gene Hackman as originally shot, and he says, 'Bitch.' But originally, he was reacting to the fact that the plans had been stolen. Now, he's reacting to the fact that his tapes have been stolen.
So we applied to Paramount to shoot this shot, and yes, we can shoot it. We want to keep the cost low, so why don't you borrow the camera? There's another film that's shooting right now, just borrow their camera in-between setups, you can build a little set over in the corner. Dean Tavoularis will... Alex and his brother... Dean and Alex will build a little set over in the corner. Gene Hackman is not available, but his brother is available, and that's enough, all you need is a shoulder. And so we went down and borrowed this camera in-between setups from this other film, shot the scene. And I regret that I didn't keep the camera rolling. Because after the last take, if we had panned the camera over here, we would have come upon Jack Nicholson and Roman Polański waiting to get their camera back because they were shooting Chinatown, which was the other film. So in one shot, we would've gone from The Conversation to Chinatown.
Anyway, that shot is in the film, and that knitted the two pieces of the film together.

These changes that we made to The Conversation, which happened roughly in that order, were enough to convince Francis [Ford Coppola] that we should go ahead with the film. Rather than shelve it, we should just run to complete it. And after tidying up some bits and pieces and struggling once again, briefly, with one of the central problems with the approach of the film, which is this mixture of character study and thriller, murder mystery, about an unsympathetic character. Because, not to put too fine a brush on it, Harry Caul is an unsympathetic character. He's not the normal kind of character that you would say, 'Let's make a film about this guy', which was the intention of Francis, he wanted to make a film about somebody you don't normally make a film about. And a technique that we use in film is that if the central character is, on the face of it, unsympathetic on objective terms, a technique that you can use is to make that film from a single point of view. And if you boil down films to... If you take a really long view of theatrical motion pictures, dramatic pictures, there are films that have multiple points of view, and films that have a single point of view. These vastly outnumber these, but these are significant. In multiple points of views, there are, broadly speaking, two different approaches, convergent and divergent. If you have... If you're going to have multiple points of view on a film, one approach is the approach that was taken by The Godfather and by American Graffiti, which is to load up the first few scenes of the film with all of the characters that you're going to have in the film, at the wedding in The Godfather, and in American Graffiti, at Mel's Drive-In. So at the first scene or two, you meet everybody, and you see everybody relative to everybody else. Oh, there's Fredo, he's the weakling, sentimental... There's Sonny, who's a womaniser and crude and brass. There's Michael, who doesn't want to be part of the family. There's, you know, Tom Hagen and everybody. And he [George Lucas] does the same thing with American Graffiti.
Then once all those people are lodged in the audience's mind, then you can explode the bomb and they can all go off in different directions. Of course, it has to be a well-written, interesting story, but you know who all these people are, and in the back of your mind you know their relationships to each other, and so you can keep track of stuff.

The opposite approach is the convergent which, in Godfather II is an extreme example of that, which is where... It's a film made up of two completely different tracks, and you intercut from one to the other. And in Godfather II, the point at which they meet is actually just outside of the film, which is where Marlon, the Godfather, comes in at the end of the film. You only hear him, you never see him, but he comes and you're left with Michael sitting alone at the table about to tell his father that he's joined the Marines.
But a more conventional approach would be a hypothetical film where you have a scene on a train with some businessmen going to the nearest town, discussing what they're going to do, and then you cut to a family in a car, going on a picnic. And the kids are making noise in the backseat and the father's telling them, 'Be quiet.' Then you cut back to the businessmen, then back to the car, and at a certain point, the train and the car are going to come together in an accident. And the businessmen and the family are going to, you know... Their stories are going to mix together. The problem with the single point-of-view film, and Talented Mr. Ripley is another example of this where we have an unsympathetic main character who murders people and lies, but you're fascinated with them. And hopefully, you're fascinated with the Harry Caul character. Or you just get up and leave the theatre. There isn't a scene where some of the other characters go off and say, 'What do you think about that Tom Ripley? I think he's duh duh duh.' It's – you're either looking at Tom Ripley or Harry Caul, or you're looking at something that he is looking at. You're never let off the hook. The problem is, how do you tell the truth in that story? It's tricky.
And we ran up... we run up against this problem in The Conversation, which is what happened, you know? We couldn't have a scene in which, you know, like the end of detective stories where they say, 'Well, actually he did this and she did that.' 'You mean?' 'Yes, he did that. And then...' We couldn't go there, because that would break the rules that we were operating under. So we had to find some way to help the audience in this way, and we were doing many things.

When I was mixing the film, Francis [Ford Coppola] was off in Godfather II, shooting in New York. And I was mixing the film, but in the back of my mind, thinking always, 'Oh, how can we help this process?' And then out of the blue, I remembered a recording that I had made with Fred Forest and Cindy Williams, who played the couple in The Conversation. And I'd recorded a wild track, a separate track of them saying the conversation. And they and I went out with a Nagra, a tape recorder, to another park in San Francisco, but in a residential area where there was no noise or interference. And I just... they just walked around the park and I walked in front of them recording the conversation. So they said their lines and I recorded it with them actually walking, so you get the effort of them moving, so it doesn't sound artificial.
On the third take Fred said instead of 'He'd kill us if he had the chance', he said, 'He'd kill us if he had the chance.' So the emphasis was different, and I remember noting in my notebook: the third take is the wrong reading of the line. But in the middle of mixing the line, I thought, I'm going to find that reading, where is that reading? And so I dug around in the old tapes and came up with this third take. And I transferred that and put it in the film, at the very end of the film when Harry is realising that those two kids are still alive and they've taken over the business. And the Robert Duvall character is dead, seemingly in an accident. What's going on? And in the middle of all that, the line gets replayed, 'He'd kill us if he had the chance', which implies, therefore, 'We have to kill him.' And you don't even know who he really is or what their relationship is with him, that's all deliberately undernourished plot information. Is she his wife? Maybe. She could be his daughter. We just don't know, you know? And that's a deliberate strategy on Francis's part.
Anyway, I'd mix that in and flew to New York with this version of the film, and played the mix for Francis. And I prepared Francis ahead of time and I said, 'I, you know, changed the rules here at the end.' And we had this different reading of the line, and at the end he said, 'No, I like it, leave it in.' Now, he says, 'Well, we should have kept it the way it is.' But you know, that's thinking after the fact. At the time, it seemed like a good decision, and you know, I think it breaks the rules in a sense, because it isn't exactly the same conversation played over and over again, there is a shift. But it addresses this subjective nature of the single point of view. And by implication, it seems to say Harry Caul wanted them to be innocent, so he chose to hear it with a certain inflection, whereas it actually had another inflection. But you know, I can't go too far down that path without running up against some contradictions. But that's the story anyway, behind that process.

The film went on to win Best Picture at Cannes that year, and then it was released and unfortunately, did not do very well. People expected, because of Francis [Ford Coppola] and because of Gene Hackman, and because of what was very much in the news at that time, Watergate, they expected, 'Oh, this is going to be The Godfather meets French Connection meets Watergate.' And of course, it really isn't any of those things, and so there was a mismatch between people's expectations for a kind of violent, rough 'em up story. No, this about a man who is put into an agony of wondering, is something I did responsible for the death of somebody? Rather than those other films, in which people are killed without even thinking about them.

I plunged almost immediately from The Conversation into [The] Godfather Part II, which now needed a mix. And so I was not editing film on Godfather Part II, that was Ritchie Marks, Peter Zinner and Barry Malkin, all of whom had worked for Francis [Ford Coppola] before, but not me because I was working on The Conversation. So I came in to do the sound design, although I'm not credited with that term, but the supervising sound editing and the mix on Godfather II. And well there's a lot to say about it, but it... it was a big film and long, it was 3 hours and 20 minutes long. And that's a long film and we had to mix it very quickly because the film had to come out in... around Christmas.
And... There was one disaster that happened on that film that permanently gave me a little scar; I can show it to you here. Metaphorically speaking which is that I wanted the film to have a large dynamic range which means in practical terms that the loudest sound in the film is significantly louder than average dialogue. One of the terms for this is headroom which means average dialogue is here at a certain loudness, how much louder is the biggest explosion in the film. For many years before Dolby, and this was before Dolby, the limit was six decibels which is about 50% louder. So in these big films, even the loudest explosion in the film is only 50% louder than average dialogue. And there has to be artistry to make that work. You have to kind of massage things to make it seem louder than it is. But I was young and on American Graffiti, I had pushed that envelope and done that. And on Godfather II I pushed it even more because I wanted the riots in Havana to be loud.
And in retrospect, I pushed it too far. And so the film came out, and complaints started coming back from the theatres which is: it's too dynamic. When we adjust... when we adjust the levels to make the dialogue sound correct, the loud sounds are way too loud. If we turn the sound down so that the loud sounds are correct, then nobody can hear the dialogue. So that's a problem. It technically is exacerbated by the fact that we were working in a relatively small mixing theatre.
And I've worked in many small mixing theatres. But you have to be very careful when you're in a small theatre because small mixing theatres, small rooms allow you to endure a greater dynamic range than normal. I don't know the physical reason for this. I suspect that it has to do with the fact that loud explosions and loud music are generally continuous sounds that exist over a wide spectrum of frequencies. So in music, Beethoven, he's using lots of frequencies and the sound is... continuous. And what this does is energize all of the air molecules in the room and kind of get them moving. There's kind of inertia to the air in the room, and you have to energize it with the sound and get them going.
Dialogue, on the other hand, is intermittent. It starts and stops. And it's in a relatively speaking restricted frequency range compared to music or sound effects. So dialogue – it takes more to energize the room. On the other hand, if the room is small, even the dialogue will get all of the air moving. Whereas when you're dealing with a large theatre, and in those days as in Godfather II theatres were still very large and you had theatres where there would be one thousand people, you know – huge amounts of air, and that's where the problem began to set in that the dialogue would not energize that huge cubic space compared to how the music and the sound effects would.

The net result was that I went down to Los Angeles, and we took the soundtrack of [The] Godfather II and with Dick Portman, who had mixed the original Godfather, we compressed the dynamic range. We held back the loudest sounds, and we raised the level of the dialogue and pushed them together. Then we made a whole new series of prints of the film, so it was a very expensive mistake.
And I saw my career being blighted by this terrible mistake. It didn't happen, but for me, it was a very uncomfortable two weeks of learning about this problem, figuring out what to do with it and then doing it. The result of it though, like any trauma, is that I am now extremely sensitive to issues of dynamic range, and I'm always on alert in mixing. How big is this room? You know? And I've got my decibel metre, and I'm always checking to make sure we have enough energy in the dialogue to balance out how loud the loudest sound effects are.
Clearly Apocalypse Now has an even greater dynamic range than Godfather II, but it's spread out over six soundtracks. So it's a stereo film with split surrounds and low-frequency enhancement. And I was just very careful about making sure the dialogue was loud enough to stand up to the increased pressure from all of that extra sound.

So whenever you do something for the first time, it... you know losing your virginity so to speak and literally, you are... you pay particular attention to everything that's happening because it's happening for the first time. And when I was editing picture on [The] Conversation I was very alert to the problems we were trying to solve, but also just to the... the physicality of what I was doing. You know, cutting from one shot to another.
And I had a revelation on the film where... probably a month or so into the editing, maybe two months. I was working very late at night, and in fact, I worked all night on a sequence. Then dawn came, and I went out to get some breakfast. And I had an experience that night which was I would be looking at the shot, and at the appropriate moment, you have to feel the moment where you are going to cut. And at the appropriate moment, I would feel: there. Then I would mark the film; I would run it again and see if that little mark seemed to come at the right point for a cut. If it did, then I would take the film out, and I would make the cut there. What I found was that over and over again, much more than chance would make it happen, within a few frames of that mark, Gene Hackman would blink. I thought, 'Well, that's curious. You know I haven't gone to sleep tonight, maybe... maybe it's that.'
Anyway, I went out for breakfast, and I walked past a Christian Science Reading Room, and this was in a slightly depressed area of San Francisco. They had a copy of the newspaper, The Christian Science Monitor, in the window; this was 6:00 in the morning. And I just stopped because John Huston had just finished a film called Fat City and he was talking to the interviewer Louise Sweeny of The Christian Science Monitor. And he said, 'Louise, look at me, now look at that lamp, now you're looking at the lamp and now look at me again. Do you see what you did?' And she said, 'No.' He said, 'You blinked, when you went from me to the lamp and the lamp back to me, in that process you blinked. That's what the cut is. The cut is a blink in between two focuses of attention. What the mind wants to do is bring the lamp and John Huston into close proximity and it wants to forget about the intervening swish pan.'
And that made me think: okay, if that's true and let's say it is; then that also must be happening internally within the mind of the audience, of the person. That if you have a thought in your head, and now you are going to switch to another thought, involuntarily there is a blink because that conceptually brings those two thoughts into closer proximity. Or the blink is an automatic reflex of a process whereby I'm finished with this thought, and in computer terms, I'm going to save to disk now so that I can think about the next thought. And the blink is just that little sound that hard drives make, you know, when you save to disk. So I thought the blink is either something that helps this transition take place, or it's an involuntary reaction to the transition that is already taking place.

Where somebody blinks is a moment where you can actually get access to the architecture of their thoughts. And so I started watching people in real-life and just noting where do they blink. And it was clear that they do blink at certain moments and not at other moments. And this is not what you read about when you open your biology textbook, certainly back then, which is that blinking is the body's need to moisten the surface of the eye. If that's all it was, then in an environment at a certain humidity, at a certain temperature or with a certain wind speed, the blinking would become thermostatically separate. So, in this environment blink every 12 seconds and you would remain blinking every 12 seconds unless it got hotter, in which case the blinking would happen every eight seconds. Or unless the humidity rose, in which case you would slow down and blink... But that doesn't happen.
Our blinking is tied to what we're thinking and how we're reacting to what's happening around us. And in a sense, editing is blinking for the audience. We are showing them a thought and in every shot is a thought or a series of thoughts. Then at the right moment, we are ending that thought and giving them a new thought. And then ending that and giving them a new one. And just as we are disturbed when we meet somebody whose blinking seems to be off... And politicians are notorious for this because they're telling us things, but they're lying to us frequently. And they're not only thinking about what they're saying; they're thinking about many different things. So their blinking rate is being determined by stuff that we cannot perceive because they're politicians. But this applies to everybody, not just politicians.
So when you meet somebody, and there's something off about them, watch where they blink, and their blinking probably has very little to do with the exchange that's happening with you. When somebody is really angry at you, they will either blink 60 times a minute or sometimes they won't blink at all. When they're not blinking at all, they have one thought which is: I hate you, and I'm going to kill you if you say that word again and don't you ever come... Or: I hate what you said, and I want to run away, but now I want to fight you, now I want to call you this and I want to call... And the blinks are desperately trying to separate out this snowstorm of thoughts that are running through the person's mind.
Anyway, the point is that I suddenly realised that there is an affinity between how people blink, where they blink and the way a film tells itself. And a poorly edited film is like meeting somebody who's blinking at the wrong places. You know, I get what you're saying, but you know, there's a blizzard going on that is preventing me from really feeling comfortable in your presence.

There were nice practical things about this. The actor has to be in character and Gene Hackman was definitely in the character of Harry Caul. You can frequently get actors who are nervous or who are not in character. They've been miscast and therefore their thinking is not correct. So you can't rely on them because their blinking is off. Michael Caine says actors should not blink. His technique is when the camera is running I will not blink, and this allows me to command the scene. If I blink, it destroys my command of the moment. Maybe, but that's an interpretation of basically the same concept. And so Michael Caine is relying on the film editor to do his blinking for him. He's not going to do it because he, Michael Caine, has decided that blinking is an abjuration of his authority as a character.

When I start any new film now, and I look at the people in the film, I watch how they blink. I pay attention to that, and I kind of get in the groove. And then one of the things as an exercise that I do is get that character on screen and then I try to hit the stop button just ahead of where they blink, so the frame before they blink. Can I do that? And I can. You know it's like playing a musical instrument, you get good at it. That's a way I have of tuning my reactions to the reactions which are unconscious, but the unconscious reactions of this actor to his character. Parenthetically what I would say is never, never, never use the blink as the frame on which to cut. You had to do it yourself; you have to come to that decision. Actually making a cut while somebody is blinking is a terrible thing that you don't want to do. It just... it looks like how it feels to you when you get a piece of dust in your eye. You know, you're kind of like, 'No, I don't want that.'
So there is something going on there and would say my understanding of it is about at the level of the way an acupuncturist understands where to put the needles. I don't fully... the acupuncturist doesn't fully understand in Western medicine terms what's happening, but there's no doubt that it works under certain circumstances. And I would say this is sort of a similar thing. Anyway, that was... that's been with me as a concept for the last, you know, now 40 plus years. And the book that I wrote, In the Blink of an Eye, is where you would meet that concept written down.

The other thing I came to on The Conversation was that I don't like cutting on matching action. And this is the rule, mostly unexamined, mostly in films from America and to a certain extent Western Europe, where a character will be sitting let's say at a table, and then will stand up. And the matching action solution is, wait until the actor starts to get up and then cut to the next shot which might be a wide shot of the same action. And you choose that frame where he's sort of in the middle of that action, and you match the action. I don't... I tend not to like this. I do it, and it's a very good technique under certain circumstances, notably in fight scenes and action scenes where there's a lot going on, but I prefer to do something that I have my own analysis as I call it, nodal editing, like nodes.
So the person is sitting at the table, and then I determine at this point, whatever this frame is, it is inevitable that you must get up even though you haven't even started the action. But the line of dialogue has been said, and the only thing that can now happen is that you stand up. Now I'm going to cut to the other angle and initiate that action in the next shot so that the cut point is the moment where a potential action has reached inevitability. And then the cut happens, and now that action reveals itself completely in the next shot.
When I see matching action stuff, the problem for me is that the motion or whatever it is has been initiated and only partially completed and in the middle of that a cut happens. Which makes the audience have to say unconsciously, 'Where is this shot now? Oh, it's a wide shot from a different angle.' And using that analysis to also see the completion of the action. So it produces in my value a kind of stuttering that has a duh, duh, duh quality to it. Initiation, then dis-completion of that, change of angle which is another thing that you have to take on board, and then completion of action.
I think it was initiated, I mean this is something that we've been doing since the 1920s at least. It's something that people were nervous, especially in the early years of film, about editing in general. Can you really cut from one shot to another? Will people accept that? In the earliest films, Life of an American Fireman, 1903, they had little miniature dissolves between shots, like four frame dissolves because [they thought] audiences need that. To actually cut from one shot to another would be disorienting, so little zip, zip, dissolves. So I think the idea of cutting on matching action is a kind of vestigial remnant of that nervousness about the cut. I think it actually achieves exactly the opposite effect of what... what's wanted. But, I don't know, this is an example of self-analysis that if asked what is your aesthetics, this is what I would come up with strictly in terms of how I determine which frame to cut on.

I call it nodal because I think that each shot is like the branch of a tree, and the branch will grow and at a certain point, that is determined by the DNA of the tree and the conditions under which it's growing, the tree will say, 'Now I'm going to put out another branch, I will create a node here, and I will branch.' And then this branch grows and puts out another one, and you get twigs and then eventually the leaves. So cut, branch, branch, branch, each one of those is a cut in a sense. And that's how we recognise trees. That if you see an Elm tree or you see an Oak tree, without knowing it, you're looking at the rhythm of the branching of that tree and every species of tree has a slightly different rhythm of branching that is determined by the DNA of the tree and the circumstances under which it's growing.
And in that sense, every film is a tree that grows that I think has to have its authentic branching points that are organically true to its DNA and to the circumstances under which it is growing. And there are many counter examples of films that are wonderfully successful that don't follow this, but... so I'm just talking about my own approach to the process. Which is by virtue of what I call it, nodal, is organic. I think there's this idea that I just talked about which is that every shot has a rising potential, and there is a moment where that potential has to be changed, or transformed, or realised and so that's the cut point.

Similarly, when somebody... if  you're going through a door and the door closes, you do not necessarily say 'I will cut when the door is closed' unless you're trying to make a point about slam. But just if there's somebody moving through a doorway, you cut at the point at which the door's closing is inevitable. Not before because it could always be that the actor will go halfway through and then stop and... but I have another thought. And if you wait until the door is closed, then you've dissipated the potential of that moment of transition because now the potential has been realised, the door is closed. Whereas if you cut at the moment that closing is inevitable, then the film keeps moving in a fluid way rather than stopping. And this would apply in various other ways. You know, somebody moving towards the edge of a frame line. Are they going to exit the frame? Where do you cut? Do you cut when they've left the frame or...? No, you cut when it is inevitable that they are going to leave. That is an identifiable frame, and you can identify that by this technique of dynamic trimming that I talked about earlier which is: you cut.
And now what I do is I would just note that in my mind. I would say, what's the timecode of that frame? You know 122. And then I rewind, and I hit again, and I look. Did I hit that same frame? Usually, I do, or you know. So what that tells me is if I can hit that same frame twice or three times in a row, that tells me that it's beyond my conscious control. I can't decide to do that. I have to do it the way a musician plays a note. When does the oboe enter? At exactly the right moment. If you enter too soon, you ruin the piece of music. If you enter too late, you ruin it. So you have to enter, or the drum has to hit at exactly the right moment for the orchestra to be correct. And in that sense, we are... the editor is a musician within the orchestra of the film hitting these entry points of, each shot is another instrument that is coming in that's playing a little melody and you want that instrument to come in at the right... at the right point.
And a way of doing that is this 'cutting on the fly' or 'dynamic trimming', where you decide the frame at which you're going to cut out of a shot by running the shot at normal speed and then hitting that frame on the fly. Noting where you hit it and: can you do it again. If you can't do it again, then that's also a good indication that this is not a good area to cut, there's something wrong with the rhythm. So maybe you should cut a whole phrase later or a phrase earlier. But there's something wrong... If you can't do it, then there's something wrong about the area that you've chosen. And... so that's another good indication.

Another advantage of that is that this will allow you very quickly to quantise your technique. This is kind of down at the level of a violinist talking about bowing techniques, and you know vibrato. But if you practice this technique, you will get better at it, and you will also discover that when you... when you hit the stop button, you will feel something. You will feel: 'Oh, that was a little late', or: 'that felt great', or: 'that felt a little early'. Holding that feeling in your thoughts for a moment, now look at the number and yes, that felt early. And now that I look at the number it is three frames earlier than the other time I did it. What that tells you is for this film, for this shot in this film, that's what three frames feels like. So you're picking up a way of quantising an emotional state in musical terms, and the same thing obviously would apply to 'oh, that felt late.' How late? Well, five frames. Oh, okay, that's what five frames feel like. So it puts you in a creative spiral that reinforces a kind of aesthetic, a sort of musical aesthetic as quickly as it can be done, I think, if you're sensitive to those kinds of things.

One of the original plans for The Godfather, because it was part of a tradition, was that a long film like The Godfather would have an intermission. And Bob Evans made the decision not to have an intermission. And this affected the scene just prior to the theoretical breakpoint in the film which is where Michael kills Sollozzo and McCluskey. And the plan was to have that scene play in silence as far as music goes, not to have any music for the scene. So that at the moment that Michael kills Sollozzo, the music would come in very big, and that would take us into the intermission. And then people would get up, go do what they have to do, and then come back, and the film would begin again. So the plan for the music didn't change.
But now that there was no intermission, it put us in a slightly different situation because the scene prior to the intermission is a long dialogue scene, pretty tense with Michael talking to these two... this mafia guy and the police captain. And under normal circumstances, this probably would've had some kind of tense music. Another director certainly would have put some kind of something underneath that scene. And half of the scene is in Italian without any subtitles. So the audience is thrown back not understanding Italian into looking carefully at their body language, and their... the acting, and the facial expressions to try to figure out what is going on. You can sort of guess what it is, but Francis [Ford Coppola] and I thought well, it probably needs something to help the audience because it's so long and much of it is in a foreign language.
And I'd grown up in New York not far from that particular location in the Bronx, and I knew that there were many elevated trains. The subway system in the Bronx comes up out of the ground, and the trains are in these elevated girded structures that make a wonderful noise. So I thought well, that could be in the atmosphere. And so we recorded elevated trains and particularly recorded elevated trains going around a corner and coming to a stop. And the wheels as they do that make this incredibly wonderful, from a sound point of view, screech as they do that, this metallic screeching.
And so I laid this sound effect in, and even though there's nothing visually that tells you that there are trains in this neighbourhood, you're left to your imagination to think that might be what it is, but we never see any of these things. And... but during the course of the scene this rumbling pulse, kind of like a string section of low-based strings, comes and goes away. And then it comes back a minute or so later a little bit louder and then it goes away. Then when Michael is in the bathroom looking for the gun that they had placed there, it gets even louder and then it goes away. And then he comes out, and he'd been told: 'As soon as you come out of the bathroom come out blasting', but he doesn't. He just looks and then he goes and sits down. And the audience we guess is wondering: is he going to do it or not? What is happening? Now he sits down, and Sollozzo starts talking in Italian again and now the sound gets louder, and louder, and louder, and louder, and louder, it gets so loud that it... it's almost as if we were looking at the train coming right over the camera and coming to a stop, and this screeching sound gets louder and louder. And then Michael suddenly stands up, pulls the gun out and shoots both of them. And when the gun goes off, this sound which is very loud suddenly stops. There's a moment of silence, and he drops the gun and then this big music comes in.
So what I learned from that was that I could make these things happen in the soundtrack of a big Hollywood film. I'd been doing this kind of thing in our smaller films, but this was a big Hollywood film. And yet it was also amenable to this sort of treatment where sound effects, my word for it is: 'metaphoric'. They're not literal because there's nothing. We're not seeing anything of what is making this sound, so the audience has to interpret it in some way. And of course, if you know anything about New York you can interpret it as: I guess that's a subway train.
What happens though is that in a weird kind of alchemy, that sound becomes in a sense Michael's neurons rubbing against each other as he's tensely coming to this realisation that he has to actually pull the trigger.

There was a wonderful interview with a mafia person who was in hiding talking about this scene, this was Sammy the Bull Gravano, who killed 19 people. He said that sound convinced him that Mario Puzo was in the mafia because: 'that's exactly how I felt when I killed my first person.' It's just a sound effect. It's not in the book, first of all, it's a sound effect in the movie, and it's put in by this kid who grew up in Morningside Heights in Manhattan, had nothing to do with the Bronx and didn't' know the mafia at all. I was just trying to solve an aesthetic problem of how de we help the audience in this scene where there is no music and a lot of the dialogue is in Italian.
But it was one of those lessons for me that you could do this kind of thing and, I don't mean this in a bad way, you can get away with it. The audience doesn't say, 'What's that terrible sound? Why are we hearing that?' It makes Al Pacino, who gave a wonderful performance there if you look at his eyes, but it intensifies that. And I think most people don't even hear that sound; they don't register it really. What they register is Michael. And so the sound kind of goes into the visual and the performance of Michael and intensifies it. So it was, on many levels, a lesson for me about what to do and how to do it. Not that I would repeat that same thing, but just the idea of metaphoric sound became very present in my mind at that point.

One of Francis [Ford Coppola]'s techniques that he uses often is to ask the actors in a scene, say between two people, to do the scene, and then he makes directorial observations, everything's the way it usually is. And then somewhere around take five or six he will ask them, 'Now play this scene, but without any dialogue. Go through all of the motions that we've established where you drink a cup of tea, then you put it down, then you get up, go to the kitchen, pour yourself another cup, then come back and turn, you know.' So the actors are moving physically around, and they... they have expressions on their faces, obviously, but they're not saying anything. So they have to learn how to convey that emotion, whatever it might be, without using dialogue. And we are shooting and recording it at the same time.
The technical advantage of this from an editorial point of view is that we get a complete recording of the scene without any dialogue so that all of the sound effects of putting glasses down and walking – we have a clean track of this where we don't have to snip out the dialogue. And from a picture point of view, we have angles on the actors for reaction shots that we might need if we wanted to change the dynamics of a scene. We can use this shot to prolong a pause because the actor isn't saying anything at that moment.
For the actors it's a wonderful thing, I think, because the whole premise of the scene is shifted. And then, of course, there is a take seven, and now they do it again, and take seven is usually very different and deeper than the last dialogue scene which was take five. So it... it's a very simple thing that integrates itself into the process of shooting the film, and it produces a lot of good things that are relevant to how we build the film up later. But also for the actors, while they're actually shooting the scene, it makes them approach the material in a different way.

The makeup for Marlon Brando in The Godfather was of a nature... Brando was only 46 when this film was shot, but he appears to be 62 or something and then even much older than that later on just before he dies. And when Gordy Willis, the cinematographer, saw what the makeup was going to be, he thought, by his own retelling of it, 'This is a disaster. How am I going to photograph this to make the makeup look good?' And what he decided to do was to light the scene from above to have the light be abnormally high and come down which would cast deeper shadows in the eye sockets and everything. That's how the film was shot.
When Al Pacino came along and was looking how the film was being shot, he found that very curious. He hadn't been in a number of films at that point, but this was very different than what he expected, and he thought, 'This is different, this is unusual. And I'm going to use this to help me interpret the role of Michael.' And it gave him an idea which is that Michael is trying always to escape from this spotlight of destiny. That the light above him is searching him out to say, 'You are the member of a mafia family', and he's always moving away from it, and then the light finds him again.
So this is an interesting example of the kind of alchemy that happens between a decision to use a certain kind of makeup, which prompts a decision to use a kind of lighting, which prompts a decision by an actor to interpret the core approach that he's going to use to... in his performance in the film. And there's a wonderful side effect of this which we might talk about later that relates to a parlour game that you can play called Negative Twenty Questions. That has to do with this concatenation of decisions where one decision leads to another, leads to another and you wind up further down the road in a place that nobody ever planned. But it's the result of these decisions, each of which has to be incorporated fully into the body of the film as you go along in a kind of improvisatory way.

One of the things that made The Godfather the success that it was the alchemy of the casting. Marlon Brando as the Godfather and the four sons and how that all worked together. Very different than how Paramount wanted the film to be cast. Originally they wanted Laurence Olivier to play the Godfather, and they wanted Robert Redford to play Michael. Because in the book Michael is described as not looking Italian, that he was a sport, genetic sport. And this, in fact, is true. The Normans invaded Sicily sometime in the 12th century, so there... there is a genetic strain in Sicily of this Norman Northern blood that occasionally pops up. So that's the concept behind, in the book, what Michael looked like. Francis didn't want to use that casting; he wanted Marlon Brando, and he wanted the people that he eventually got. James Caan as Sonny, Michael played by Al Pacino, Fredo played by John Cazale and Robert Duvall playing Tom Hagen, who was an adopted son.
There's... Looking at this film made me realise that in casting a film there's a weaving of fabric where you can think of one line of the fabric being what you might call vertical casting, which is, does that person resemble the person described in the text, whatever it is, the novel or the screenplay. And from a vertical point of view, Paramount was probably as right as anyone could be. Laurence Olivier is a great actor. He could play that part, and he could be made up to look even more like that part. And if you read the original novel, Robert Redford kind of does look like the Michael in the book.

There's another weave which is what you might call horizontal casting, which is the relationships between the actual people who are cast and does that mirror the relationships between the people in the play. And in that case, the relationship between Robert Redford and Laurence Olivier is not good horizontally because they come from different cultures, neither of them is Italian and etc.
So when Francis cast Marlon Brando in the role of the Godfather and cast four actors who had grown up acting in New York in the 1950s, the model for them as actors was Marlon Brando. He had acted on stage in New York in the late 40s, maybe a little in the early 50s. And then he had left to go to New York [sic – should be: Hollywood] leaving this kind of empty space that these other actors who were slightly younger, ten years younger than Marlon, came in to fill. And each one of them in a sense was interpreting Marlon Brando in their own ways. Sonny was the tough Streetcar Named Desire Brando. Al Pacino was the introspective, moody, broody Brando. Fredo was the kind of goofy Brando, something slightly wrong with him. And Robert Duvall was the earnest, focused, business-like Brando. So when you got these five actors sitting around a table, their relationships with each other were... mirrored exactly the relationships between the characters in the film. So Brando was the Godfather of all of these actors, and each of them was like a brother who was competing with each other to impress dad in some way.

The other miracle of the film really is that Al Pacino emerged from this film as a star, and he was relatively, almost completely unknown before the film began. And what you saw in the film was the character of Michael who was not... who didn't want to be part of the family and over the course of the film, he emerges as the strongest person who eventually becomes the new Godfather. And this wouldn't have worked as well if it had been somebody like Robert Redford who was already a star. As soon as he appeared on the screen and said, you know, 'I'm not part of this family', you would not... Where is the trajectory there? And the other thing about that if somebody doesn't look Italian and says I'm not part of the family, the audience says, 'Well yes, that's true.' And there's no tension on that because I can see it. Whereas somebody like Al Pacino who looks extremely Italian and Sicilian who says, 'I'm not part of this family, I don't want to be part of this', there's a tension there because in every frame that you look at Al Pacino it says, 'Yes, you are.' And yet you see him struggling against this and eventually failing and being subsumed by the whole story of the film. So his trajectory as a character, what he looks like, how he emerges out of anonymity to take over, all of these things mirror the actual story of the film. But they mirror what actually happened to Al Pacino as an actor and competing with his brother actors for the approval of the Godfather, which is Marlon Brando, who they all were in awe of and adored.
Occasionally films get this fantastic resonance like The Godfather does, and it's down to the vision of the director because this is what Francis [Ford Coppola] wanted and his persistence and luck that it all worked out. It could not have worked out at some point, and somebody might not have been available, and the studio could have been more insistent and, and, and, lots of other problems with it. But in this particular case, that constellation of horizontal and vertical actually fit and made the film the strong film that it is.

When the film came out it was a big hit, The Godfather, and Francis [Ford Coppola] would go to screenings of the film to see an audience reacting to it because we had never previewed the film, so this was a learning process. And one of the things that took Francis, set him back, was that the murders at the end of the film, the audience, particularly in parts of the country, the audience was extremely vocal in wanting Michael to get revenge. So the audiences were cheering the murders, and this was not Francis's intention. And it was not our intention; the other people working on the film were... this should be seen as a kind of chilling episode where Michael is in the process of losing his soul. But it was interpreted by the audience as a... something that we should cheer because he's the main character. And you know, there was no... we didn't know what to do with that. But it was one of those examples in a film where you make a film intending one thing, and the film becomes a big success, but it's interpreted by the audience in a slightly different way. Over time – The Godfather was, you know, 40 plus years ago – and over time that reaction I think has mellowed. But at the time when the film came out in 1973, part of the appeal of the film was 'Michael gets revenge.' And it's just one of those curious slightly hot potatoes that as filmmakers; how do we do this? How do we metabolise this in our own reactions to the success of the film?

The film in the few months before it came out there was a great deal of speculation on Francis [Ford Coppola]'s part. Is this going to be a hit or not? And there were moments where he thought it was not going to be a success because it was too long, it was too dark or there was not enough action. And as a result, he took the job of writing the screenplay for Great Gatsby. Jack Clayton directed the film I think, and it was a Paramount film starring Robert Redford. And he... I said, 'Why are you doing this?', and he said, 'Well, in case Godfather is not a hit I want people to know that I am still a writer for hire.'
And before The Godfather, Francis had not had any really financially successful films. Then the question is how does he support his family? If The Godfather had failed, hard to believe that now, but if it had failed, then what would his career have been? He was an Oscar-winning writer; he had won the Oscar for Patton, so maybe this is what he will do. But we navigate the twists and turns of our creative lives not knowing what will happen and how these events will actually impact what we can do in the future. And a series of films that fail financially are... become an increasing ball and chain around you, inhibiting how you can actually move forward.

The Conversation was 4.5 hours long when it was first assembled. The script was 150 something pages long. So that kind of explains why it was such a long film and it was shot... many of the takes are long takes. Apocalypse Now was 5.5 hours at least. Cold Mountain was five hours and ten minutes. Talented Mr. Ripley was 4.5 hours; English Patient was similar. And each of those films was eventually cut down to probably half of that original length. And what I have... a kind of rule of thumb that I have for my own purposes is that an assembly of a film when you lay it all out, and you are not second guessing anything, everything is given its due purpose. You measure that length and then say, 'What is 30% of that.' And that gives you an approximate hit on how can we... in reducing the length of this film by what I call 'diet and exercise.' Which is just do we need to be that long as she leaves? Maybe we can come in at the beginning, this moment when he opens the door rather than that prologue of the scene. Just finding these little efficiencies in the... in the way you tell it can reduce the length by about 30% from the original. If you want to go further than that, you can, and I have, we have, but to do that you have to actually cut out... do surgery, and you have to cut out what otherwise seem to be essential scenes or even characters have to disappear out of the film.
In The Conversation, there was a subplot involving Harry's role in the apartment building where he lived. It turned out that he actually owned the apartment building and was speculating on its value because urban redevelopment was coming to knock it down and build something else there. And so he was not maintaining the building very well because why spend money on something that's going to be knocked down? All of the other residents of the apartment building were complaining about this, and ironically they chose Harry, anonymous Harry, to represent them and go to the lawyer who represented the owner of the building to complain. So Harry went to this lawyer, and there was a scene where he was complaining about... to the lawyer about himself because that was his mission. And then ironically saying, you know, what are we going to do? There was not a single trace of that left in the film. It was thematically related to Harry's anonymity, and there was... there were solely comic elements of it, but it just... it had to go if the film was going to be anywhere near two hours long. So that's an example where there was no way to slightly whittle that scene down and then to get it down to some length. You actually had to just rip... rip the whole thing out.

My approach in cutting down a film is kind of a two-pronged approach. And there's what I would call 'the spaghetti sauce method' which is a version of this 'diet and exercise' where you put the film over a source of heat so to speak, and just keep stirring it, and gradually the water content of the film will diminish. We don't really need this shot, and we don't need her to go downstairs and then come back, she can just stay in the room all this time and, and, and... So it's a gradual way of intensifying the dish by losing what is not essential – water, basically.
And then there is another method which I call 'the Procrustes method' which is based on a mythical character from ancient Greece. And the question in ancient Greece was, why is everyone more or less the same size. Why aren't people this big and 12 feet tall? And the idea was that we were once that different, but that there was a man somewhere on the road between Athens and Sparta and if you travelled between these two towns you had to stay at his inn. He would put you on a bed, and if you were too short he stretched you, and if you were too long, he would lop off the extra parts. And so everyone who left Procrustes's inn was the same size.
So, in this case, a film is too long, you attack it and just lop out things in an almost brutal way and get down to the length that you want, and then you look at it and say, 'Well, that doesn't work, but it almost works. And now we go in, and we fix these things.' So rather than slowly boiling it down and reducing its length, you go in and aggressively make it the right length and then fix what you need to fix.
In my experience George Lucas is a big proponent of 'the Procrustes method.' American Graffiti was originally three hours long, and it worked, it was very good, but it was not releasable at three hours, and there was no time to do 'the spaghetti sauce method.' So George just went in and hacked it down, and it was a mess, but he then went in and fixed... he and Marcia went in and fixed all of the things that didn't work, and it became the wonderful film that it is. So, both methods can work. It's down partly to how much time that you have and what is your temperament.
Anthony Minghella definitely used the spaghetti sauce method. It was very difficult for him to produce a version of the film that had a problem with it. He always wanted every version of the film on its own terms had to be viewable. So it was an incremental process, and that's what we did on English Patient, [Talented Mr.] Ripley and Cold Mountain. And you know I would occasionally suggest, 'Why don't we just take this scene out?' And it gave him the shivers to think about doing that. We would eventually arrive at that point, but he wanted to arrive there all in good time.

At the end of Godfather II which was sometime in December of '74, we were having a post-mortem meeting at Zoetrope, which was, 'Well, that was interesting. That worked, how could we have made this better', and just an evaluation of all of the work that had gone on over the last six months. And at one point Francis [Ford Coppola] said, 'You know, I'm tired. On every film I make it's as if I have to reach down into my guts, my personal life, pull out my guts, hack away at them in full view of the audience, then stitch them together and stuff them back inside.' 'And for just once', he said, 'I'd like to make a simple film, maybe an action film. Has lots of action in it, and to have three bankable and compliant stars that would do what I want. And I can sit in the director's chair like ordinary directors do and say: bring on the helicopters, action, and cut, and go home at night and not worry about the film.' Then he said, 'I think I'll make Apocalypse Now.' And that was the start in early 1975 of his decision to make Apocalypse Now, which ironically given the history of the film was originally conceived as a simple film, an action film set somewhere in the world in a jungle environment yet to be determined with three bankable stars. The film eventually came out in 1979, four plus years later. And a tremendous amount of angst and trouble, probably more than any other film that Francis made. So it's 'watch out for what you wish for', I guess.

He started the process of making Apocalypse Now, and I was started on writing the screenplay with Carroll Ballard for The Black Stallion. The idea was that we were going to make this film, I was going to edit it, and it was going to combine the first two books of The Black Stallion series which involved the shipwreck and then an adventure somewhere in North Africa with Arab horses. We struggled with this story for about six months trying to fuse these two things together and keep it at a manageable length. We just... we did not succeed at that, and we brought on Gill Dennis, who was a mutual friend, to give us a new way. And so the three of us started working, and Gill made the suggestion, 'Just tell the first book, keep it simple, and then if you want... if the film is a success and you want to shoot another one in North Africa, then you have this other book.' And we were in such a state that we thought okay, we'll do it.
Carroll was nervous about it because he loved aspects of the North African scene. And in The Black Stallion, once the shipwreck is over, it really becomes a story of a boy in a suburban environment with a horse. That's eventually how the film was finished and made. But there was a certain amount of tension in that process, and Carroll put a great deal of attention, which really paid off, on the whole story of the shipwreck and the boy marooned on the island with the horse. So my... all of my activity in the year 1975 was based on writing a screenplay, I wasn't doing any film editing, mixing or anything. I was sitting and writing different versions of this script.

Things got to the point that eventually Carroll didn't like what we had all written and he just kind of stopped the process and wanted to reconsider everything which left me beached. I didn't... now, what was I going to do?
And a job offer came as a result of some letters that I had written to go to England and work with Fred Zinnemann on the film Julia. One thing led to another, and I found myself and my whole family with four kids in London the summer of 1976 working for the first time with people that I had absolutely no history with. Every job that I had up to that point was with people I had gone to school with or people I had met through those contacts. We all had a common language, and we all had a common mission that we understood. And for the first time I was plunged not only in a foreign country, although Aggie, my wife is English and I had been here many times, but now I was working in the heart of the British film industry as a foreigner.
And it was a wonderful learning experience, Fred Zinnemann who was about 70 years old at the time became a very good friend, and we maintained our friendship for the next 20 years until he died almost at the age of 90. The... I met Les Hodgson on Julia, who was a sound editor on Julia, and he became one of the principal sound editors on Apocalypse Now, following...  a couple of years later. And he also became the picture editor on Return to Oz, which we shot in England in the mid-1980s.

It was early on in the process of shooting Julia I noted that the actors which were Jane Fonda and Vanessa Redgrave would stop instantly the moment that Fred Zinnemann would say, 'cut.' And he would say 'cut' when they were about to go through a door. So in a... as soon as they hit the mid-point of the door, he would say 'cut', and they would stop as if they'd been yanked by a rope. And I thought this was peculiar because the people I had worked with, Francis [Ford Coppola] certainly, would allow the actor to go through the door, and then the door would close, and the camera would stay on the closed door running for about five seconds and then he would cut. Because who knows? Maybe we could use that extra little bit of footage somehow.
Finally, after a couple of weeks of shooting, I screwed up my courage and knocked on his trailer door, Fred Zinnemann, and I said, 'Mr. Z', because that's what he was called, 'I'm curious about why actors... why do you get actors to stop when you're going... when they're halfway through a door.' He said, 'What do you mean?' And I then explained, and he said, 'Yes, I do that because if I didn't do that then she would take my film, and recut it, and write new scenes on the other side of that closed door and when I went to see the film it would be a completely different film than the one I intended.' And I said, 'Who is she?' And his eyes got very narrow, and he said, 'Margaret Booth.'
Margaret Booth, who died only a few years ago [in 2002], was Louis Mayer's chief editor at MGM in the 1930s when Fred Zinnemann was a young man struggling to establish himself. And all of the young directors were terrified of her because if a film was in trouble or if Louis Mayer decided that a film was in trouble, she would be the guided missile that he would send into the editing room. Everyone else had to leave, and she would take over the film and things like this would happen. New scenes would be written, and the doors... the film would be changed around. And so, people like Fred learned that one defence against this was to cut in the camera, not to give this extra footage that would make these recuts possible. And it... it's just one of those things that goes to show how an early traumatic experience that you have informs your filmmaking. Even 40 years later with Fred Zinnemann having won however many Oscars, and being a world-famous director, still his technique in filmmaking was informed by this early experience that he had with Margaret Booth and people like her.

In 1976, the nature of how you lit a film was still fairly much the way it had been traditionally, the lights were very big. And Dougie Slocombe, the cameraman on Julia, was somebody who had started shooting films in the 1940s and had shot many of the classic Ealing films. And what I noticed was that when somebody hit a light switch and turned the switch off, simultaneously with that, the lighting department would turn the big lights off. But the lights were so big, and the bulbs were so huge, that it took probably a quarter of a second for the light to actually fade out. This is not what happens in normal life with 100-watt bulbs when you turn them off; they instantly go dark. Yet here, Jane Fonda would turn the lights off, and it would take six or eight frames for the scene to become dark. And I thought, I wonder if I can fix this. What can I do editorially? So I tried an experiment which was at the moment that she hit the light switch I'd jump cut to the first dark frame, and I looked at it, and it looked completely convincing. Even though, if you studied it frame by frame, the Jane Fonda character or whoever it was had... was in a different place in the frame. But your eye being overwhelmed by the shift in light could not register the fact that she was in a different position, and she was in darkness, so it was harder to see it anyway. But I thought, this is a wonderful observation to make. And the only problem I thought is that I see the splice because we have to use these big wide pieces of transparent tape in those days. This was before digital editing. If you look carefully you could see this Mylar going by.
And I thought; let's see if I can even improve that. And so I cut a very small piece of latex tape we use for editing sound and made it so thin that it was not seen by the projector. And as a result, it looked completely convincing because, there she went to turn the light out and flip the switch, and instantly it turned dark just like real life. I started to think that maybe I can do the whole film this way using these thin bits of film... bits of tape. I did, and I modified the splicing block to make this easier to do, not being quite so hand labour intensive. And for the rest of the time that I had been working on editing actual film rather than digital which went up until 2005, this is what I used.
I started manufacturing these splicers and selling them to other editors, and I called them N-VIS-O because the splices were invisible. And it made the experience of previewing a film much more like an experience of actually watching a finished film because you didn't see any artefact of splices. Particularly, say in the middle of a shot where the shot is running, and then you made a cut, but later on you thought, 'No, I'm going to restore it.' Then, of course, there had to be a splice there, and then the rest of the shot would run. Now when you're looking at the film suddenly in the middle of the shot, you see this tape go by, but now with N-VIS-O, you no longer saw that. So everything... the work print looked like a final answer print or as close as it could be. And a number of other editors adopted it, and it became fairly standard in the industry as a way to improve the look of a film, particularly when you were previewing it in front of an audience.
And then, of course, technology came... the digital technology came, and we no longer had to conform the work print and in many cases, we weren't shooting work print to begin with. And now as of today, in 2016, everything is completely digital. And even if you shoot film, when you preview the film for an audience you are showing an electronic version of the film on DCP, Digital Cinema Projectors. And it's becoming harder and harder now to find a theatre that actually has a 35mm or 70mm projector. Even if you wanted to show physical film it's now becoming very, very difficult to do it and difficult to find projectionists that know how to run these fairly angry complex machines.

In the middle of editing Julia, I got a call from Francis [Ford] Coppola in the Philippines. He was still shooting Apocalypse Now a year after having started. And he said, 'Can you come to the Philippines for a weekend because we want to discuss the final mix of the film? I have some ideas.' So I thought, okay. I made some arrangements and was able to leave on a Thursday and come back on a Tuesday and flew out to the Philippines.
In the interim, between scheduling that and my actual arrival, Marty Sheen, the lead actor of Apocalypse Now, had had a heart attack. And of course, when I arrived this film was in an unbelievable crisis because the lead actor is not here and because it was a heart attack; would he ever come back? What are we going to do? So the immediate solution was: keep filming and let's keep doing whatever we can do that doesn't have Marty Sheen actually in the frame, which was very little. So Marty Sheen's brother was flown in, and some over-the-shoulder shots were done, with… not with Marty Sheen, but with his brother.
In the middle of all this, I arrived, editors who were working on the film in San Francisco had flown in, some people who were going to be working on the final soundtrack flew in, and a potential composer who was Isao Tomita from Japan flew in. And Francis to his... it's kind of amazing that he had the presence of mind to focus on the soundtrack at this point of great crisis, but we had a meeting.

The basic idea was, 'I heard [Isao] Tomita's music of Holst's The Planets in 4-track'. In the 1970s, there was a brief moment where people installed 4-track sound in their homes where you had two stereo speakers here and then two other speakers in the back of the room. And Francis [Ford Coppola] said, 'That's how I want the film to sound. And Tomita's going to be doing the music.' And as it transpired Tomita wound up not being able to do the music because of a contract that he had with his record label to produce a number of records, he just didn't have the time.
But this idea of the 4-speaker array survived and not only survived but blossomed into a 6-track arrangement. And what I observed at the time was, we can't really do 4-track because unlike music, film has dialogue and the dialogue needs to have its own speaker right in the centre of the screen so that when people speak it's not a phantom centre, but it's a direct projection of sound from centrally behind the screen. So we need five tracks, and Francis said, fine. And then as the meeting was breaking up he said, 'And one other thing, when explosions happen, I want the audience to feel the explosions, not just hear them. So I want the explosions to be like real explosions and have frequencies down below the audible frequency range which is roughly around 25 cycles per second.' Human hearing goes from let's say 20 cycles perhaps to 20,000 cycles and he wanted to go lower than that so your guts and your lungs would vibrate even though you might not hear that sound with your ears; your body would pick it up. And I said, 'Okay, I think that's another track. We need six tracks now.' And that will allow us to fly a helicopter around the theatre because we have speakers all the way around the theatre, and it will allow the dialogue to have a central spine. And we'll also have a channel dedicated to this low frequency because we'll have to have speakers that haven't been built yet, we have to design speakers to go that low.
And that was the beginning of what actually turned out to be what we now call 5.1 sound, which is now the standard soundtrack for films. Now, of course, there's 7.1 and 8.1 and Dolby has a new system called Atmos that is, theoretically anyway 67.2. [sic – it is 62.2] But the basic core of the idea is similar in each case. You want to be able to manipulate sound in an environment in a completely free-form way. Where do you want the sound to come from? Up there. You can do it by manipulating the faders and the joysticks on your control. And you want to have control over the frequencies that go down below human hearing so that the theatre can shake when there's an earthquake or when there's a big explosion or even in the music and in the sound effects so that you have available to you this very wide frequency range.

The other spin that Francis [Ford Coppola] wanted for this was that his original intention was that this film would not play in ordinary theatres, but that it play in just one theatre in the geographical centre of the United States which is somewhere in Kansas. A theatre was going to be built, kind of like Imax theatres are today, so this was Imax before Imax. And you would go to that theatre the way you would go to Mount Rushmore or some place because now we're going to see Apocalypse Now. Families would drive from all over the country to this theatre, and the film would be six hours long divided with an intermission. You'd see three hours and then you'd have dinner or something. Then you'd see the final three hours in the evening, and it would be an event, and it would have this fantastic soundtrack that was designed for this film.
Well, that never happened, the theatre in Kansas. But what did survive was this, at the time, a completely unique approach to how to do movie soundtracks which overturned the stasis that film soundtracks had gotten into. That Godfather II, Julia, 1976, the soundtrack on the release prints of those films was identical to the same films made in the late 1930s. Dolby in the interim had entered the picture and had started making optical soundtracks that had a wider frequency range and also more channels of sound in the mid-1970s. So kind of coincident with Francis coming up with this idea in 1975, 1976 that progress is being made at an audio engineering level.
When we got back to San Francisco on Apocalypse Now, Dolby was also based in San Francisco by that time and both of us came together, Apocalypse Now and Dolby. And together we evolved the system that was the release pattern for 70mm prints of Apocalypse Now. And a number of years later that system, what we now call 5.1, became the de facto standard for film exhibition. But it was made on an artistic level. This was Francis's artistic vision of how this film should be made; it was not an engineering decision originally. The idea was how can we do this? And then we tried to figure it out. I mean the idea was this is what we want to do, how can we do it rather than the opposite which is an engineering thing that was then offered up to creative people.

At one point during the meeting in the Philippines, in the spring of '77, I went with Francis [Ford Coppola] to his writing cabin in the jungle. To escape the chaos of the set, he had a little cabin built at the end of a path off in the trees. So he could go there and just be surrounded by nothing but jungle, and he could sit and work on the script. So, to escape the chaos of that weekend, we went there and just started talking about practically what does this mean, and what are the aesthetics of this decision, and you know just the kind of conversations you have between a director and a head of the department.
So we were sitting on the porch of this house, and then we looked, and we saw a figure walking toward us out of the jungle. The closer it got we saw it was a man with a briefcase and a suit. So a man in a suit, carrying a briefcase was coming out of the jungle walking toward us, and as he got closer, Francis finally recognised him and said, 'Hello, Mike.' This was Mike Medavoy, who was at that time head of production at the studio that was involved in the making of Apocalypse Now. Then Francis said, 'I guess I'm worth more to you dead than alive at the moment' because of this crisis with the heart attack. And of course, Mike laughed and said, 'Don't be silly, Francis, we're going to get through this.' He came, sat down, and we started chatting. And of course, as it turned out, the heart attack was serious but not so serious that Marty could not come back on the film after, I think, three weeks. And at that point, there were another two or three months of shooting left to do. And as an editor, I can't tell, and I don't know which scenes were shot with Marty after the heart attack and before. So there's... there's no way even for me to tell: yes, that was before the heart attack and that was after the heart attack, which was a tribute to Mary's basic health I guess.

My original brief on Apocalypse Now was that I was going to join a film deep in its completion process, and I was going to supervise the sound editing and do the mix on the film in this new format of 6-track, or what we call 5.1. And I finished Julia at the beginning of August in 1977, and two weeks later I was in San Francisco working on Apocalypse Now. It was immediately clear to me that the original plan was not going to happen; particularly because they thought that they could finish the film by December of that year which was the original schedule. Maybe we could be done by June, but I hadn't seen the film yet, and this was all speculative. The studio in which we were going to mix the film was being built, and I didn't know where that was in its engineering and finish trajectory. But it was clear that original plan was not going to happen.
Then I saw the film, and it was even clearer that editorially it was all over the place, and it was over six hours long if anyone had actually looked all the way through it. But the ending was particularly difficult and troublesome, so that was in a very unformed state at this point.
Consequently, Francis [Ford Coppola] decided that the best thing was for me to join the picture editorial team alongside Richie Marks and Gerry Greenberg, who were the two editors on the film at that point. We went out to lunch to discuss this along with Dennis Jakob, who was a friend of Francis's who had been, you might call it a metaphysical consultant during the Philippines to talk about the big themes of the film. At that lunch, Francis observed that it's a law that anyone who works on Apocalypse Now for any length of time becomes insane. Then pointing at himself he said, 'I'm the poster boy for the person who's the craziest sitting at this table because I've worked on the film the longest. The next person is Richie Marks because he's worked on it longer than Gerry. Then there's Gerry, and then there's you, Walter, and you're the sanest because you haven't even really started working on this film.' Then he turned to his friend Dennis and said, 'Of course Dennis is already completely crazy anyway.' And Dennis was responsible for trying to wrangle the ending into some kind of shape. 'I want the film to get... to start normal, get crazier, and more surreal the deeper you get into the film. So it's appropriate that Dennis is working on the very end of the film. It's appropriate that Richie is working on the lead up to the ending. It's appropriate that Gerry is working on the middle to the early part of the film. And I want you, Walter, to work on the beginning of the film because I want it to be normal.' So, we had our marching orders and we knew where we stood in the realm of who's craziest and who's not.

Then I sat down with Francis [Ford Coppola] to talk about the beginning. And the script at the beginning of the film had long ago been tossed away because Francis wanted the film to have essentially a prologue to set up the parameters and the themes in a kind of symbolic way of things that you would encounter later on and to establish the character and dilemma of this Captain Willard, played by Martin Sheen. The two pillars on which the opening of the film was now going to be built were two shots that were never intended to be in the film in the first place. One of which was a slow motion shot of a napalm explosion that was shot by a sixth camera. When an explosion went off, you had as many cameras shooting it as possible, because at that time it was the biggest explosion ever staged for a film. In fact, it probably still is the biggest, because now you would do that explosion digitally. You wouldn't have an actual gigantic explosion such as that. So, photograph it with as many cameras as possible because it's only going to happen once and you want to make sure you get the correct coverage.
A.D. Flowers, the man who was responsible for the physical special effects during the shooting, of course, knew how big this explosion was going to be, and he wanted a record of it for his own purposes. So the sixth camera was set at super slow motion, I think probably 240 frames a second, certainly well over 100, maybe 160. And this shot, of course because it was slow motion, there was never a place for it in the actual story of the film, so it was set aside. Oh, that was A.D. Flowers' shot.
At one point in the Philippines, Francis was in the editing room, and his restless mind went and looked at that; what's this? He picked it up. 'Oh, that's this slow motion shot', in which Francis has never seen. 'Well, let me see it.' And so he looked at it, and the lightbulb went off and he thought, this is how I want to begin the film. This telephoto shot of the jungle. Just these flat trees shot from very far away but with a very telescopic lens and then poof, suddenly it bursting into flames with these strange slow motion helicopters sort of floating in at various tilted angles going through the frame.

The other was an acting exercise that had been shot with Marty Sheen, early, early on in the process to help burn the character of Willard into Marty's psyche. Because the original person cast for Willard was Harvey Keitel and two or three weeks of material had been shot with Harvey. At the end of that two or three weeks, Francis [Ford Coppola] came to the conclusion that Harvey was not the correct person to play Captain Willard. The reasons for this go down to some of the imponderables about casting.
When I first heard, maybe six months earlier, that Harvey Keitel had been cast in the part, I thought great. Because Harvey Keitel is... can play an assassin or a nasty piece of work, and he can do it very well. What I didn't realise, and what Francis didn't really realise was that... even though he wrote the script, was that in fact, Willard doesn't really ever do anything in the film until the end. He's a passenger on a boat, and he sits there reading a dossier; he looks at things, but there's no action in it. And for an actor like Harvey Keitel, who wants this kind of action, or certainly did back in the late 1970s, this was frustrating for him as an actor. And the physiology of Harvey Keitel compared to Martin Sheen is very different. Which is that Harvey Keitel has very thin eyes, you know like tank slits, and Martin Sheen has these big searchlight eyes that are very visible. And if a character is going to be the lens through which you look at the story, one of the ways we human beings understand this is by looking in the character's eyes. And Martin Sheen's eyes are lookable-atable to coin a word, and Harvey Keitel's eyes aren't very lookable-atable. Anyway, the end result of all of this chemistry was, 'Harvey, I'm sorry, but we're going to find a new actor for it.' I don't know any of the other particulars about that because I wasn't around at the time and we never talked about it.
I did see some of that footage once. My assistant Steve Semel, at a certain point in the process of editing the film I said, 'Where is that Harvey Keitel footage?' And he said, 'You don't want to see it.' That made me want to see it even more, of course. And I said, 'Where is it?' 'No, no, don't look at it.' So finally he took me around the corner to a back alleyway of the editing suites where we were working, and there was a rack of boxes of this Harvey Keitel footage. I took one of the reels and threaded it up on my machine and within a few seconds I realised, I don't want to see this, not because it was bad, it was just so different. The DNA was such a different film and by that time I had already incorporated the film's DNA into myself, picking up the sensibilities of this film, and that was a different film. So I shut the machine down, rewound the film and I never looked at it again. It's somewhere; it does exist somewhere, but I haven't ever seen it since.

Over the course of a single weekend, Harvey Keitel was replaced by Martin Sheen. And Martin Sheen... I think they plunged immediately into the scenes on the beach where the surfing was happening, and people were being bombarded and Kilgore is yelling through a microphone. You know it's an action scene in which Martin Sheen is not... Willard is not a central character in that scene, it really belongs to Kilgore and the surfers. But, Francis [Ford Coppola] observed what Marty was doing as an actor and thought, 'I think Marty needs a boot camp in Willard, something to get what this character is all about.' It's hard, not to say even impossible for an actor to come into the middle of a film and replace another actor and be completely... find out who this character is.
So a scene was staged in Willard's hotel room of Willard on a bender wishing that he was not in his hotel room but in the jungle. That... the idea is that he had fought in Vietnam, he reached the end of his tour, he had gone back home and found out as many soldiers do that you can't go home again. That everything he had gone through had made it impossible for him to live a normal civilian life with his wife. So he got divorced and signed up for another tour of duty back in Vietnam. The trouble was now he wasn't being given an assignment. He was just cooling his heels in this shitty hotel room in Saigon. So that's the acting exercise: do something with that, Marty. Vittorio Storaro, the cameraman, shot it from two angles, but they were very, let's call them serviceable, elementary angles at right angles to each other. It wasn't covered in any normal way because it was never intended to be in the film. It was just... we had to document it.
Marty Sheen by his own admission at that time was fighting alcoholism and Francis diabolically gave him a bottle of whiskey... real whiskey in the scene. So here was an alcoholic really drinking alcohol, playing this disturbed person in a hotel room, and it culminated in him looking at himself in the mirror, and being angry and smashing the mirror. That was never intended to... It was a spontaneous act on Willard... Martin Sheen's part. And the fact that he cut himself, that was real blood. The whiskey in the bottle is real whiskey. And the anguish that he is going through is a kind of real anguish. It's not the character, it's really Marty Sheen caught in some vortex of his own demons, but how powerful it is.
And Francis's mission to me was: take these two shots, Marty smashing his hand in a mirror, and covering himself in blood, and the slow motion shot of the jungle bursting into flames, and then some other shots that I have shot of Marty Sheen waking up in his hotel room, realising where he is, going over to the window, looking out of the window and some other things. 'Feel free', he said, 'to ransack the rest of the film for other images that might be compelling in this context, progressively more nightmarish and see what you come up with.' So that was my mission. Oh and, by the way, let's use The Doors music here for This Is the End. So, theoretically we're looking at the beginning of the film, what we're hearing is Jim Morrison who is now dead singing This Is... This Is the End, and then the concoction of images of slow motion helicopters and napalm superimposed in a swirl with Marty Sheen in this diabolical predicament that he finds himself in, in this hotel room in Saigon.

The irony of that situation is, that scene is arguably one of the crazier scenes in the whole movie, so... and yet I who was dubbed the sanest person was assigned to cut this. And that's not illogical. If you want to produce something that gives the impression of insanity, you don't have to be insane to actually produce it. In fact probably being insane would be counterproductive.
So, here I was, the new kid on the block editorially, cutting the beginning of the film and trying to come up with something that fit all of these parameters. Technically it was a challenge because that was in the days of film, not computers. Today we would be... it would be very easy to have these images, to do dissolves and to see what the dissolves look like. In those days, there was no way to do that. I had to modify the KEM editing machine, I had to have three screens and then build rolls of each element that I wanted to superimpose and run those so that they would run in sync. And I had to kind of look with three eyes left, centre and right and imagine what those dissolves might look like. The one advantage to visualising that we had was that Francis [Ford Coppola] had bought and installed, by today's standards, an extremely primitive linear editing console up in his office. So once I'd gotten things roughly in the shape that I thought would be good I could telecine each of those rolls, turn them into video, then take those video tapes up to Francis's office, and run them together and do these dissolves like you would do a television dissolve, fading one shot to the other live. And then learn something as a result of that. Make notes and then go back down, make some modifications and do the process over, and over, and over again until it looked something like we wanted it to look.

One of the other things I was told as we... as I started working on the film was that there was no narration on the film. My last memory of having read the screenplay about a year earlier was that it had narration. And I asked, 'Well, why?' 'No, it's not going to have narration; we got rid of that idea.' So I went back to my editing room, looked at the schedule and thought if we had a couple of years maybe we could find a way to tell this story without narration. But it was shot from a script with narration, but not... it wasn't reinvented as if it did not have narration. So how can we do that in the time that we have left, which at that point was probably nine months to finish the film. And I thought there's no way; we have to have narration.
So on the spur of the moment, I got the old script, and a microphone and recorded this old narration with me speaking it. And then started putting it into the film, and I created a version of the first 30 minutes of the film with narration. And then called Francis [Ford Coppola] and everybody in, Richie and Gerry, and I gave my spiel. 'I think we have to have narration, and I think it will be good.' The thing I didn't say is that I had just finished the film Julia, which had narration, and so my mind was predisposed because of that experience of thinking about films with narration. I don't know what would have happened had I been working on another film that didn't have narration; I may not have come to that decision. Anyway, I was passionate about what I thought was right. I ran the film, and people thought, 'Yeah, okay, let's have narration.'
So we limped along with my narration for a month or so. And then Michael Herr, who wrote the book Dispatches and was a big influence on John Milius when he was writing the original screenplay. Michael Herr joined the team as the writer of the narration. He wound up living in San Francisco on and off for the next year or more with his wife, and he would be writing the narration. Then we'd screen that version of the film, then everyone would have new ideas, notes would be given and Michael would write another. And so it went through probably eight iterations of different narration for the film as the film went along with Marty Sheen coming in replacing me obviously and reading Michael Herr's narration.

There was one moment somewhere in the middle; I think version four of the narration, where Marty [Sheen] came in... flew into San Francisco to record the narration the next day. And at the end of my workday, I went across the street to a bar, The Albatross Pub, because Marty was there... was going to be there along with three or four other people from the film. So I came in, sat down and Marty wasn't there. 'Where's Marty?' 'He's in the bathroom.' And so I had a beer or something. After three minutes it was like, 'Where's Marty', you know? 'He's still in the bathroom.' And then another couple of minutes; somebody go check. So somebody went to look and opened the door to the bathroom, he wasn't there and a window was open. And he had crawled out of the window of the bathroom and was loose in San Francisco somewhere. You know, he was unsteady on his feet.
So okay, this... we have to find Marty. You go north, you go east, west, south, and my job was to go south. Where's Marty? I went a block in the southerly direction, rounded a corner, and there was a donut shop there, Winchell's Donuts, which is still there. And usually, when you look at people sitting in a donut shop they're lost in their own thoughts, drinking a cup of coffee, facing in all different directions, kind of sad. This time, everyone was facing in the same direction and paying a lot of attention to something that I could not see because I hadn't rounded the corner yet. As I did round the corner, there was somebody sitting on the steps of the donut shop with his back to me gesticulating. I opened the door, looked, and it was Marty who was giving a speech from one of Shakespeare's plays to the assembled donut eaters at Winchell's Donuts. I listened to it, I was glad to have found him mainly, I listened to it and then he became aware that there was somebody behind him. He slowly turned around, looked at me and his face was just completely gone; you know, he'd drunk too much. Then he looked at me, pointed at me and said, 'The avenging angel.' I said, 'Come on Marty, we have to go.' So he got up, and I took him back to the Albatross and left him there and went home.
The next morning I heard that the group had gone on to another bar, Enrico's, and continued to drink. Marty had gotten belligerent. He started throwing chairs around and jumped up on tables. The police were called, and he was thrown in jail. Francis, at 6:00 in the morning, had to go and bail Marty out. And Marty felt terrible that this had happened and 'Oh God, oh no, but I want to do the narration; I want to record it.' 'Well, okay', Francis said, 'We'll record it.' And so there is a version of the film that is recorded with Marty in a completely hungover, having been thrown in jail overnight state. And hypothetically it could've worked because that's the state that the character of Martin Sheen's was in at the beginning of the film and maybe he's narrating from this state the whole film. But it didn't work. It was too all over the map. It's a version of... you know if you have to put together something that gives an impression of insanity, maybe the best thing is for you not to be insane. So in terms of this narration, the best thing... even though we're looking at somebody who is hungover, the best thing is not to have the voice actually be in a hungover state.

Rather late in the process, somebody in the administration of the film had the presence of mind to ask if we had the rights to use the recording of The Valkyries that we were using in the film during the attack on the beach. And this had been in the original script that we were going to use The Valkyries; this is John Milius's idea. It was Francis [Ford Coppola], I believe, who chose that particular recording which is a famous recording. It's Sir George Solti's recording with the Vienna Philharmonic in 1966, and it's the go-to classic of The Valkyries. And... so as I was editing those scenes using that music, that was just given; that's the music that we're using. And I never thought about it, and if I had thought about it, I would've thought, 'Well, somebody has already secured the rights to this.' But the question was asked with probably a month or two months before the release of the film, and the answer was, no, we don't have the rights to it. Who owns the rights? Well, it's a record company Decca. So a letter was drafted, sent to Decca and a week later the answer came back, 'No, you cannot use this for the film.' So another letter was written, 'Please, can we use it?' 'No, you cannot use it.'
So panic set in, what are we going to do? And a triage response was setup. The first fork of the triage was: Walter, go to the record store – and this was long before the internet – go to Tower Records and get every recording of The Valkyries that there is. Listen to them all, and there were 17, I think, and find out if there's one that is sort of as good as, maybe, the Solti recording and we'll see if we can get the rights to use that. The other fork was: continue to pound away at Decca. And the last fork was, let's record it all again with The San Francisco Symphony. And so Francis's father who was a composer was assigned the task of wrangling The Valkyries and arranging to record The Valkyries with singers. And I mean, it was a huge production when you think about it, with the San Francisco Opera and Chorus and whatever.
And I did listen to all 17, and I developed a grid system analysing Solti's metrics every five seconds. Because what seems like a regular tempo is not, in fact, regular, it only seems that way. And good conductors are constantly modifying the time base of their rhythm to give you the impression of regularity. But if they were actually regular, the music... if they were metronomically regular, the music would not be alive. It's similar to the solution that the Greeks came up with for the columns of the Parthenon that they actually bulge a little bit, but that gives the impression of rectilinear. If they look... if they were actually rectilinear, they would look pinched at the waist. So you have to distort things in order to give the impression of regularity. So this is the musical equivalent of this, so I mapped all of this out, and then judged the recording... the other recordings by how well they tracked Solti's decisions. Of course, they're not going to be the same in every case by any means, but are there ones that come closer to the others? So I was able to get rid of three-quarters of the recordings almost immediately. And finally, it came down to one single recording which was Erich Leinsdorf's recording with the LA Philharmonic that had been recorded the year previously, 1977.
So the next step is take that record, get it transferred to magnetic film, and then put it on the editing machine, line the two things up and play it. I did that, and as soon as I turned the switch, I was optimistic. It actually sounded pretty good, and the metrics were actually pretty close, so close that I thought for about half a minute, 'Yes, I can make this work, I can make little changes that will keep it all... It would be a lot of work, but we were in a desperate situation.'

And then I saw something that made me turn the machine off because I knew it just wasn't going to work and it had nothing to do with the metrics. It had to do with the colour value of the shots that I was looking at and the tonal values of Leinsdorf's recording. At the point that Solti had emphasised the brass, Leinsdorf was emphasising the strings. And without knowing it, as I was editing the film, the collusion of brass and a certain colour blue in the ocean, there are a number of shots where you are looking down out of the helicopters at the ocean, and that blue and that brassy sound work together synergistically to produce something that was to me correct and even thrilling. And when I heard the Leinsdorf, the blue looked dead, and the sound sounded disappointing. So they cancelled each other out in my view. So I went up to Francis [Ford Coppola] and I said, 'I don't think it was going to work. There's only one recording, the Leinsdorf, and it has this problem. The tonal values of it are significantly different.'
And luckily for us, Francis made another effort and this time he actually got in touch with Sir George himself, explained the situation and Solti said, 'Of course, dear boy. Why didn't you talk to me in the first place?' And Solti issued instructions to Decca and Decca opened up their hearts and gave us the material. Unfortunately or maybe fortunately, this all happened so late that we were never able to get hold of the original masters of the recording. But what's in the film is a transfer from the vinyl LP of the Solti recording. But that's what Kilgore... Robert Duvall, would have done. He wouldn't have been able to get hold of the masters; he would have done a transfer from the LP recording. And we manipulated the sound so much to make it sound like it was coming out of these big broadcast tannoy horns and adding echo and other things. So that even if we had gotten a hold of the masters, I think it would've wound up sounding very similar to what it sounds like in the film.

The mix of the attack, The Valkyries attack, then subsequently the surfing on the beach and everything is certainly the most intense thing in the film in the first 45, 50, 60 minutes of the film. It was so complicated to do it, and we did it in such... so many sub-mixes and pre-mixes and elements because of the nature of how we were mixing the film. And we heard it so many times that eventually we kind of became inured to it. It is tremendously exciting, and when we did the final, final mix, the excitement all came back. But the process of doing it was fraught with so much repetition and uncertainty about: was this technically... can we do all of this in the time that we have? It isn't frequently that, you know surgeons doing the most desperate kind of operations on somebody have this other attitude that kind of insulates them from the reality of what they're doing, and they joke about it. We didn't joke about it, but we certainly weren't... didn't spend the months that we were mixing this scene in a state of permanent excitement. But at the end when it finally all came together it was, we suddenly thought... And when we would show the scene to people who had no prior experience with it, then we could realise it's having an effect on them. When I see the film now, that scene certainly does still have a fantastic effect on me. I'm moved by it in a way that doesn't really change over time. I'm still kind of, 'here it comes!'

But it's a unique scene in film... that film and really in film history just because of all of the ways it was shot, how it was all put together and what it say about America's involvement in Vietnam and these characters. Similar to the wedding scene in The Godfather, it was shot as if it were a documentary scene. But vastly more complicated than the wedding because it's a huge battle that takes place over, I don't know, probably 100 acres of land and every person in the battle had an assigned role to play. When the helicopters come this way you have to shoot blanks at them, then this explosion will go off and then this will happen. It took about ten minutes for that scene to actually happen, and it was shot with six cameras, each camera loaded with ten minutes of film. And it was like this diabolical toy that would be wound up at the beginning, 'Is everybody ready? Go.' And the attack would happen, and it would be photographed as if you were photographing a documentary scene in an actual war. And then everyone would come back to base. If you had time enough in the day, 'Okay, let's move the cameras to another position', you work all of this out in advance, 'go to position two and do it again.' So another 60 minutes of film would be shot, six cameras, ten minutes a piece of this attack. And then it was done again, and again, and again and again.
Once the daily's had been looked at, then specific moments were shot not in a documentary style. But, 'Okay, all we need to get right now is a close-up of the mini-gun firing the bullets.' So that would be set up in the normal way that you would shoot a film. But these were little accents that were placed in what essentially is documentary footage. And I think there was as much film shot for that battle as was shot for the entire English Patient. So that section of the film which lasts probably 20 minutes has 270,000 feet of 35mm film to make it happen. You know, just by the nature of how you shoot a documentary that's what you get. You get this huge amount of material because you never know what's going to happen. The positive thing about that approach is that wonderful things happen that you could never plan in advance.
And you get the feeling of this spontaneity as a result of it, that this is really happening even though, of course, it's artificially constructed after the fact. But it's a... If you can do it and Francis certainly did it, and that was part of his method of operation in The Godfather, and [The] Conversation was shot the same way. The people walking around was shot as if it was really happening, by hidden cameras and not planned. And then a number of scenes in Apocalypse Now were shot the same way. The concert with the Playboy Bunnies was shot as if it were The Rolling Stones, and you just shot the way you would shoot a concert, actually a documentary concert.

The mix, once we actually settled down to do the final mix. We started mixing in December of 1978 and we were essentially done in... at the beginning of April. So whatever that is... December, January, February, March. So it was about 16 weeks of mixing. Then we had a number of previews of the film. We took the film to Cannes and showed that version at Cannes at the middle of May. The film won; it split the first prize with The Tin Drum, I think.
And then we came back and did another month of mixing because now we had the final music for the film. Before we'd had quick mix-downs but now this was the finished music for the film. And we were mixing actually right up until the release of the film. A few days... We were still mixing a few days before the film hit the theatres. And we were able to do this because the initial release of the film was in 70 mm, which is magnetic film. And we had stockpiled everything except the final reel and so we were there mixing the final reel on Tuesday, knowing that Thursday it had to be in front of the theatres.
When we finished that final reel, we sent that to Los Angeles to have the magnetic stripes on the edge of the film sounded, where you transfer the mix to the magnetic. And then I collapsed and fell asleep for probably 36 hours. The longest I've ever slept and woke up in a daze. Flew to New York, arrived Thursday afternoon, went to the Ziegfeld Theatre, which is where we were, the film opened. And sat in the empty theatre and said, 'Okay, run it.' Just see what, how it was, what was going to happen, what had we done.

And everything seemed okay until Willard spoke, until he said something, and when he spoke, he sounded like Mickey Mouse. His voice didn't have the deep richness of his voice. It sounded a little like that. So, immediately, my antenna went, 'Oh-oh, something... what's wrong?' I went up to the projection booth and said, 'Is everything running at the right speed?' 'Yes, yes, this is the normal speed.' Hmm. Am I too tired? Is this an illusion that's happening because I... I'm still groggy?
So I went back down, listened to it again. No, it still is wrong. And so I went back up to the booth of this famous theatre and said, 'This film is not running at 24 frames a second, is it?' And the projectionist sort of nodded their head slowly and said, 'No, it's running at 25 frames a second.' 'Why is that?' 'Well, we imported these projectors, these are European projectors that we imported through Canada and they're Zeiss projectors and they're running at 25 frames a second.' So I said, 'Change it! Turn the switch, make it 24.' 'We can't, this is fixed.' I said, 'You've got to fix it.'
So, they went through the motions of taking screwdrivers out and kind of fiddling, but nothing... It was basically hopeless. And by now the producers, Fred Roos, was knocking on the door saying, 'We have to let the people in.' And so I shamefacedly because there was no... I said, 'Okay, let them in.' And the audience came in and I sat in the theatre and the film ran at 25 frames a second, which is 4% faster than it should run. Over the course of the film that's... The film ran, I think, eight minutes shorter than it would normally have run. And Willard's voice had that quality to it. And to my mixing shame, after 30 minutes, I got used to it. I said, 'Well, what the hell.' Of course, in the other theatres in the world, where you had the correct projector, this didn't happen, but at the Ziegfeld, at its main preview, main opening of the film, it ran and continued to run at 25 frames per second. And not only that but all of the films that ran at the Ziegfeld ran at 25 frames per second until 1999 when they finally retired those projectors. So what can you say? There's an observation that, who has final cut on a film? It's the projectionist who has final cut. This is a good example of that.

We were using this new sound format when we were mixing Apocalypse Now and we were mixing in a theatre designed specifically to mix this way. It was a specially-built mixing theatre in San Francisco that Francis [Ford Coppola] and the film had put together. None of us working on the film had ever mixed even a stereo film, even a normal... Everything we'd worked on prior to that had been mono. It's the old-fashioned soundtracks.
The last film I had worked on prior to Apocalypse Now was Julia, directed by Fred Zinnemann, and it was exactly of a piece with all the film history up to that point, whereas Apocalypse Now was this big break. We were using a computerized board for the first time in film history and we were mixing in this environment. And we had to learn the rules of this. What... Were there rules, and what were they? What could we do and what could we not do?
I approached this situation nervously because I'd never done this before. Nonetheless I thought, given what we have to do, and given the work involved, and given what I know about audiences and how they react to sound, it would be counterproductive for us to mix this film with all of these channels working all the time. Because the ear gets used to an environment fairly quickly and once you get used to an environment, then all of the work that you use to maintain that environment is kind of counterproductive because... In the sense that riding a tiger is counterproductive. You have to stay on the back of the tiger.
So I thought, let's jump off the back of the tiger at fairly regular intervals. What that meant was: there are going to be many places in this film where it is just mono. We have all of these speakers but we're not going to use them. And it's just the narration, it's just ordinary mono sound effects and even the music is just going to be coming out of the centre speaker because that will get the audience used to that sonic environment.
And then, at the right dramatic moment, we can expand to stereo and because it's a new environment, the audience will feel like, aahh, things are opening up. And then at the right moment we can expand even further to the entire theatre and then at the right moment we can go down into lower depths of the sub-sonic realm and then have the film do everything that it can do. And then at the right moment, we shrink back to mono again.

A good example of that in the film is leading up to the Playboy Bunny concert. And for a number of minutes you have been with Willard in the cabin of the boat, looking at a dossier and everything is mono; narration and sound effects. And then people become aware that there's something up ahead in the river; some lights. And when they start to become aware, then the film starts to become stereo so there's this kind of opening up of the soundtrack from the confined cabin to what's up ahead.
And then as the boat comes in to the compound it expands further but not yet in the backs. And then when the Playboy helicopter arrives and two helicopters fly over the camera in to the back, we pan the sound of those helicopters in to the speakers in the back, as if the helicopters were flying over the theatre. And now the roar of the audience is also back there and the rest of the concert proceeds with this full six track, 5.1, six track. And it's only after everything has... the evening has ended and it's now the next morning, now the soundtrack collapses back to mono again.
So you, in that whatever that is, probably eight minutes, ten minutes, you have this arc... But that was all worked out in advance. I had a map of the film that I drew with each scene somewhere on the map and then correspondingly at this moment is the music in quadraphonic or quintaphonic or six track and is the, are the sound effects also. And sometimes they would be, sometimes they would be in sync, sometimes they wouldn't be in sync and sometimes both would be in mono, sometimes the sound effects would be in mono but the music would be in stereo. And then the sound effects would be...
So it was a tapestry that I was weaving theoretically before ever starting the mix, thinking, where are the best places to have this dynamic shift in the environment of the sound of the film?

And we used that in the mix and we not only used that in the mix, but this was given to the sound editors so that if a sound editor was working on Scene 86, they would know, oh this is mono, therefore my work is much simpler now. But this scene, the big battle scene, it's full so now I have to really do... I have to arrange everything to really take advantage of this space, but that allowed the sound editors to figure out how to apportion their time correctly. They didn't have to do everything in full all the time.
In fact, probably... I forget what the statistics would be but it's probably, in the end, probably only half of the film is in full six track. And much of the film is, in fact, mono. And it's something that I would recommend to film-makers to do. And it was out of this exercise that the term 'sound design' arose because in the end I was asked, 'Well, what do you want as a credit?' So, I had edited the picture and I got credit for that and I had also sat at the mixing desk, but I had also been responsible for the overall design of the sound.
And I thought, well, just like a production designer arranges things in the three-dimensional space of the set and makes it interesting to look at, I'm essentially doing the same thing with the three-dimensional space of the theatre. Where are we going to use it in full and where are we going to not use it, even though we could? Where are we going to hold back and where do we expand and where do we contract? And that is a kind of design, so that was the, in this particular case, that was the origin of the term 'sound design.'
Since then, sound design has come to mean all kinds of other things, which is... One example is, I am creating sound effects that have never been heard before, and so I am designing these sounds. There is no sound for the roar of the dinosaur so I am going to combine six or seven different sounds to give me the sound of a dinosaur, so I have designed the sound of a dinosaur. And that is another term for what sound design would mean, but the essence of it really goes back to what we thought we were doing at the beginning of American Zoetrope, which was giving to sound the same hierarchy that existed to picture.
So, just as there is a director of photography, there is also, in this case, a sound designer. Just like there's a production designer and if the director wants to talk to somebody about sound and somebody who is responsible for the whole sound, the way the director of photography is responsible for the whole image, then that is that one person. And in the case of Apocalypse Now, that was me.

During the course of the film, an early example of this unfolding is the briefing scene at Nha Trang, which is where Willard gets the assignment to go and kill Kurtz. And there were a number of wonderful peculiarities about that scene. Francis [Ford Coppola] also shot that scene, interestingly, in a semi-documentary style. It was about ten minutes long as it was originally shot.
It's not that long in the finished film but his instructions to the camera operator, who did not speak English, were, 'You are photographing these three men; the general, the CIA agent and the Harrison Ford character – Colonel Lucas, I think his name is – from Willard's point of view. Willard is hung over and whenever you, the camera operator, feel bored, I want you to pan to somebody else, look at something else. Don't feel that you have to stay on the same actor. Even if the actor is talking, you can pan off of him.'
So, out of all of the number of takes, which were many, of this scene, as I looked at the material for this, as I was cutting it, I could never rely on this take to be all of the General's speech or all of the Harrison Ford material because in, right in the middle of the speech, in this take, the camera operator would pan to the window because he felt like it. And then he would pan past the General, who's talking over to Harrison Ford and then back to the CIA agent and then back to the General.
So, then I had to do a grid map of each take: how many, each line of dialogue in the scene, is it on camera or off camera? So, kind of like a script supervisor would do but after the fact. So now I had Xs where lines of dialogue were covered and blanks where it was not covered. The great thing about this from a film-making point of view is that it kept the actors on edge because they never knew whether the camera was going to be looking at them or not.
Whereas under normal circumstances, you say, 'Okay, we're going to shoot the medium shot on the General', and the General gives the speech and he knows that the camera's going to be looking at him for the eight minutes of the speech. None of that is happening in this scene. It's wandering around seemingly randomly. But it all has to do with what the camera operator was interested in at that moment.
A number of side-effects of that are that all of those actors are looking at the camera as if they're looking at Willard, which is generally something you don't do in a film. You look to one side or the other.
So now I'm looking at the camera here but normally I'm looking at somebody else to the left of the camera. But that scene violates that rule. However, when you cut to Willard and Willard is looking at them, he's not looking at the camera; he's looking to camera, to the left of camera. And then back to them and now they're looking at camera. So, technically it should not work. It should be very disturbing. And it is disturbing in a kind of unconscious way. But that was how Francis shot the scene and it had a wonderful effect on it.

When we were mixing this scene, we mixed it mono. So the characters are just talking, their dialogue is all coming out of the centre speaker and none of the other speakers in the theatre are active. Towards the end of the scene there is a single helicopter flyover and that's in stereo, so it starts to open up towards the end of the scene. 'Oh yeah, there's a world out there', but up to that point you've been caught in just this kind of solitary confinement with these three other people.
Now the helicopter goes past and shortly after that music begins. And it's mono to begin with and then, as the scene progresses, it starts to become stereo but all in the front. And then the camera operator is shooting... There's a shot of the General which is just a random shot that I found when I was scanning through the material of the General kind of looking at the camera with his hand up to his eye like he's thinking, 'This is a terrible thing that I've done' or something.
And then the camera pans off of the General to the window off to the left. And there's a semi-transparent curtain so it's a very bright image but slightly translucent-y and then the music gets more... And then on the cut to this big wide shot with a tiny helicopter flying over the mountains of Vietnam, although it's actually the Philippines. Then the music hits with all of the speakers... All six channels hit at the same time so that there's this big opening up of the, simultaneously of... visually of the landscape of Vietnam and the full orchestra so to speak of the, what the soundtrack can deliver at that point. And it stays in that mode for another minute or so and then focuses back down again as the narration comes in again.

Tangentially, there is a shot of Harvey Keitel in the film, for those who are interested, and it is the shot of Willard walking from the helicopter to the boat and he sits down on the front of the boat with his rifle by his side kind of sticking up in the air. That's Harvey Keitel because that was a big shot to get. The sunset is just perfect. It was a big production to make this happen and they had shot it with Harvey Keitel. And unless you know, there's no reason to reshoot it with Captain Willard, with Martin Sheen. But in fact that... Harvey Keitel is in the film and he's in that shot.

One of the things that we found that we had to confront in mixing Apocalypse Now was this question of how much information to give the audience in terms of the... what could appear on the various channels. The nature of film is that you are sitting in a theatre or your home watching a screen so your attention is focused in a forward direction. What a three-dimensional soundtrack like 5.1 or Dolby's Atmos now, which is 67.1 [sic – it is 62.2]. What they tried to do, with varying levels of success, is fold the sound into the total space of the room.
And what we found, since we were doing this for the first time, was that certain things worked very well and did not complicate the issue at all, like crickets. If you had a cricket track of night-time insects, you could spread this sound over the whole theatre and there would be... It would sound good and there would be no problem with this. This would not present a conceptual problem. What we did find created a problem was any time we tried to move the dialogue from the centre speaker, even to the left and right speakers, let alone something in the surrounds.
And so this became one of the rules of our road, which is, with very few exceptions, all of the dialogue is coming out of the centre speaker. Which is a paradox or it presented us with a paradox because the dialogue is coming out of the centre speaker and yet you believe that that person over on the left hand side of the screen is saying those words. And that sound effects like cars and boats and helicopters and other things are, in fact, moving around the screen. But dialogue is... seems to want to come out of the centre. And if we would, as an experiment, if we would move it to the other speakers, it... there was a conceptual funniness there. It was complicated by the fact that, no matter how hard you tried, the coloration of the centre speaker would be different than the left speaker and different than the right speaker in very subtle ways, but our ear is very finely tuned to picking up those subtleties. So, if you took a voice and moved it from the centre to the right, it would not only move in space but its coloration would change. It would have a different kind of a quality to it. And the same thing moving in the other direction. And that would be amplified if you moved it into the surrounds.
Now we did occasionally put intelligible dialogue in the surrounds but only in the midst of complete chaos. In other words, at the Playboy Bunny concert in Apocalypse Now, when everything is breaking loose and people are jumping from the auditorium onto the stage and the helicopter is trying to escape, there are a few words that creep intentionally into the surrounds. But we would only do that under that kind of condition.

And so what it is about the way the human being understands dialogue that's different from the way we understand sound effects? Because clearly there is a difference there. And I think what the difference is, is a question of what I came to call encoded sound and embodied sound. Language is an encoded sound because language is a code. These are just syllables that we can make with our lips and mouth and throat; that we have determined that cat is a sound that means an animal with a furry body and whiskers and pointy ears and a tail.
And that, in a different language, that's a different word. You have to know the language in order to break the code. So, when somebody is speaking to you, your brain is very busy. Even though you know the language very well, if you know English very well and somebody's speaking to you in English, your brain is nonetheless very busy behind the scenes cracking open this code and extracting the meaning out of it.
And under those circumstances, I think, my hypothesis is that the brain lets go of directionality in a cinematic situation. It says, 'I'm too busy to worry about that; I will believe it's coming from wherever my eyes say the person is.' So, in that case, the vision of the location of where the person is steers our belief that that sound is actually coming from there. Because otherwise we're too busy... The brain is occupied decoding it.

The opposite of encoded sound is what I call embodied sound. And the best example of embodied sound is music. Music is simply is what it is. We can't really... It's very difficult to analyze music. What does it mean? It means dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah. That's what it means. And so, under those circumstances, we are not breaking open a code. We are experiencing the sound directly for what... what it means. And, under those circumstances, we do pay attention to spatial cues, so you can in fact spread music very nicely around the theatre and it doesn't bother us.
And sound effects are somewhere in between. A sound effect sometimes is encoded. The sound of a doorbell that goes, ding dong, is a language. And it says, 'I'm here', or 'let me in', or something. It also is a pure sound in itself and in that case, it's kind of a musical sound too. Whereas the sound of the elevated train in Godfather is sort of... What is it? It's sort of music except it's not melodic but it is functioning in exactly the same that a low string section going 'nuh, nuh, nuh, nuh' would function and for pretty much the same purpose; to add tension and a pulse, a slow pulse to the scene.
It does have a meaning because that subway theoretically is actually present in the world. Just, you know, outside that door, two blocks down, is a subway that's making that sound, hypothetically. So, from encoded on the one hand to embodied on the other, with language here, dialogue and music here and sound effects a kind of centaur that fluctuates in between. And the practical effect of this is that, when you're dealing with an encoded sound, it is generally better to put it coming right out of the centre and let the mind locate it wherever it wants.
And the more embodied a sound is, the more malleable it is to be rearranged within the space of the theatre without causing a problem. So that dialogue, being encoded, becomes a problem if you try to put it in a so-called not neutral space. The centre speaker is sort of a neutral space that doesn't call attention to itself. Anything else makes you wonder, why is it there? Whereas the sound of crickets, which is sort of a musical chirping, it can be spread around the theatre without causing a problem.
So, as we mixed the film, experiencing all this for the first time, we would develop our lists of, do this, don't do this, yes, no, on either side and whenever somebody would be mixing and we... at times we were mixing 24 hours a day in different shifts, people would add stuff to these lists because of their experiences. So it was definitely a learning process for all of us. But I think a lot of the learning is at some level reflecting some basic truth about the way the human mind, especially in the slightly artificial world of the cinematic experience, the way the human mind understands the reality of what it is that it's looking at.

The years after Apocalypse Now, I did a variety of things. I wrote a screenplay based in Egypt, about some archaeologists, that never got produced. It was originally intended for Zoetrope Studios and then they sold it to the Ladd Company. And the Ladd Company sold it to Warner Bros. So technically that screenplay is somewhere in the basement of Warner Bros. And on a legal, contractual basis, since I was paid to write it, if I wanted that screenplay back, I'd have to pay my salary to bring it back and I just, I don't think that's going to happen at the moment.
It was many, many years ago and I took a number of odd jobs to stay afloat. Curiously, I didn't get any offers to supervise the sound on any films after Apocalypse Now, even though I won an Oscar for it. There's something called the Oscar Curse, which says the last thing you want to actually do is win the Oscar because then people avoid you and don't want to deal with you for a whole variety of reasons. They think, 'Well, maybe he's too expensive now', which is not the case, or 'maybe he'll have too inflated a head', which I'll leave to other people to decide. 'I won't be able to say anything because he will then beat me over the head with his Oscar.'
These are things that maybe people are afraid of without even articulating it. But it... I can testify that it is definitely a factor, this sort of Oscar Curse. It's much better actually to be nominated and not to win because then you're perceived as having been disappointed and therefore people approach you to kind of say, 'You did a really good job' and you get more work. But the actual winning of the Oscar has this other element to it that is sometimes curious, its results.

In the middle of this state, I got a call from Disney Studios saying, did I want to come and talk to them about potentially directing something for them? And this was an unusual situation because, up until that point, Disney Studios was and was certainly perceived to be a universe unto itself, a kind of monastery within Hollywood. And people who worked for Disney did not work anywhere else, and nobody from elsewhere worked at Disney. It was its own thing, which had an explanation in the past because much of their work was animation and the animators and they were really THE animated studio and all those people just did that and they didn't go elsewhere; they were under contract. But Disney had started to make live-action films while Walt Disney was still in charge. He died in the mid-1960s, so this was 15 years later or so, was this approach. So I thought, well, that's interesting.
What had happened was that the executives at Disney had seen the success of Star Wars and in my personal case, Black Stallion, and they thought: if Walt were alive, those were the kind of films that he would be making. Why aren't we making these films? Other people are making these films now. And so I guess because I had been associated with the Black Stallion and other things, that's why I got the call. And on the way down to talk to them I thought, 'Well, what would I want to do that Disney might also want to do?' And I had had the experience as my son was growing up of watching with him the American television programme, Sesame Street, which had the Henson, Jim Henson and his team doing puppetry, hand puppets that interacted with people in a very amusing way. So this was 1972, around those years. And there was something about the muppet approach to technology and they had gotten over the years very sophisticated in their use of puppets.
And that sensibility made me think that maybe that could be linked to doing a sequel to the Wizard of Oz. That... it was not possible for me to think about making a musical version, you know, a Judy Garland descendent of the Judy Garland film. But I had grown up reading the Oz books, you know, the L Frank Baum series, which was like Harry Potter was... In its day, it was the exact equivalent of Harry Potter. Phenomenally successful series of fantasy books that involved witches and other imaginary creatures.
And so when I was sitting having the meeting and they asked that question, I said, 'A sequel to the Wizard of Oz.' And the executive straightened up behind his desk and started pushing papers around a little nervously and he said, well, 'Did you know that we own the rights to all those books', which I didn't know. And he said, 'Yes, Walt also wanted to make sequels to the Wizard of Oz and he'd bought the rights to all those books in the 1950s and tried to get a screenplay written and nothing ever came of it and then a few years later he died. And so the copyright on our purchase is about to run out, so we are interested in making a sequel. Why don't you go and write a treatment of what you would do and give it to us.'

I got together with Gill Dennis, with whom I had written one of the drafts of the Black Stallion and we took two books, as it turned out, in the series. There was the Wizard of Oz and then, I think Baum wrote probably seven or eight or 12 books in that series. It was taken over by other people after he died.
But... so we took the first two books in the series and shuffled them together into one story. The reason we did that is that Dorothy in that story, the character Dorothy, is a key person but for some peculiar reason the author did not include Dorothy in his first sequel. It was a story that took place in that world, but there was no Dorothy. And at the time, readers of those books wrote a ton of letters to L Frank Baum saying, 'You've got to write another one with Dorothy in it.' So, he did.
And, so we took book two and book three and we shuffled them together, combining, mixing the characters up and basically taking the third book in the series and adding elements from the second book into it. We handed it in, it was approved; they liked what we had done. And we took the next step, which was now 'write a screenplay', which we did. Went through several drafts with the studio. It was the usual process with the studio. There was not a lot of angst about this. They liked what we were doing.
They wondered about our approach to the opening, which had Dorothy in trouble at home because she couldn't sleep because she was worrying about her... the Land of Oz. She had had this experience, and yet the situation with her guardian... She presumably is an orphan. She's living with her aunt and uncle. Nobody knows where her parents are. But her aunt in particular says, 'There is no place, Oz does not exist, that was some... that was dream that you had because you hit your head.'
And Dorothy's imaginative life demands that she defend her experience as being real. And this causes a tension which results in Dorothy being taken to a clinic in the nearest town to have electrotherapy to erase the memory of this experience so that she can become a normal person again.

And we persisted with that and Disney thought, 'Well, okay', and they approved it. And we started pre-production before... Because Star Wars was shot in England and because Indiana Jones was shot in England, and this was a similar kind of project with lots of visual effects. And Gary Kurtz, who had produced Star Wars, was the producer of this film. We decided to shoot it here in London and all of the... Many of the people who had worked on Star Wars and many of the Henson people came to work on this film and it was a big film that involved travelling to remote locations, like Indiana Jones. We were thinking of shooting in the Sahara and Sardinia and Spain and Kansas. And the budget got big, as those films get.
And then a crisis emerged because the management of Disney changed, about three months, three or four months before we were supposed to shoot. And the new management didn't like any of this, and they thought that the budget was much too high and they decided to put the film into turnaround, which is to say, 'We're not going to do it, but we will not oppose you if you find somebody else who might take it on, some other studio. But if you, Walter, rewrite the screenplay, so that the budget is significantly reduced, then maybe we will do it after all.' And that's a gamble. What is my vision for this film? What do I really want to say? What are my chances of ever getting this project accepted by some other studio, given all the work that we have done? It... So I took the risk, which on a certain level paid off, of rewriting the screenplay and making... I cut out a few characters and reduced the complexity of the story. And made the decision that we would shoot everything in England, that we would not go to the Sahara Desert. We would not go to Sardinia. And handed it in and they agreed, they said, 'Okay.'
The one problem that I had was I had not found an equivalent of Kansas in England. And we had looked principally in Norfolk because that's a fairly flat area bit it was not right. And this was pre-digital, so you couldn't easily erase things like power lines and other artefacts of the 20th century. Now it would be relatively simple to do that. But back then that was not quite... That was not easy. So the executive on the film, the head of the studio actually, said, 'I'm going to leave London on Friday morning. If you have found Kansas by Friday morning, you get the green light to make this film.' So, on Friday morning we took a trip. Instead of going to, north to Norfolk, we went west to Salisbury, Salisbury Plain, and very early and started looking. And I had to make the phone call at 10 o'clock in the morning. We still hadn't found anything and it was 10 o'clock and I went to the... We rounded a curve; there was a pub with a phone booth there. We stopped, I made the phone call. I said, 'We found it, it's fantastic!' And he said, 'Great, okay, you've got a green light.' And I hung up and went back to the car and said, 'Well, we have to find it now.'

And as luck or destiny would have it, we crested the hill and came down to the Salisbury Plain military testing ground. And the British Army for the last 200 years or something has taken over a large chunk of that area, a big circle that they use to blow up bombs, run tanks around and test things out. And the nature of that testing is that there are no power lines, there's nothing. It was never there in the first place and if it was, it's been blown away.
Luckily, they divide that circle up into pie-shaped wedges, like a pizza and they work their way from pie-shape to pie-shape every two or three years and there was a pie-shape that had not been worked on in the last 15 or 20 years which was, now had been used to run sheep on and we looked at that and it was perfect. In fact, there was even an old farm building, the foundations of the building still there from 1820 or something. And that became the farmhouse in Return to Oz.
And so we started shooting in February of 1984 and it was difficult for a variety of reasons. This was the first film I'd ever directed. The central character is Dorothy and she is in almost every shot in the film, and when you have a nine year old in a film, the amount that you can shoot with that nine year old is restricted because of educational issues. So I could only shoot with her for four hours a day.
That meant that I was working with other girls in rehearsal and then, at the very last minute, saying to Ruza, the girl playing Dorothy, 'Okay, come in.' And I would then rehearse with her quickly and then we would shoot. But it meant that there was an added layer of complication to the process, which was further complicated by the fact that all of the other people [characters] in the film were actually puppets and robotic creatures and chickens and puppet chickens and animation of rock, Claymation that was not there at the time of filming but had to be imagined. There's a... On that wall, there's a white X. That you have to imagine is the Nome King, one of the characters in the film.
Anyway, as a result of all this and several other factors, we began to fall behind and Disney executives who weren't completely sold on the project to begin with, began to get very nervous. And five weeks into the shoot, after losing my cinematographer and my first assistant director, they fired me. And it's not an experience that I'd like to go through again, although in various forms I have. But the miracle was that not only was I fired, but that I was rehired again five days later, thanks to the intervention of my friend George Lucas, who heard about the fact I was fired and flew, at his own expense, from Japan to London, and met with the executives who had fired me and convinced them to rehire me back again. Essentially he put up the bond of his own self. He said, 'Hire Walter back again. If everything starts to go funny again, I will step in and do something.' So the fact that George was willing to back me up with a pound of his own flesh made them say, 'Okay.' In fact, there was nobody else waiting in the wings to take over the film, which sometimes happens. So, unless they could find somebody very quickly, there was, the whole film would just disintegrate.
So, I was fired on a Thursday and by the following Tuesday, I was working again, having been dipped in this bath of acid as how it felt and then yanked out and hosed down and sent back out again. So, it certainly got my attention.

And in discussions with George [Lucas], just between him and me, the question was, what can we do to speed things up and he made a suggestion which I followed, which made all the difference. And... because I'm an editor and because I know how films are constructed out of bits and pieces. And because the film was full of visual effects and robots and puppets, many scenes in the film had to be storyboarded very carefully to make it most efficient. So, what I was doing was shooting the storyboards. So, at the beginning of the day there would be a board with these storyboards on it. Okay, we're doing this and now we did that, now we're doing the next one. And this is well and good up to a point.
But what he suggested is, 'Yes, of course, you have the storyboards but shoot the master shot.' And I said, 'George, I can't shoot the master shot.' 'Why not?' 'Well, because there's a chicken in this scene and I can't tell the chicken what to do in a master shot.' And Tik-Tok can only be in... the person inside Tik-Tok can only be inside Tik-Tok for two minutes and this is a four-minute scene. And Jack Pumpkinhead cannot move around convincingly if he's a puppet because he's operated by six different people, and so on.
And he said, 'I know, I know, I had the same problem on Star Wars with R2D2, who didn't work and there was somebody inside.' But he said, 'Shoot it anyway. It will not work. Much of it will not work. Some pieces you find might work against all expectations. But the real value of it is that, at the beginning of the day, the whole crew will see what it is that you are shooting. And even though it's full of mistakes, you are imprinting on everybody, this is what I'm doing today. This is the scene.'
And when people have actually seen it, rather than looking at storyboards, they have enough experience, for instance, in... The head of the painting department will say, 'Okay, I know that I don't have to be here during... when they're shooting this scene. I will leave my first in command and I will go to the next set and start doing that because there's not going to be any painting issues as far as I can tell from... If there's an emergency, yes, I'll come back.'
When I didn't shoot the master, everybody would stay on set all the time because they never knew what this crazy director was going to ask for next. And so they were always on alert, which meant that the project slowed down and things being prepared for the next day's shoot were not being done so everything got slower.

The other thing that speeded us up was that... As sad as I was to lose Freddie Francis, who was a wonderful cinematographer, I got David Watkin, who is also a wonderful cinematographer. But about as far from each other as it's possible for English cinematographers to be. Freddie... They've both passed away now. Freddie was a kind of cinematographer who said, 'Show me the camera angle and I will light that shot. And I don't like having two cameras shooting the same shot. If you must do it, you can have a B camera, second camera shooting along the same axis as the A camera with a telephoto lens. But don't think about shooting here because I'm lighting for the A camera and this lighting will not look good from this angle and besides that, you'll see all my lights.'
So that was another reason that we slowed down, because I was not able to use two cameras under those circumstances. And his style of lighting, as beautiful as it is, took a long time.
David Watkin was of the ilk that he said, 'I'm not even going to be here when you shoot. I'm going to be on the next set pre-lighting that. I light the set and I don't care where you put the camera. If there's a problem, Gordon can fix it' – he's the camera operator. 'If Gordon can't fix it, then yes, drag me back and will do something. But my experience is: 95% of the time you can shoot with six cameras on my sets and I don't care.'
And it's just his style of lighting, which is a more broad-based, rather than pin-point sources. It's a more broad-based kind of lighting. And in fact, that is how it worked and it worked out... We sped up, both because I was now shooting masters and because we were... The lighting was simpler and the... We were allowed and encouraged to use multiple cameras where possible.

There was a wonderful example of David, his approach in shooting on the location of the mirrored throne room. And this is a main location in the film. And the walls are mirrored, the ceiling is mirrored and the floor is mirrored. So, from a cinematographic point of view, this is a nightmare because, where do we put the camera so we don't see the camera? Well, there are ways to do it. The mirrors on the wall were flexible so when we had the shot lined up, there was moment where we said, 'I see the camera in panel eight.' And all you had to do was move panel eight by five degrees and the camera would disappear. And you couldn't tell that it was shifted five degrees. So there was that kind of procedure.
But Freddie Francis's style of lighting... and he tried to light the throne room and he had difficulty because of his point-source lighting, made it impossible to hide all of these, the lights that he was using. And the result, which... We did shoot one day with his lighting and it looked unfortunately kind of dreary. And that set has to be really alive and sparkling. And so I was I very nervous when I took David Watkin onto the set and said, 'Well, here it is.'
And he looked around and he said, 'Marvellous, I've been waiting all my life for this kind of a set.' 'What do you mean', I said. 'Well, here's what I'm going to do: I'm going to light this whole set with one light.' 'How are you going to do that?' 'It's simple; you're shooting over here in this direction. I will put a 10k, which is a very big light, over there and I will angle the light to bounce off the mirrors and the floor and the ceiling, so that it caroms perhaps seven times before it, the light hits the set, the action. By the time it hits the set, the mirrors' surfaces will have diffused the light so that the light is not a searchlight kind of a light. It's got this beautiful glow to it because of... Every time the light reflects, it, there's a spill that happens. And I'll be able to light this set in five minutes flat. And then I can go off and do something else or take a nap.' And that's in fact what happened and the results are what you can see in the film. But it's a fantastic illustration of the problems presented by certain kinds of very difficult sets and the solutions that different cinematographers come up with to solve these problems.

Another change of management happened on Return to Oz. At the end of shooting the film, there was... A whole new regime took over Disney. And this was the Eisner Katzenberg regime that is now no longer there but who were in power for quite a while at Disney. And they had absolutely no interest in this film because it had not only been started by a previous administration, it was two administrations ago. And the downside of that is that they didn't put any serious work into releasing the film, how to release it.
Because it's a difficult film; it's a sequel to one of the most beloved, iconic films that has gone even beyond film. The Wizard of Oz is sort of how America defines itself in some weird way. So, to make a sequel to it is like... It was worse than making a sequel to Gone with the Wind with Clark Gable and... Because you had to address that issue of, what is this? And how should the audience take it? And our film was not a musical, and Wizard of Oz, the original film, was a musical and it was much more vaudevillian. This was more reality-based.
In fact, my approach to the beginning of the film was in 1899, which is when the film is set, what would happen to a real nine-year-old if she was caught up in a tornado, rescued alive and had a story to tell about where she had gone and it involved this fantasy about witches and flying monkeys and scarecrows and tin men. What would happen under real circumstances? And I did a lot of research into the dilemmas that farming communities were facing in 1899 in the United States. They were just coming out of a bad depression and there were all kinds of issues about the gold standard and the silver standard and how the banks were crushing the farms.
So, I placed the Dorothy in that film in the real environment, rather than the vaudevillian environment of the Wizard of Oz, with people in costume and singing, rather than Tik-Tok who is kind of a... There is somebody inside Tik-Tok but that is hidden from the audience. Whereas the Tin Man it's a... that's a human being made up to look like, painted in tin colours.
So, anyway, it would have taken a really smart intensive thinking to know how to market this film and I think they were just not interested in doing that. And the good part of that, though, was that they didn't interfere with what I was doing with the film. There were a couple of suggestions that they made but nothing like the kind of things that they were doing to the films that they were making themselves currently at the time. So, as awkward as being fired from a film and a number of the other struggles that happen on any other film, the cut of the film is the cut that I wanted. There's nothing in the film that I did not say, 'Yes, I want that.' No studio was forcing me to do this thing or that thing. But it was out of indifference rather than charitable towards my personal vision.

I was surprised; I was a little discombobulated by the fact that when the film came out, people said, 'This is an extremely terrifying, disturbing film', which was not my intention. I wanted it to engage the audience fully and I wanted Dorothy to be in a desperate situation, but the anguish of many of the reviews and some of the comments that I got from the film were... was surprising to me. And I'm still thinking about it. I have some ideas now after 30 years of why that might have been.
One of them is simply it isn't a musical and when there is something that has scary things in it but there's also singing, the singing says: this isn't so bad, it's just a show. And we didn't have songs. The other decision that I made for creative reasons was Dorothy was not a 15-year-old with a band around her developing breasts pretending to be nine years old. It was a real nine-year-old girl. The difference between a nine-year-old pre-adolescent girl and a 15-year-old pretending to be younger than she is, is substantial. Again because that's a real nine-year-old girl. Whereas if it's a 15-year-old girl pretending to be younger, you say, 'Well, it's just... it's pretend.'
So, as desperate as some of the situations are in Wizard of Oz, you have some escape valves from them, which is song and 'this is pretend.' And then the basic of much of the action in Oz looks like a vaudeville show. These are painted sets and they're clearly painted sets. We're not trying to fool anyone. This is paint. And so that adds another element where you think, oh, this is a theatre and if I want, I can get up and leave at any time because it's just theatre. Whereas a film that has a real, raging river and the girls really fall into the river – it looks real, I mean it's all a set and it's very artfully done but it's convincingly real. And that's a real house and that's a real doctor who's attaching real electrodes to Dorothy's... You know, that's also different.
And it's a scary world. When she gets to Oz, there are scary things that happen and there aren't very many cuddly things. There's... Toto gets left behind and is replaced by a chicken. And chickens, as charming as chickens can be... I'm a big chicken fan... They are not cuddly creatures in the same way that a cute dog is cuddly. And a robot Tik-Tok is different than a man pretending to be a Tin Man with a painted face. And Jack Pumpkinhead is a pumpkin and pumpkins are made to scare you on Hallowe'en and he's got this sort of grin, even though his voice is very nice, Brian Henson's voice; it's still a little scary. And the Nomes are scary and Mombi the witch is scary particularly because she has this ability to change heads at will, depending on how she feels: I'm going to use this head today.
And all of these are ideas that come from the books. I didn't invent these things. This is L Frank Baum and he had a definite ability to imagine these rather frightening things, even though he would say to his readers, 'I don't want to create any heartache in my readers. These books are charming and friendly' and yes, but... There are things looked at objectively that are strange. And that's one of the things that attracted me to the books. It was one of the things that, when my mother read these books to me at the age of five or six, I loved this stuff because it made me think in a very interesting way about, what is... If you could take your head off and put it somewhere else, what does that mean about who you are and what the head is and all of these questions?

I recently added another idea to the pile of 'why is this film scary', which is the... Dorothy's guardians... Aunt Em in particular, because she's a mother figure, takes Dorothy, trying to help Dorothy she takes Dorothy to a place which ultimately might do her harm; this clinic. And the idea is, we are going to erase your memory of this event. This is just the result of hitting your head. Your neurons are a little scrambled and we're going to smooth out the neurons so you don't remember this.
And the film... the subtext of the film is, you must defend your dreams; you can't let the world take away your dreams from you. That's your most prized possession. And that's what happens in the film. Dorothy defends her dreams by going to Oz and defending Oz and restoring that place. And the film ends with a happy reconciliation of Ozma in the mirror and Dorothy looking at Ozma in the mirror so we know it's real. But Aunt Em, the guardian, takes Dorothy there and leaves Dorothy there to go back to deal with her husband, Henry, and we know, as audience members, that something funny is going on here.
Why doesn't Aunt Em, with using her woman's intuition or her mother's radar, say... Halfway down the road she should say, 'Hmm, there's something funny about this place. I'm going to go back and take Dorothy out of there.' But she doesn't. She... Dorothy is there overnight and then one thing leads to another and she gets swept up in the flood that takes her to Oz.
So, the scary sub-basement of the sub-basement of the story is: grownups can hurt you, potentially, while trying to help you. That, even though grownups sometimes have the best of intentions and sometimes they don't, because what is the doctor and the nurse... what are their intentions? But even your guardian can mistakenly harm you and you have to defend yourself. And this is that message that I overtly wanted to put into the film, to make kids realize that is some circumstances... sometimes in life you're on your own and even the people who are there to protect you... Things can go funny sometimes, so you have to be on alert.
And this is fundamentally a very challenging idea for the kids. And it's also challenging for the grownups who might be sitting next to the kids, who may not want the kids to get this message. Even though they may not be understanding this message in as clear terms as I've just laid it out but that feeling that she [Aunt Em] should have gone back, she should have... She should have realized there was something funny going on is a... It's the equivalent of the undercoat in a painting. That there is... this undercoat has a funny quality to it that undermines a lot, if you're disturbed by that kind of thing.
Because relatively speaking, compared to other films that were coming out at the time that were full of blood and gore and sawn-off arms and limbs that, to which young kids would be taken... This doesn't have anything of that. There is no blood in this film. Nobody even touches anyone else successfully to do them harm. And every time harm looks inevitable, something happens to allow you to escape from it. And people are courageous in the face of danger and that courageousness is ultimately rewarded and the bad folks in the film are... dissolve away and they weren't that harmful to begin with. They just looked scarier than they really were.

The film was not financially successful when it came out and it got a  lot of negative reviews because of, I think, some of the things that  I've been talking about. And that's kind of a double whammy for a  director, especially a first-time director of an expensive, very  high-profile film for it not to be critically successful. There were a  number of good reviews but, on balance, more bad ones than good ones and  then it was not financially successful. And it was perceived as being a  kids' film and kids were running from the theatres in tears being  scared by it.
So, I was box office poison for a number of years afterwards,  certainly as a director. I tried to get a number of projects off the  ground but was not successful at doing that, partly because of reception  of Return to Oz, partly because of the kinds of projects I was  interested in were not projects that people thought they would be  interested in. And so after a while you sort of... you're sent to the  closet to think about your sins in Hollywood, although I don't live in  Hollywood; the virtual Hollywood.
And so I wound up returning to film editing and film editing/sound  mixing. On films, I'd do both jobs and it's an area that I love  absolutely. And of course I wish Return to Oz had been more  successful at the time. It's now 30 years later. People are seeing  screenings of it and liking it and there are many... I'm approached by  many kids who are now 38, who were eight when they saw the film and they  say, 'I was scared completely witless by your film, but I loved it!'
So, that's... I guess that's the way the ball bounces. You can never  predict exactly how... When you launch a film into the world, what is  its reception going to be and how is that going to affect your life and  the kind of things that you can do. You just don't know until happens  and then you try to compensate appropriately. And huge success can be,  ironically... Huge success can be as limiting sometimes as failure.
Francis is very eloquent about The Godfather being a straitjacket of a kind. That is a very successful film; The Godfather and Godfather II.  Top of the list on IMDB and routinely among the lists of best films  ever made in the 20th century and that kind of stuff. And yet he feels: 'That's not what I wanted to do. I wanted to make little films like The Conversation,  I didn't want to make these big films.' And yet he's identified with  these films. And to a certain extent self-identifies with it because he  can't escape it. That's what he did and that's... Those films brought  him many good things but they also... There's a binding force that comes  along with great success that is sometimes as powerful as failure. And  you just have to know that that's the territory you're moving into and  act as appropriately as you can under the circumstances.
In my case, I went back to editing. I have never directed a feature  film since. I've directed some small things. I've directed some  animation, a little short half-hour programme but... I directed Michael  Jackson singing a song for Captain Eo, as a second-unit job. So I can...  I'm the only person, other than Francis [Ford Coppola], who can say, 'I  directed Michael Jackson in 70 mm 3D', but not ever another feature  film. And I doubt that it will ever happen to me now. I'm 72 years old  now so I doubt that anything... I doubt that the rainbow will come back.  I don't have too many regrets about that at the moment.

Shooting on [The] Conversation started at the end of November in 1972, Haskell Wexler was the cinematographer and Francis [Ford Coppola] and Haskell had worked together just recently on American Graffiti, which was shot that summer. And Haskell had been called in to work on the film because George was working with two camera operators and there was no director of photography on American Graffiti, to begin with. It was all going to be done in purely natural light. And, as a result, there were problems with focus because the depth of field that you work with, especially at that time under such low light conditions, where you can't really see what it is that you're photographing, and the plane of focus is very restricted.
And so after a week of shooting, Francis called Haskell, who was a friend of George's, in fact, had gotten George [Lucas] involved going to film school back eight years earlier. Haskell came in and saved the day. I mean, he came in and became the director of photography on the film. The two camera operators remained. But they were relieved of the responsibility of lighting the film. And Haskell just added judiciously to the light to allow the focus, the plane of focus to expand, while keeping it still looking naturalistic. So, the choice of Haskell to work on The Conversation was almost inevitable, given their recent history. And yet in retrospect Haskell had second thoughts about the screenplay. And once they started shooting, those second thoughts became third thoughts. He didn't like the Harry Caul character and felt that that was going to be very frustrating for an audience that that character was too hesitant about things, that you simply had to engage with the story and make the story happen faster and be more exciting. And this ran against Francis's intention, which was to blend a certain murder-mystery story with a character study, which almost by its definition is slower paced.
This tension came to a head about a month later and the issue had nothing to do with script. It was about the concept of backlight. And Francis had chosen a location for the Robert Duvall office, the director in an office building in San Francisco that had windows, floor to ceiling windows and Francis wanted the light to seem to come from outside. He didn't want to supplement the light inside. And this meant that whoever the cinematographer was, Haskell in this case, had to struggle with the exterior light and how to get detail in the foreground characters. It's just a natural dilemma to any of those circumstances that... You know, even when you're taking a still photograph of your family and you have strong backlight, you come up against that problem. So there they were confronting this problem and I wasn't present at the time but apparently words were exchanged. The situation got heated and the result was that... It was coming up for Christmas and Francis declared that the film was going to stop shooting over the Christmas holidays and that Haskell was not going to come back after Christmas.
And a new cinematographer joined the team, Bill Butler, who had shot Francis's earlier film, The Rain People. So they had a... And Haskell was... Haskell just died recently but Haskell was one of the world's great cinematographers and he had a definite strong personality and was not afraid of expressing his personality strongly. And that naturally came in contact with Francis, who has a similar strong personality. Bill Butler is more accommodating. He's a perfectly wonderful cinematographer but his personality is: yes, let's make it work. And not, you know, he's more concerned with what is actually right in front of us, rather than these other issues, whatever they might be.
So, the film [The] Conversation progressed forward. It never really recovered the lost time and that was another reason why the film had to be abandoned with ten pages yet to shoot. And which... That problem landed in our lap editorially and we did what we could to solve the problem, given the footage that we had. And ultimately, to knit everything together, we just needed this one extra shot.

In the first month of shooting on [The] Conversation, much of that footage, much of that shooting concerned the conversation itself, which is a seemingly innocuous conversation between two young people walking around Union Square in the centre of San Francisco. And this was photographed again using Francis's documentary-style approach that he had using in the wedding of [The] Godfather and would use again in Apocalypse Now.
The two young people, Cindy Williams and Fred Forrest, were fitted with radio mikes and just told to walk around the square with everyone who was really there. There were no or very, very few extras or actors in this scene. It's just people who happened to be there at lunchtime. And walk around, say your lines as if you're really saying them and if you were really who you were as characters. And we will hide cameras here and there in Union Square and no one will know that we're making a film. And this is something that Francis worked out with Haskell and Haskell is very good at this because he started out in documentaries and he's made many documentaries. And so the premise is... The way The Conversation itself was filmed is very similar to the premise of the conversation in the film, which is: secret cameras, secret recordings, nobody else knows they're there picking up this recording. And the result of that was a huge amount of footage because it was photographed with, I think, four or five cameras simultaneously and done repeatedly over and over again with the cameras in slightly different positions each time. And the cameras were just getting what they could get, the way you do when you make a documentary.
The plus side of that, of course, as it is with the wedding in Godfather or with the battle, Valkyries battle in Apocalypse Now, is that you get things that would be very unlikely to get if you had set them up intentionally. Accidental things that just have a magical quality to them that are clearly recognized for being good but not intentional. The Chinese actually have a word for this, called 'li', 'L I', said with the right Chinese accent. And I use this in my note-taking, when I'm looking at material in a film and when something particularly nicely-composed and sort of magical in its arrangement happens, I say, 'very good li at the moment.' And this is a term of approval in China for a particularly fortuitous arrangement of markings in jade. Jade has this... Good jade has this wonderful kind of cloud-like texture to it, where the light markings work against the darker markings. And what is prized especially in China, as I understand it, is not chaotic markings, nor markings that are too symmetrical but markings that have this serendipitous, stochastic quality where there is a pattern but it's not too rigid, nor too chaotic.
And that's a value that I note and prize especially when I look at dailies and something happens in the cinematography that has this quality. My code word for it is 'li'. And your chances of getting 'li', if you shoot in a documentary style and if you have good camera people and the idea is good, your chances are quite high that you will get 'li'. You can't predict when it's going to happen and you can only recognize it when it does happen. The price you pay for it is a lot of material because this will emerge only by chance so... I forget exactly how much material we had on The Conversation, in the conversation itself, but certainly a 100,000 35mm feet, which is many hours of material.

I remember in 1973, late in 1973, for contractual reasons, I took the film, the cut of the film to Los Angeles and showed the film to Haskell, meaning... The idea was: 'Do you want your name on the film?' And he didn't. He thought that his contribution was not big enough and he still didn't like the film. His word for it was, 'That character', meaning Harry Caul, 'has to shit or get off the pot.' It's just... He was impatient with Harry Caul as a character. The flipside of that is that we finished the film and that involved the final mix and the music and everything else.
And then I met Haskell about a year later and he came up to me in mock anger, but it was kind of hard to tell and he said, 'You tricked me.' I said, 'What do you mean, Haskell?' I mean, we'd known each other for almost ten years at this point. He said, 'You tricked me.' He said, 'The version you showed me was not like the version that is in the theatres.' I said, 'It's the same as it was.' 'No, it wasn't; it was different.' I said, 'Well, yes, you're right, different – we had not yet finished the mix on the film. I was showing you the film and the guide track but not the finished mix.'
And he thought for a minute, 'Yes, yes, yes, I guess you're right.' So, it again... It's a hidden factor maybe in the fact that the film was very well received. It was nominated for Best Picture that year and it got very good reviews. And I think that kind of gnawed at Haskell, that he had turned down putting his name on a film that actually got very good reviews. And I'm sure he didn't expect it to get good reviews because he didn't have a good opinion about it. Well, once he saw that other people liked it, it was like: 'Hmm, Walter tricked me.'
And it's also a good example of the power of sound; that sound will make you see a film in a different way. And you will not think, 'Oh, it's sound that's making me do that.' Like the elevated train in [The] Godfather; we hear the sound with part of our brain, but the emotion that comes up we ascribe to what we're looking at, rather than the sound. And so Haskell's reaction to seeing the finished film of The Conversation with its finished soundtrack, which makes you see the film differently. He ascribed that to the fact that I had showed him a visually completely different film but I hadn't. The only thing that was different was the fact that we had finished the soundtrack.

A big element of the film is the music and David Shire wrote the music for the film. And on Francis [Ford Coppola]'s initiative early on, even before the film was shot, David was hired to be the composer and was given the screenplay and Francis said, 'Write the music for this screenplay.' And David said, 'But you haven't shot the film yet.' And Francis said, 'That doesn't matter. There's the screenplay. Write some music for it. Pretend this is a Broadway show and you've just been given the libretto. That's what you do anyway, so do it for this.' And so David said, 'Okay.' And he came up with four or five themes that he played on the piano and gave them to Francis. And while we were shooting the film, Francis could take these recordings and play them to Gene Hackman and Terri Garr and Cindy Williams and Fred, John Cazale, the actors in the film and say, 'The music for this scene is going to be something like this.' Which is a huge good thing, if you can do it because an actor, in deciding how to play a scene, in the end is being asked to dance with an invisible partner, because there probably will be music for this scene, but I don't know what it is. 'So, should I, how should I, what bases should I cover in acting? If I knew that the music was going to cover third base, then all I have to do is cover first and second base. I don't have to do everything. I can let the music take care of that.' And that makes me more efficient and better. And the ultimate film will be better because we aren't getting a sad performance that has sad music behind. You get something that has more interesting harmonics.
And I thought... At the time, I thought, 'This is fantastic.' This was, again, the first feature film that I was involved in as editor while the film was being shot. And I thought, 'This is great and this must be the way it's always done because it's such a good idea.' And it was only later that I discovered, 'No, it usually doesn't happen this way, that this was a one-off, unique situation, where Francis had asked this to be done and it was done.'
And Francis so liked the sound of the piano in these temporary, initial tracks that he thought, 'We're just going to... It'll just be piano, because that solo instrument fits with the solo nature of the character of Harry Caul. And the loneliness of the music is like his loneliness and it would be wrong to have a full orchestra for this kind of movie, which is very spare. And there's a sort of jazzy element to the music and Harry Caul plays the jazz saxophone and jazz is used elsewhere in the movie. So, sad jazz on a piano is good.'
For me, it was fantastic because, as an editor, I had already music to play when I was putting the scenes together. So, after I cut a scene and assembled it, I could experiment with these five different pieces of music. How does that one work? Oh, that's good. Should the music begin here or there? Well, here, that's good. And now it goes on too and I can cut the music here. So I would experiment with different cuts of the music and then I would show that to David and Francis and David would listen to what I had done with his music and he would get further ideas about other things to write and compose and work this out with Francis. So it was a very creative, healthy spiral, ascending spiral of feedback between the film and the editing and the music, and the film and the editing and music, and the result in the end is what you hear, with the added element of synthesis.
So, as the film progressed and the situation became more and more fraught, we processed the music through an ARP synthesizer to add increasingly distorted elements sonically. It's still a piano, it's still just one instrument but it gets this sort of ragged quality to it as the film goes on. And then it ends and the music is back more normal at the very end of the film. This sad music at the end when Harry is alone in his ruined apartment playing his saxophone and is probably not a hopeless case but... He has some recovering to do from this situation.

When The Conversation came out, it got very good reviews and people would come up to me and say, 'Wonderful sound on the film.' And of course you take the compliment wherever you get it but I thought, 'Yes, but I'm not aware of doing anything really different than I do on any film. Why are they saying that?' And one explanation, which is obvious and very true, is that this is a film about a sound man and so people think about sound, whereas in most films the subject is not about a sound man and so you don't think about the sound.
So this film upfront asks you, because of what this man does for a living, it asks you to think about sound. And so people are paying attention to something that they normally don't pay attention to. And if you've done good work, and I hope I did good work on all my films, but if you've done good work and people start paying attention to it, then they will come up to you afterwards and say, 'Very good sound.' But I was not used to hearing this because sound is mostly just an anonymous companion in the background. Certainly not consciously appreciated by most people who've seen a film. But then I thought also that the structure of the film is, in fact, rather unusual. And what is also unusual is that I didn't realize this while I was working on the film. But at the halfway point of the movie – once the party at Harry's warehouse dissipates, and Harry wakes up the next morning, from that point on to the end of the film – nobody really talks, there's not much dialogue from that point to the end of the film. There are a few phone calls and people say, 'You can't go in there', or, 'Stop',  or, 'What are you going to do with her', but there is not the kind of extended back and forth conversation that there is in the first part of the film.
And we were talking earlier about encoded sound and embodied sound and one of the other aspects of encoded sound, like language, is that when you are processing language, it is like a hungry cuckoo bird in that it eats all of the worms that are on offer. And you allow spatial location to be driven by the visual but you also don't pay conscious attention to anything that is not dialogue, for the most part. And my analogy for this is that it's like the night sky. And on a moonlit night, the stars are there, presuming you're out in the country where there isn't too much spillage from city lights. The stars are there but because the moon is present and a focus of your attention, you pay more attention to the moon and the stars are a kind of a silent chorus on either side of the moon. When the moon is not there and it's just stars, then you look and say, 'Look at all the stars.'
And dialogue plays the role of the moon and stars play the role of the sound effects. So in a series of scenes where there is dialogue, your focus is on the dialogue and the stars are there but you're not paying real attention to them. When the moon goes away, when the dialogue goes away, as it does at the midpoint of The Conversation, then you start to pay attention to those former supporting actors, the stars or the sounds effects. And if the filmmakers have done a good job, which we hope we did, and there is meaning in those sound effects, you will pull the meaning out of what is being offered to you, which is not dialogue but sounds effects. And, if all of that works, you are grateful to the sound effects and then you compliment who, that you know did the sounds effects. So I'm happy to receive compliments from it but it is not a complicated soundtrack, which is a virtue in itself, I guess.
In those days, I think, the maximum number of tracks running at any one point is probably ten or 11. On Apocalypse Now we would have 100 or 200 tracks running simultaneously, where it all had to be balanced with each other. Whereas in this case there's the dialogue and there were a few sound effects. There's Harry's coat that's rustling, there's the playing of the conversation itself, there's some background sounds, there's trains in the distance. But it's a very simple soundtrack. But, when you add all of these other elements together, it's about a sound man. There isn't much dialogue past a certain point. Then... which all encourage people to pay attention to the sound. And conceptually we're doing interesting things with the few soundtracks that we have. Then that... The result of that is that people appreciate what you're doing, whereas under normal circumstances, in a normal film, they're completely oblivious to the kind of stuff that you're doing.

When I was hired by Fred Zinnemann to work on Julia, I was working in England. I was an American. I think the only other two Americans on the film were Jane Fonda and Jason Robards, playing Dashiell Hammett. I could be wrong but anyway it was... We were definitely in a very small minority. And I think I was hired to work on the film because Fred Zinnemann had seen The Conversation and liked the editing of it. And he was also nervous about making a film about Americans in England and France and getting it wrong. Because he was 70 and he'd been making films in England since the early sixties. He had lived in the United States up until the fifties and then he'd moved to London. And this was now 15 years later and he felt, I think: 'Have I lost touch with America?'
And this is an American story. It's not Day of the Jackal, which is an entirely European story, or The Nun's Story, which is also European. This is an American story with Americans in it. 'Maybe I should get somebody in a key position who is American.' And that was, turned out to be me, which I'm very grateful for.

He [Fred Zinnemann] had a very interesting, to me, way of working, which was very unfamiliar, based on my experience with George Lucas and Francis Coppola. He loved to shoot the rehearsals. He loved it when actors bumped into the furniture because they were unfamiliar with the staging yet. These kind of quirky things that are accidental, to him made the film realer. And I agree with that, up to a point. But I was encouraged to do my thing, whatever that is, on the film and to make this voice the American voice. However you communicate American-ness through editing, I don't know, but there I was being asked to perform this sort of police action on the film. And the... There was an event that happened during the shooting of the sailboat up in the Lake District... This was Lily and Julia as young women, Jane Fonda and Vanessa Redgrave, having this great experience sailing a boat. And the chemistry of how these shots happen is mysterious because it depends on the sunlight and the weather and the angle...
Anyway, a miraculous blossoming of light happened just at the right moment when the sail came in. And Dougie Slocombe, the cinematographer, was filming it from a camera boat, shooting at this yacht. And just at the moment that the boat looked most beautiful, the prow of the camera boat came up into frame and showed half-eaten sandwiches on the edge of the camera boat. And then it went away again. And there was no question that that was the best part of the shot. But how to deal with the half-eaten sandwiches?
And I knew, because I had been researching it, that there had been a huge improvement in the quality of what was known as 'interpositive stock', which is what you would use to make an optical. You had to go a generation away from the original, make an interpositive. You would manipulate that and then you would make a new negative from that and that would be your new shot. So the optical, visual effect that you were doing was two generations removed from the original negative.
And this was... Up to this point, this was always a problem because the degradation was quite noticeable. There had been an improvement in the mid-seventies to where the degradation was almost invisible. And so I thought, 'Well, this is a good opportunity to try this', and so I ordered an optical move in on this shot. So that, as the boat comes around the corner, we zoomed in slightly to eliminate the camera boat and the sandwiches and then as soon as the boat was gone, we moved back out again. And because you're shooting from a boat to another boat, you never even notice that move because it just fits in with the waves.
I was very proud of it. I mean it was a small thing, but proud of it.

I got a visit from Fred Zinnemann the next day, who came over to the editing room and said, 'I hear that you've ordered an optical.' And I said, 'Yes, I was going to show it to you.' And he said, 'Well, okay, what it is it?' And I showed it to him and he said, 'Is that an optical?' I said, 'Yes', and so it already passed its first because he was looking at something and he couldn't tell that anything had been done to it. And he said, 'Show me the original shot.' So, I showed it to him and of course there were the half-eaten sandwiches. And he said, 'I like that.' And I said, 'Fred, there are half-eaten sandwiches in the shot. We reveal the film-making process and the eye. Potentially the eye goes away from the beautiful boat and looks at disgusting half-eaten sandwiches.' He said, 'Nobody will be looking at that. They'll just be looking at the boat.' And I said, 'But the optical does the same thing and we don't even... There's not even any question that it will happen.'
You have to remember, this was before VHS tapes or DVDs. Once a film was made, that was it. You never had an opportunity to look at a film and go through it frame by frame. It might eventually be shown on television sometime. But certainly an average person would never have the ability to look at a film frame by frame. And anyway, we got into a friendly but slightly heated argument and... which he thought I was... I didn't understand his directorial intention. And I thought, 'He's being a stick in the mud about this issue.' And finally he said, 'Alright, here's what we'll do. We'll take your optical and set it to one side. We'll finish the film with the original shot in the negative. We will make an answer print and Dougie Slocombe will come to the screening of the answer print and during the drinks celebration afterwards, I will ask him if there's anything in the film that he would like to replace.' And this is what came to be.
We previewed the film with the half-eaten sandwiches. Nobody commented on it, which was ominous for me. And we cut the negative and there were the half-eaten sandwiches. We made the final answer print. We had the screening. Dougie Slocombe, the cinematographer, was there and over shrimp sandwiches and champagne at Technicolor afterwards, Fred Zinnemann said, 'Dougie, what did you think?' 'Marvellous, marvellous, just beautiful, came out better than I even thought.' 'Is there anything that you would like to change?' 'Uh, no, nothing, not a bit.' 'Is there anything, even in the sailboat scene in the Lake District?' 'Ah, beautiful, beautiful, no, it's perfect. I wouldn't change a thing.' And Fred looked at me and I looked at Fred and said, 'Okay, you win.' And to this day, that... those half-eaten sandwiches are in the film. If you have a DVD of the film or whatever and if you stop-frame your way through that scene, you see the prow of the camera boating coming in. But it was symptomatic of how Fred approached the film.

There was another incident when we were shooting aboard a train on the stage in Paris. The train was an actual train car of the period that had been brought in to a dark sound stage in Paris. The actors were onboard a real train. It wasn't a set, so a real train car. Out the window, it was just black because it was travelling at night. And the production department had arranged for tiny lights on the little wires to be moving at various speeds in the distance to simulate close streetlights and then distant farmhouses moving much slower.
It's completely convincing particularly because it was also raining, supposedly, and so the window had that sparkle of rain, and so you couldn't really focus on it. Anyway, the setup was: we're onstage with the actors. The camera, though, had to fit in the compartment because you couldn't move the walls. So everything was very restricted. And Chic Waterson, the camera operator, couldn't use what he normally used, which was a geared head, which was a particular skill that has almost disappeared from camera operators talents. But this heavy camera would be manipulated by moving gears in different directions to make smooth pans left, right, up and down. And people got very good at it, it became second... But, because of the restricted nature of shooting in this compartment, he couldn't use that set up. So he had to use a tripod with a handle to pan left and right.
And a particular scene involved Jane Fonda putting her hat, which has the money in it, up above the seat, in the rack above the seat. And the shot started on her and, as she got up to put the thing away, the idea was you would pan with her up and it was tricky to get. I mean, not overly tricky but the first takes, the choreography wasn't quite right yet. She moved too soon, Chic moved too late or something. Finally, around take five, they were going again and in the middle of take five, the handle that Chic was using came off in his hand. So, it hadn't been properly screwed in. And so, as a result, the camera stopped and with Fred Zinnemann, you didn't say, 'There's a problem.' You just kept going, so Chic grabbed hold of the camera and yanked it in position, so that Jane Fonda moved into position at the end and the middle was completely screwed up.
And Fred was completely oblivious to this. Fred Zinnemann. He was watching Jane and he wasn't aware of what was happening with the camera, and he said, 'Cut, print, perfect. Let's move on.' And Chic came up to Fred holding the handle in his hand and said, 'Sir, the pan handle came off in my hand and I was not able to get the middle of the shot.' And had this been Francis [Ford Coppola], there was no question that we'd do another take. And Fred looked at the handle and he looked at Chic and he said, 'I said: cut, print and we're moving on to the next shot, and that's what we're going to do.' He walked off and Chic held the handle and he looked at me. I was watching this and he said, basically, 'Hey, it's your problem now.'

I was scandalized by this at the time. Now I have a more nuanced version of it, but I thought, 'What kind of filmmaker is that, that would potentially damage his film? What would it take to just do that again? It would... You know, 30 seconds. We'd already done five takes; why not a sixth take? Why would you, on a, because of a snit or what...' I didn't understand it. Why let your emotions, or whatever it is, damage the film?
And what I came to understand is that the way Fred worked, that he didn't mind damaging the film occasionally. He didn't mind the sandwiches coming up into the frame. He didn't mind the actors bumping into the furniture if some other thing were good about it. And what he was teaching, I guess, in quotes... What he was teaching us all and Chic in particular was: check your equipment before you shoot the next shot. 'I so believe this' – Fred Zinnemann – 'that I am willing to damage my film to teach you this lesson or ideas to that effect.' And that was generally true as I heard it from the actors and all of the other departments, that with other directors there was a ramp-up time, as you did take one, two, three, and four, things got into position. And Fred was not tolerant of that. He wanted, even the rehearsals, everyone to be running at 100%. He didn't want, 'Okay, that's pretty good and now let's do the next one and maybe we'll make an incremental improvement and maybe by take four, it will be good.' He didn't want that and he wanted literally and metaphorically the entire camera handles to be fully engaged with the pan head so that these things didn't happen. And to make sure that you understood that, he was willing to sacrifice the particular shot, in this case, as a sacrificial victim of this lesson. In the end, it wasn't an issue at all.
When I put the scene together, the fact that the middle of this pan was missing... I forget what the actual solution to it was, but it did not hurt the film. There was another solution and it was so easy and obvious that I never even struggled with it. I regret that I can't recall exactly what it was, but it was not a source of any anxiety, that particular issue. Did Fred know this secretly in the back of his head? He might. He might know that, as a director I've done this enough. I know that that moment is covered in one form or another and that, in fact, this last take was not so important.

This dovetails with a general observation which I would call 'the penultimate take phenomenon', which is that if you shoot X number of takes, the best take is usually X minus one. Because if you think about the process of what's actually going on in any take, where we've got the camera set up and we're doing the script from here to here and we do take one, there are problems. We try to solve those problems and we do take two. We solved some of the problems, some we didn't solve. Take three is an attempt to solve those unsolved problems. Take four, the same problems of take one resurface for some reason. Take five is good. Take six, really good. If take five is good and take six is good, take seven must be really good. So let's shoot take seven. And what happens is, take seven isn't as good. It... Some chemistry... Something dissipated... What do you, as a director, do?
One response is to keep going. Take eight, still not good. Take nine, still not. Take ten, take 15, 16, take 17. Good! But you've done 17 takes now and somehow... Yes, there was a good one and then a falling off and then it got better and better and hopefully the last takes are even better than that other good take. If you don't have the time and patience for that, and Fred Zinnemann never shot 17 takes of anything, you say, on the seventh take, which to you is slightly disappointing, you say, good. Cut, print takes six and seven. Or maybe four, six and seven. If you say... Instead, if you said, 'Okay good, that was take seven... Cut, print take six', the actors will say, 'What was the matter with take seven? We can do better; let's keep going.' And so you don't want that to happen for schedule reasons. So, you say, 'Take seven is good', even though secretly you know it's falling off, but you say, 'Print it' to avoid a discussion. But secretly, the next-to-last take, which is the best one, is in fact the best.
So my editorial dowsing rod when I'm going through material, if the director has not indicated to me which are the preferred takes, I... The first place I would go is the next-to-last take for these psychological reasons. It's true, to a certain extent, with all directors, I've found. It's not just a peculiarity of Fred. This is just a human situation that arises out of the nature of that kind of fast-paced collaboration that has to happen on every movie set. It would be good, although probably impossible, if when you saw take six... As a director you would say, that's the good take and you said, cut, print take six. That's it. And that sometimes happens. Frequently though, you try to reach for the brass ring. If six was good, maybe seven will be even better, I hope.
But if you did say, 'Take six is good', that's potentially the most efficient way to work because what you have said to the actor implicitly is, 'Whatever you did in that take, which is the last take, that's what I like.' So now we're going to do the over-shoulder version of that and the actor now has take six in their head. 'I kind of remember what I did and I can recreate that.' But if the director says instead, 'Print takes four, six and seven, or God forbid, four, six, seven, 13 and 17', the actor has no way of knowing how to balance their performance. 'What did I do in take four that was different than take six? And 13, what was that? What are they going to do, the editors and the director, with all of those different takes? And so I then have to rely upon the director's guidance for this next take. I don't know... What am I going to match to? Is it take four or take six? What did I do in take four?'
Anyway, if you can be as decisive as a director... If you can be as decisive as possible and make a commitment, then on the set, that makes the actors realize what it is that you want. And because it's fresh in their memory, it's easier for them to recall it when you do subsequent setups of the same scene.

Of all the characters in Return to Oz: Jack Pumpkinhead, the Gump, Billina... They all had puppeteers and cables snaking around them which all had to be hidden from view of the camera. Tik-Tok was autonomous in the sense that he was like an ordinary actor who you could say, 'Walk from here to there' and he would do that, without any need to hide anything or cabling or anything because a certain percentage of him, his head and his eyes, was radio-controlled. So there were, in a sense, invisible wires controlling his blinking and his moustache and his... the rotating of his head.
But his physical movement was being controlled by a person who was actually inside Tik-Tok. Michael Sundin, who was the British trampoline champion of 1982 or something like that. He was not that short. He was short but not really short, Michael, but he had a low centre of gravity. He had a long torso and relatively short legs, which I think made him a trampoline champion. And that, for various reasons, was suitable to him being inside Tik-Tok and we tried many different people. And many that we tried ran screaming because they couldn't stand it. He had to put his legs into Tik-Tok's legs. The top of Tik-Tok would come off. From... his belt off... would come off. So there was just his lower half and his legs. Michael would put his legs into Tik-Tok's legs and then he would bend over, so that he was looking upside down through his legs. So, kind of a yoga position. And then he would take his arms and cross his arms this way. His hands would control the handles that controlled Tik-Tok's arms.
And Michael would be looking at a miniature video screen, radio controlled Wi-Fi essentially, 1984, which was receiving a transmission from a video camera that was mostly at right angles to where Tik-Tok was. And the video screen was upside down, of course, because Michael's head was upside down. His right arm was controlling Tik-Tok's left arm. His left arm was controlling Tik-Tok's right arm. And his understanding of where he was relative to the other actors was mediated through a small upside-down video screen from a camera at right angles to wherever he was. So he was not seeing what the film camera was seeing. He was seeing something to the side of that, with a much wider view. So, physically, he was contorted, and mentally, spatially, he was contorted because he had to process information from this third point of view and relate it to where he was, even though he was upside down, backwards and side by side. And the amazing thing is that he not only got very good at, he kind of enjoyed it after a while.
And, nonetheless, we – the production – had to be very careful about how long to let him in there, because there was no ventilation. And he was expending a lot of energy moving Tik-Tok, because it was an acrobatic act. And using up a lot of oxygen and creating a lot of heat, body heat. So, our limit was two and a half minutes. We would say, 'Michael, are you ready?' 'Yes.' Thunk. Then we'd put Tik-Tok on, Tik-Tok's top on top of Michael, screw it in and then Tik-Tok would be in the right position for the start of the scene. A stopwatch would start and action. The scene would transpire. And if the scene went longer than two and a half minutes, we had to stop and break the scene into bits so that Tik-Tok could... Michael and Tik-Tok could complete the scene without dying of suffocation or heat stroke.

On top of this, Michael had to coordinate his movements with Tim Rose, who was Tik-Tok's voice and puppeteer for Tik-Tok's head. So that Tik-Tok's... Where Tik-Tok was looking, whether Tik-Tok was blinking, whether Tik-Tok was moving his moustache, which was our proxy for speaking. Tik-Tok has no lips, he just has a moustache that moves up and down. 'Hello, little girl.'
So, Tim had to coordinate with Michael inside Tik-Tok, but Michael had to coordinate with Tim, even though Michael couldn't really see what Tim was doing because his only view was this wide, probably slightly fuzzy video image upside down inside Tik-Tok, in the dark. So, it's phenomenal that Tik-Tok was able to be embodied onscreen when you think of how complicated and almost inhuman the contortions have to be to make this seem like it's the most natural thing in the world. He got so good that he was... Michael was able to go upstairs and downstairs, to navigate these kind of perilous environments. As a director, of course I was thrilled to do this. I'd say, 'Fantastic, Michael, let's do it again.' 'And now can you do this?' So I would pile more and more achievements and to Michael's eternal credit, he rose to every occasion. l went in once to a rehearsal of Tik-Tok and, as you can imagine, this... We had to have Tik-Tok boot camp for about two months before we started shooting to allow Michael to come to terms with all of this problem.
And I walked on to the sound stage where these rehearsals were happening and I saw something that just astonished me and I wish I had been able to incorporate it somehow but I didn't, which was Michael was rehearsing without Tik-Tok's head. So there, if you can imagine Tik-Tok as this round ball with two legs sticking out of it. Under normal circumstances, Tik-Tok also had a head on top of the ball, which was another ball with a hat on it. For various reasons, the head was being worked on by Tim and so Michael wanted to rehearse, so he was rehearsing without the head. And the result was something completely, astonishingly inhuman. You looked at this and said, 'There's nobody in there. This is a creature that is somehow spontaneously doing what I'm seeing, but I don't understand how it's happening.' Because there was simply a ball and two legs and it was running around. It was only about this high and it was doing these amazing pirouettes. I mean, Michael was already very good at doing this. He was standing on one leg and on another leg and then twirling around and doing all of these balletic gyrations. And because of the missing head, it looked like... In fact, it looked like a head with two legs sticking out of it, running around. And if the story had been a different story, it would have been great to put a face on that ball and just say, 'This is a head with two legs and it's running around.' It's very Ozian. It's very easy to imagine Frank Baum dreaming up this kind of character and it being in a film.
But it was just one of those things that arrived too late in my consciousness to allow it to somehow be incorporated into the film. But if anyone wants to recreate that and you can find somebody... Unfortunately, Michael died a number of years ago. But if you want to recreate something like this, that has this hair-raising aspect to it, that's how you can do it.

After we finished THX [1138]... This was back in 1971. After we finished it, the film played at Cannes. Not in the main competition but in the sideshow. And after that, it had a run in Paris. And quite a long run actually in a theatre in Paris. And later on that summer I was back in San Francisco at Zoetrope working on, I guess, The Godfather. And we got a letter from Warner Bros., who were the studio behind THX, saying, 'We're being sued by a record company in Paris for copyright infringement, because they say you have stolen one of their squeaks from a record and how do answer this accusation, Mr Murch?' I saw my incipient career in film going down in flame because it was true.
I had fallen in love in the mid-fifties with musique concrète, and particularly with the work of Pierre Henry. And when I was working on the soundtrack for THX, there was a scene where the opening shot was of a machine that was sort of rotating, like a gyroscope but slowly. And the camera moved off of this to a scene between Robert Duvall and another character, Dom Pedro Colley, playing SRT. So THX and SRT were having a conversation in a confined space with this machine, surrounded, I think, by foetuses waiting to be born, or something like that.
So, my challenge, simple enough, was to come up with a sound for this little machine. And I decided, as a tribute, to use a squeak from the record Pierre Henry called Sonata for a Door and a Sigh, or Concerto for Door and a Sigh, something like that. It will come to me in a second. And this short clip on the record consisted of a barn door somewhere in Normandy being opened and closed with a rusty hinge interspersed with a woman sighing kind of languorously [imitates sigh and squeak] for five minutes. And I chose one of the squeaks, being particularly a good one, a nice juicy squeak, and transferred it to film and then made a loop, a physical loop out of that piece of magnetic film, put it in the Moviola, this machine that played the loop and then I transferred that sound onto a long strip of magnetic film. And so what was on that new piece of film was simply [imitates squeaking sounds]. And I took that film and synced that looped sound up with this machine, which was doing this, so [imitates squeaking sounds] got in the film.

Fade out, fade in a year later and somewhere in Paris the film is being screened and Pierre Henry, I guess, had been told he should go see this film because it had an interesting soundtrack. And he went to it and halfway through the film must have stood up and said, 'That's my squeak!' And he relayed this information to his record company and they wrote to Warner Bros. and complained. And that is probably the first sampling lawsuit ever in the history of motion pictures and media. Because that's exactly what it was. It was using ancient technology, LP records and Moviolas and magnetic film physically buckled into a loop, transferred to a long strip of 35mm film. But it is a sample. I made a sample and I chose that sample and then looped it and repeated it over and over again and put it in the film.
The story has a happy ending because I'm here telling you about it and I've continued to work in film. And I don't know the particulars of how this was settled. It was settled at some corporate level, but the gist of the interpretation was that I had... In doing what I had done, which I admitted doing, I had changed the context of the sound and the sound itself was so brief, that there was not a full basis for the lawsuit in a formal way. As far as... It could have been that some money was... changed hands to say sorry that we did this. But I never knew about that or had anything to do with it. It was a fire alarm problem for me because I felt very guilty about it, but it eventually went away. And I wrote a letter to Pierre Henry saying that I was very sorry for using it, but I intended it as a tribute to his huge influence upon me as a fellow sound artist.
[Q] That's great. Is it still in the film?
Yes, yes.

I remember reading a review the moment that Return to Oz came out. And it was in USA Today, which is a big, popular newspaper, certainly at the time. And it was a very good review by Mike Clark. Thank you, Mike. And I thought, 'It's going to work, great.'
And then, an hour after I saw the review of Siskel and Ebert, who were the two TV reviewers, who danced on the grave of the film, with tom toms and shuttlecocks. And just... They hated the film. And they wanted everyone else to hate it. And they would trade barbs about how bad the film was, and showed excerpts from the film. And then, showed excerpts from The Wizard of Oz, which was the first film. And said, 'This is how the film should have been made, not this way.'
So I felt the floor open up beneath me because I knew that that was going to carry the day. I don't know why I knew that. But there was something about the virulence of it that totally caught me off guard because the film was not made with anything like what they were ascribing to it.
And yet, in the irrationality of the reviewing process, I guess, you can't second guess the reviewer. And that's what they say. And in fact that was the brush that tarred the film that it was an overly dour and frightening film for children. And that I was some kind of molester of children because of the film, the screaming kids leaving the theatre. And it was a crisis of a kind because I had ultimately enjoyed working on the film, despite the being fired from it in the middle, and the difficulties in making any film. I thought I learned a lot on this film. And I wanted to then apply what I had learned to directing other films. And I had a number of ideas in the pipeline, my pipeline.
But the lack of commercial success of the film because it did not do financially well... And it was an expensive film. And it was a very high profile film because it was daring to make a sequel to a film that was even more than a film, The Wizard of Oz is, or had become a cultural icon that by which America almost defined itself. There are so many references to that film in popular culture that this seemed... This film, Return to Oz, seemed insanely malevolent from that point of view.

And what was I going to do next? And I clearly had to think about it because I hadn't anticipated quite such a critical and commercial flop as this. And in the interstices of that I was asked by George Lucas to come in and help to take over a film that he was making with Francis [Ford] Coppola. Both of whom had supported me throughout my career, but particularly on Return to Oz, when I had been fired. They came to keep me on the film.
So naturally, I said, 'Of course, I will do this.' And this was the film, Captain EO, with Michael Jackson. And it is a science fiction film made for Disney. The same people who had made Return to Oz. 20 minutes long, and it was a three-dimensional film as a kind of a ride, an experience. They were dubbing it 4D, meaning not only was it optically in 3D, but there were special effects in the theatre, explosions and lights going off. So that it was to use a phrase that had not yet become current, it was a very immersive experience.
And for a while – I think, it's been surpassed – but for a while, minute by minute, it was the most expensive film ever made. For 20 minutes, and it cost $20 million, I forget. But $1 million a minute. At that time, in that budget, I don't know what the math would be today. And I got out of that three or four experiences, learning experiences. Working with 3D – that was the first and only time that I had worked on 3D. And I not only edited the film, but also directed some second unit stuff. So you're looking at somebody who has a fairly unique experience of directing Michael Jackson in a 3D 70 mm scene.

I remember he had only one question to ask me as a director, which is, 'Where do I look?' It was a musical... We were shooting one of the big musical numbers. And he knew exactly what he was going to do, and there as nobody to gainsay what he was about to do, certainly not me. But his question to me as the director is, 'Where's my eye line?' And I gave him an eye line, and he took off.
Francis had told me, 'It's sometimes hard to get Michael out of his dressing room. And if that happens, here's what you do. You try the usual techniques, five minutes. When ultimately that doesn't work, you address him as Captain EO. You say: Captain EO, your ship is about to take off.' And that's what happened. He wouldn't come out of his dressing room. He was playing with trains or something, or making the deal to steal The Beatles' catalogue, which was going on at the same time, or outbidding Paul McCartney for The Beatles' catalogue. And so I said, 'Captain EO, your ship is about to take off.' And boom, he came out of the door dressed up in costume and ready to go.

I also remember, I was editing on a KEM, this was pre-digital editing. And Michael was sitting behind me with his two bodyguards, looking at the film. And I felt a slight pressure on my back.  And I turned around and Michael was wearing his surgical mask, and a hat, and dark glasses. And he laughed. I didn't think anything more about it. And then, I felt the pressure again. And turned around, and then thought, I wonder... And I reached around, and sure enough there was a piece of paper taped to my back. And I pulled it out. And it said, in Michael's handwriting, 'Kick my butt', which he found very funny, and I found funny. I wish I had kept that piece of paper. I wish he had signed that piece of paper, and I'd kept that piece of paper because it would be worth a certain amount of money today.
But it put into sharp relief the kind of person that he seemed to be, which is a very astute business man. Because at the same time that he was writing 'Kick my butt', and putting it on his editor's back, he was also making the deal to bid $60 million for The Beatles' catalogue, outbidding Paul McCartney by $30 million, or something.
After having asked Paul, disingenuously, in retrospect, he said, 'Paul, I'm such a mess. You guys have your act together. What's the secret?' 'Well, Michael', said Paul, 'the thing is don't lose your catalogue. We made the mistake of losing our catalogue. And we're now trying to buy it back.' 'Oh, really, how much are you paying?' '$30 million.' '$30 million that's... oh my God.' 'Yes, so keep in mind, Michael. Don't lose your catalogue.' 'Thank you, Paul.' I'm inventing dialogue here, but essentially, the door closes. And Michael gets on the phone, give the bid of $60 million for the catalogue. So at the same time that they were doing Ebony and Ivory, and playing together, there was this other thing going on in the background. So the most hard headed kind of business aspect. And yet, ten-year-old behaviour, he said, 'Kick my butt.' And he was, I think, a child who was never allowed to grow up, the whole Peter Pan syndrome. But also, and simultaneously, he was an adult that never had a childhood. He was plunged at age four or five, however when he started singing, into a world of really adult shenanigans, and values, and everything. And so the Peter Pan aspect of him was an attempt, probably, to claw back some of the childhood that his life had never allowed him to have. And in dealing with him, you saw both aspects of this flickering back and forth.

The other fascinating thing about that film was working in three dimensions. The way we did it back then, which is still the way we do it today is, you don't edit in 3D all the time. You edit in 2D. And then, at certain intervals, you will say, 'All right, let's watch it in 3D, and see if we made any mistakes', because you can make mistakes, not only editorial mistakes, but mistakes in the translation from 2D to 3D. And so all week we would edit in 2D, using one of the sets of work print, what we called 'the left eye work print.' Over there was a rack of film, which was the right eye, which was the same material, but seen from the other lens of this 70 mm monster that we were shooting with. And my assistants would conform the right eye to the left eye.
And then, on Friday we would screen what he had looked at. And I noticed a curious phenomenon, which was that material that looked perfectly fine in 2D would not look fine in 3D because of  the lateral displacement of the image. Say, Michael Jackson doing 'moonwalk' left to right, would look in two dimensions, perfectly smooth. When you looked at in in three dimensions, it was in three dimensions. But all of a sudden it stuttered, so that it was a version of the thing you see in Western movies with the spokes of the wagon wheel going backwards. There was some threshold that was being exceeded in three dimensions that was perfectly fine in two dimensions.
What that is, I think, is the fact that in three dimensions your brain has to pay particular attention to the edges of things, to line them up correctly, so that the three dimensional illusion takes place. In two dimensions, yes, you see the edges of things. But your brain is not obsessively concerned with the edges of things. It is in three dimensions, and as a result, the stuttering effect that I'm talking about, which is there in two dimensions, but it's kind of ignored by the brain – suddenly that looms up as a problem. And this was what caused Peter Jackson to shoot the Hobbit films in 48 frames.
It's an acknowledged problem, this stuttering issue. And so he [Peter Jackson] hoped, in fact, and did overcome much of this by shooting at an advanced frame rate. So that the brain is being supplied with more information, so that it doesn't have to obsess so much about the edges of things. I'm simplifying a little bit. But that's essentially the problem. The 48 frames, of course, brings along another set of problems, which is that the image has even more clarity to it.
And if you're not careful, those films are criticised, as the Hobbit films were criticised for looking like actors in costumes on a set, rather than the characters in a world. And that gets at a very interesting flex point between reality and illusion that when we watch a film, we project onto the film what we want it to be, until the information from the film tells us that we've gone too far, or that that doesn't work. And in a sense, shooting at 24 frames a second, or 25, or whatever the system is that we use, Europe and America are different... Supplies a certain amount of information, but not too much. And that lowering of information allows the projection of: I want to believe this is Frodo there, not an actor in Frodo costume on a set. And as long as there isn't too much information, I can receive it. So this is partly one's concern in making a film.

At the time, sometime in the late 1980s, after working on Captain EO, I was editing a Showscan film, which is another kind of super, not 70 mm 3D, but 70 mm at 60 frames a second. And Dougie Slocombe, the cinematographer I had worked with on Julia, was a friend of the producers. And he came by to see what this was. And it was great to see him again. And I showed him the film. And I showed him how we were working with it. And he said, in his inimitable way, that if anything, we have a problem in 35 mm with things being too sharp. We're always trying to add a little smoke, or a little diffusion, or putting gauze over the lens. We rarely are saying, 'I wish this was sharper because of exactly this illusion that I'm talking about.' You don't want it to be too realistic, to see every pore on the skin, and all of these other things.  And that was his observation about what we were doing with this Showscan film, and by implication, IMAX films, and certainly by implication, you know, 8K 3D films. That there is a limit, which we are pushing against, of things being visually too precise. Because it starts to inhibit this ability to project the yearnings of the audience for whatever it might be onto the film itself.

Captain EO occupied probably about five months to get it to some point where the visual effects department then took over. And I went back to writing a screenplay. I was hoping to finish a screenplay that I had started before Return to Oz.
It was a screenplay based on Egypt and archaeology. It was a kind of intellectual mummy film that investigated the possibility of an afterlife, and what would that be? And is it true, or does it seem to be true, or what? And I got that with Gill Dennis, who was my co-writer on Return to Oz. We got that to a certain point. And then, I ran out of money. And I had kids going to college, and other things.
So I linked up, thankfully, with Phil Kaufman. And we worked together, him directing Unbearable Lightness of Being, and me, editing the film. And it's based on a novel by Milan Kundera, about the events leading up to and after the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, as it was then in 1968. Fascinating subject matter that involved a considerable amount of archival material. Because one of the conceits of the film was that in the middle, we would actually see the invasion the way it was photographed at the time.

It was a wonderful story of Frank Daniel, who later became the head of the Columbia (University) Film School in New York. He was then the head of the film school in Prague. And when the tanks started rumbling through in August of 1968, the film students at the school woke up, and went home, which is to say to film school, which is where they spent most of their time. And Frank was there.
And he said, 'We don't know what's happening. But for all we know this could be the beginning of World War III. Something is going on.' And he unlocked the equipment room, and started handing out 16 mm cameras and raw stock, which were normally kept very carefully under locks. But he started handing them out to whoever film students were around. And said, 'Just go out there and film it.' And this was the beginning of what now you see every night when you watch the news. Basically, let's call it 'the democratisation of on-the-spot recording.' People with iPhones, they're in Syria filming these events. And that had happened to a limited degree in Hungary in the mid- '50s. But very little in comparison with what was now possible because of... We weren't yet in digital, but everything had gotten relatively inexpensive and lightweight. And you could go out with cameras and shoot stuff that would have been very difficult 10 years earlier. So dozens of film students were out there filming this material. And they were telling the passers-by, as soon as they had finished a roll of film... They would wrap it up and find somebody who was leaving Czechoslovakia, a tourist, and say, 'Where are you going?' 'Stockholm.' 'Take this, and as soon as you get to Stockholm, give it to Svenska Television.'
And so this was happening in Brussels, Stockholm, and Rome, and London. It was as if there was an explosion of film that was coming from Prague, and going everywhere else in the world. And that was what you saw on the news the next day about these events.

And meanwhile, Milan Kundera was busy writing his novel. And then, I think a couple of years later, he was ejected out of Czechoslovakia. The earth goes around the sun 20 times, and Jean Claude Carrière and Phil Kaufman write a screenplay based on the novel, and Saul Zaentz produces it. And now, in Lyon, in 1986, so not quite 20 years, we are shooting this invasion again, using Soviet tanks that somehow materialised. And 200 extras dressed as if they were Czechoslovakian in the central area, the old town of Lyon, which looks remarkably like Prague, if you're careful about your angles. And the idea was to interleave this new footage with Daniel Day-Lewis, and Juliette Binoche, and Lena Olin with archival material. And it was all carefully storyboarded, so that we knew the footage that we had.
And we knew the archival footage. And we knew, well, if we have that angle, then we can shoot an angle like this, which is seemingly the reverse of that angle. And now we can have our actors in it. So we had tried, as an idea, to think about, let's call it 'the Zelig approach', which is: digitally insert your actors into an existing. But this was 1986, very, very early in digital technology. And you could do it. But it was very time consuming, expensive, and cumbersome. So we won't do that. We'll just rely on intercutting to create this illusion. And that meant a scouring of the world for all of this footage.
So I followed on the heels of Peter Kaufman, Phil's son, who had done a lot of the research. I then went to Stockholm, and London, and Amsterdam, and some other cities, asking them, 'Do you have any footage from…' 'Yes, we do.' 'Can I look at it?' 'Oh, this is good. Can you give me prints of this material?' So we would get dupes of this material. And then, figure out a way to technically give them the resources that existed at that time, 30 years ago, to degrade our new image shot by Sven Nykvist, beautiful 35 mm film, with the old images. And we did it.
And it looks convincing to me, even today. I look at the film, and yes, I believe that. But it was, by our standards today, very complicated pieces of doing certain things in the lab that increased the contrast, and popped the density, or increased the grain, or decreased the grain. Or diffused the colour, and reduced it from 35 to 16 mm, and then, okay, I think that works.

And by the time we were halfway through the film we had gotten pretty good at estimating what it would take, laboratory-wise to do it. But it was one of those very complicated things. Again, by today's standards, it's almost but not quite, you just push a button, and you've got what you want. And then, you can tweak it right there. This took probably a week to figure it out, and then, to see the results. And then, you might have to change it again.
So the overview of this is that a political event happened that caused and explosion of material that also caused a novel to be written. And the novel acted like a gravitational force that then pulled information back that caused this screenplay to be written that caused a movie to be shot. That caused these pieces of film that had been splatted out into the universe to be pulled back again into a single thing. And I had the luxury then, of looking at coverage of an event, a tank smashing into a bus, covered from three different angles, shot simultaneously by students. And I could see the other cameras shooting. And I knew what was in that camera because it was this piece of film. So I had a tremendous amount of material to work with. And the aesthetic problem was to make that sequence work on its own. And then, to try to figure out a way, which was partly in the screenplay… The danger of that is that scene just kind of sticks like an undigested something in the middle of an otherwise beautifully shot Sven Nykvist's film. How to get into that, and then, get through it, and then, pop out at the other end?
And what I'm going to mention now is simply the kind of back and forth that happens between an engaged editor, in my case, and the film. Phil gives me the screenplay. And says, 'What do you think, any ideas welcome.' And the getting into the scene was done via a slow shift to black and white, over a tank approaching. So you're looking at a tank shot by Sven coming. And the image degrades as you look at it. And then, suddenly you're in the other world of black and white archival footage. The question was how to get out of it. And the idea that occurred to me that I suggested, which is in the film, is have an exchange at the end of the scene between Juliette, who is photographing a Russian tank commander telling her to stop, 'Don't photograph me. Иди! [Go!]', he's saying in Russian. And she keeps laughing and photographing him. And you alternate between her kind of ecstatically taking photographs, and him shouting, 'Go! Go!' And then, suddenly that image freezes, and turns black and white from colour. And then, that is a photograph that is taken away. And you see the face of a Russian interrogator, who has been holding the photograph up as evidence of Juliette's incorrect behaviour during the thing. So it was a flourish way of handing off from the archival material, freeze frame, photograph as a physical object pulled away from the camera. And now you're looking at the lens. So a happy resolution to a particular problem for that sort of structure in the film.

There was a curious chemistry, wonderful, between Juliette Binoche and Daniel Day-Lewis on Unbearable Lightness of Being because this was the first English language film that she had acted in. Daniel, obviously, had done wonderful English language work before this. But watching the dailies of the film, Unbearable, it was as if Daniel had figured out what he was going to do. And that was it. What the reality of this was, I don't know. But this was the impression watching the dailies: that he had fantastic control, and almost an autonomous way of... On the exact same syllable, he would touch the glass, and pick it up. And the head would turn at exactly the same angle from take to take.
And you could tell that Phil [Kaufman]... I could tell that Phil wanted to change certain things. But it was like changing the direction of the Titanic going 20 knots an hour. Just with great effort you can kind of move it. And over the course of seven takes, Daniel's performance would shift. But there was considerable inertia, in a good sense, in his performance. That's not always what editors want to see. I think there's probably an assumption on actor's parts. And I don't know that this is the case with Daniel. But I think if you asked actors about editors, if they focused on us, they would assume that we want great continuity.
In fact, we don't want great continuity. We don't want you to touch the glass at exactly the same moment. We want a little, and I would hesitate to quantify that little, but let's say 12%. We want a little slop in there, so that we can extend the moment, so that we aren't... If every take is the same, then it's as if we only shot one take. So we want slight variations in delivery, and performance, and everything. Inevitably, there is this.
But it was remarkable with Daniel, how little of this there was, particularly compared to Juliette, who was 180 degrees different. There would be some shots, where I was convinced that between take 3 and take 4 Juliette had disappeared. And they had gotten her cousin to come in and act for her, and hoping that we wouldn't notice the difference. Because she was so different, not only her performance was different, but her physicality was different. And I thought, 'How is this going to...' This was exactly the opposite problem from Daniel. In one take she would be angry, but ironic. In the next take she would be completely confused angry. In the next take she would be blubberingly sad angry. And the remarkable thing, which is a testament to her personality, and her acting is that you could intercut those different takes. You had to be careful about it. But her performance was...  It was as if you were listening to a very talented pianist playing Bach, who said, 'Here's Bach. Now here's the same piece of music as if Mendelssohn wrote it.' And suddenly you're listening to Bach, but oh, yes, it sounds like Mendelssohn. How could you do that, and now, Ravel, and now Prokofiev. And as a result, fundamentally it was Bach.
So fundamentally her performance was rooted in the character. But it was 'mercurial', I guess is the word that you would use. And that was fantastic for an editor because you would say, 'I think we need a little irony here. Oh yes, that's take 6.' And the miraculous thing is that it didn't make you think, 'What? What's going on here?' So you can imagine the challenges working with these two different pieces of wood.  It was like, one performance is solid oak. And the other one is balsa wood. I don't mean to quantify those. But okay, make a piece of furniture out of these two things. They're so different. And yet, each of them has fantastically valuable characteristics.

I was working on a film a couple of years later, Ghost, directed by Jerry Zucker, where I saw the same phenomenon happening. This was really a three-part, a triple-hander with Patrick Swayze, and Demi Moore, and Whoopi Goldberg. And Whoopi, in dailies, I thought, 'Well, this is just like Juliette because each take was so different.' And yet, and I can't explain why, but with Whoopi you couldn't intercut those different things. Ultimately, you had to say, 'I think take 6 is the one that we're going to use.' And you had to use, for that scene, you had to use all of take 6. And you couldn't use take 4 because it was too different. And I wish I could quantify that.
And by the same token, I wish I could quantify what Juliette was doing. But it was an interesting challenge from an editorial point of view to be presented with something that in dailies looked to be like the same issue. And yet, to find out that in fact, it was quite different. The challenges of that film, which I think the script pulled off marvellously, and the directing, obviously, even more so, is that it managed uniquely, in my knowledge of film, of combining three elements that don't usually go together so well. Which is laughter – it's funny, and very funny in places – and screams, to be terrifying, and tears, to be sentimental. So it's both sentimental, and frightening, and funny. And the shifts from one to the other are extremely rapid. And usually if a film tries to do that, it's like a car taking a corner too fast. You spin out, and the film is criticised for being inconsistent that it can't... Stylistically incoherent. 'What does it want to be?' And yet, if you look at this film, it is that. The experience of watching the film, which I think is part of its charm, is that it's as if you're in a car going 80 miles an hour toward a right angle curve on a mountain road. And you don't lose traction. You go from fear, to laughter, to sentimental stuff without being thrown out of the car.
And, you know, the film was a big hit. In fact, if I look at all the films that I have worked on, it's probably the biggest hit of any of the films that I have ever been associated with financially. It made, I forget, you know, in today's dollars, certainly well over $400 million domestically, and internationally, close to a billion. And particularly popular in, so Jerry tells me, in the Far East because it's playing with the idea of reincarnation, and karma, and the afterlife, which I was particularly interested in because of the screenplay that I was writing, which was one of the things that attracted me to the film. And it also allowed me... When it's being funny it's, I think, the clearest funny film that I have worked on. So to edit comedy is a particular... You have to approach it in a particular way, rhythm. Telling a good joke is 80% or more about the rhythm with which you tell the joke, and how you pay it off. And editorially, there are very similar kinds of things that have to be taken into consideration as you do it. So I really enjoyed it. And I enjoyed working with Jerry very much.

We worked together again, a number of years later on a film, First Knight, with Sean Connery and Richard Gere, which is a reinvention of the Arthurian legend. It was a wonderful film, but not financially or critically successful. There are probably many diffuse reasons for that. I mean, it did fine. But it wasn't the hit that Ghost was, for certain. It was not a funny film. It had some quirky moments in it.
But Jerry, who had written and directed Airplane!, which is a very, very funny film, and many other films like that. And Ghost had this funniness to it, the Zucker touch, but also ventured into these other realms. First Knight was not that. And maybe people didn't know how to take that. And it's a fabulous evocation of Arthurian legend. It's not like Excalibur, which had come out a few years earlier, John Boorman's film. It wasn't down and dirty Arthurian stuff, which you can also do, and probably would fit the sensibility of the time more. This was kind of more like old Hollywood extravaganza. I think there was a problem in the casting of it, which illustrative of the problem, which is, do we believe that Richard Gere, who specialised in kind of suave, modern urbanity. Do we believe that he is Lancelot? It's a stretch, and especially in a film with Sean Connery.
But I remember, you know, I would be getting various drafts of the screenplay, and talking to Jerry about the progress. And initially, King Arthur was not a featured part of the story. It was really focused on Lancelot. And there were certain casting ideas that came along with that. And then, through some piece of Hollywood prestidigitation, Sean Connery was suddenly… He let it be known that he was available, or something. And he became King Arthur.

Now, with Sean Connery as King Arthur, the budget has changed. And it's a different kind of film. So we need a star to be Lancelot. And at any one time, for a film of a certain budget, within a certain category of film, you have fairly limited: who can we get? Bankable stars, and you have to deal with, do they want to do this project? Can you afford them? And are they available? And that narrows the field even more. And eventually, it came down to Richard Gere. And I remember where I was standing when Jerry Zucker phoned me and said, 'Great news, we cast Richard Gere as Lancelot.' And I suddenly thought, 'No, don't do it.' And I said, 'Don't do it.' 'Why, what?' And I said, 'Because he's so urban, and modern that I just can't see it.' And he said, 'Well, remember, Walter, that's what you said about Patrick Swayze in Ghost.' And in fact, I did say that. And I said, 'Yes, you're right.' And he said, 'It worked with Patrick.' I said, 'Yes.' So he said, 'Trust me, it'll work. And Richard Gere, he loves the screenplay. He wants to really do it. You know, he's at an age where this is the last... He feels he won't be able to do anymore athletic kind of things. And he really wants to do it.' And so it happened. But in hindsight, probably the chemistry of all of that was, I don't know, too much of a stretch. To say, here is an American, who is known for urban, modern, Pretty Woman type stuff as Lancelot, an English medieval person.
But Hollywood is, you know, it's the world of... I use Hollywood in a generic sense. Movies are all about these improbable illusions that somehow coalesce if everything is positioned right. You can ignore the most amazing sort of contradictions. And yet, not only still enjoy it, but enjoy it almost because of the contradictions. I mean, the casting of Ghost is a good example, in that at that time, Patrick Swayze, and Demi Moore, and Whoopi Goldberg were kind of in the world of sort of B Level movie stars, and popular, and sort of trashy in the best sense of that word. And yet because of the similar weight of them all, they worked together great.
And filmmaking, as many arts, are all about the internal balance of the work, not exactly what you make it. But what is the pattern that unites these things, rather than the things themselves. We respond to the pattern of things, which so they tell me is one of the definitions of life itself... That we are a pattern of organisation, rather than the individual things that make us up. And if a film can achieve that kind of balance, then it has a chance of working, despite the fact that you look at it and say, 'Wait a minute. What are the ingredients here?' It's like, similar to cooking. I mean, you can make something that's really tasty out of stuff that, if you looked at the individual elements, you would say, 'I don't know that that's going to work.'

A great example of that, though... I think the best example of it is the casting of [The] Godfather I. And aside from Marlon Brando, nobody is a known actor in that film, at the time. You know, some of them had been around. Al Pacino had been in one previous film, I think, maybe two. But John Cazale, James Caan, Robert Duvall was slightly more well known, but definitely not well, well known.
I remember thinking at the time that this was a fascinating example of what you might call horizontal and vertical casting. What I mean by that is, horizontal casting is, here's the book, Godfather. There's a description of Michael. Who can we get that fits that description? Well, as it turns out, Robert Redford is a pretty good example of what that person looks like. The Normans invaded Sicily around 1200. And so the Vikings basically conquered Sicily, and ruled Sicily for many years. And so there is an infusion of Nordic blood in Sicily that doesn't exist elsewhere. And so you get these sorts of people who don't look 'Sicilian' in Sicily. And so the idea was... Mario Puzo's idea was Michael was one of those people, so okay: Redford, check.
So if you think of the original person in the novel as the hand controlling the strings that is the puppet of the actor. Yes, there's a direct vertical alignment between Michael in the book, and Robert Redford. On the other hand, if you think horizontally, what are the relationships between the actors? And by implication, the relationship in Ghost between those three actors was, you could kind of see it. With Godfather, Marlon Brando had exploded on the New York stage in the late 1940s in Streetcar Named Desire. And then, had left for Hollywood, leaving a vacuum behind. And that vacuum was filled by young actors who wanted to be Marlon Brando. Among them, Al Pacino, John Cazale, Robert Duvall, James Caan, who were all New York actors, who decided to become actors in the 1950s after Marlon had left. So in a sense, each of them in their careers was reinterpreting Marlon as best they could. James Caan is the tough, brutal Marlon Brando. Al Pacino is the thoughtful, intellectual Brando. John Cazale is the sentimental, weak Brando. So if you cast Marlon Brando and these four actors as brothers, and put them at a table, the dynamics immediately resemble the dynamics of the book. Brando is the Godfather to these four brothers, who are all brothers in acting. And they're each interpreting 'dad' the best way they can. And sort of trying to nudge each other to show, I can do it better in my own way. So it didn't matter whether the cameras were turning or not, everybody was profoundly in character on that film. And you can feel it that there isn't a struggle to say, 'Yes, I think kind of that is how, yes, okay, I believe it, yes.'

And it was the genius of Francis [Ford Coppola], who went to the wall to get that particular casting, which is very risky because Brando was supposedly box office poison at that time. He'd had a series of flops. Not many, but enough to convince Hollywood that he was not bankable anymore. And he was difficult, which is even worse than being not bankable. And these other guys were, who are they? You know, we want Robert Redford. The original casting that the studio wanted was Robert Redford as Michael, and Laurence Olivier as the Godfather. And Francis turned it down. 'What, you mean, you're going to turn down the chance to work with the greatest actor in the world, and the biggest star in the world?' 'Yes, he's not right for the film.' The studio gets mad, but eventually Francis, just by power of his... You know, he has a sort of Godfather-y, Jedi mind trick of being able to convince people that this is the best idea.
And the success of the film is testament to that. But if you think of, you know, it's hard, but imagine the film with Laurence Olivier and Robert Redford. They're not part of the same... The dynamic between them is very different. Laurence Olivier is a great actor, but he's a classically trained British actor playing an Italian mobster. 'Okay, I think I can.' But Robert Redford, who is a talented actor, and a star, and, 'Okay, I think, maybe, I hope.' And a lot of films are made on that hope. I hope it will work because on paper it looks great, they're bankable, great people. But it's all about the internal chemistry of it.

The other side product, which I think is even additionally powerful, is the fact that you see, in the film, you see Al Pacino become a star. At the beginning of the film, you know, you have to go back to 1973 to... to imagine this. But at the beginning: 'Who is this guy? Michael, what?' You watch the film, and over the course of the film, at the end, you are convinced that he is the new Godfather. And here's a movie star. This guy has 'it', whatever that is. But that's exactly what happens in the story. Michael, who is the... Not the nobody, but the one member of the family who is not going to become part of this family. He becomes the head of the family. And so he emerges in the story, from let's say, nobody, to the king. The reluctant prince becomes the king at the end. And that's what happens with Al Pacino.
Now, if it's Robert Redford, he doesn't look Italian. And you have to think intellectually, oh, yes, if you know there are some people in Sicily who don't look Sicilian. But very few people know that. And he's already a star. So for him to say, 'I'm not part of this.' 'You're already a star. What are you talking about?' You know, it's only convincing when you don't know that person.
So it's now, when we look at the film, this is 40 years later or more, none of that is obvious. But if you have to go back to the time, and imagine the world the way it was back in the early 1970s, all of these things are firing on all cylinders simultaneously. So it's this tapestry, really, of threads coming from above, the vertical casting. And then, the horizontal casting, and if you get it right, these threads bind together in a very strong and colourful way, the way the threads of a tapestry do. And you know, they look great, and they're strong. And they take whatever abuse you can hurl at them. They kind of bounce back. And it's a goal, I think, to which all films aspire. And yet, very few totally achieve it. That's not to discount the ones that don't achieve it because most films don't.

Most films, there is a slight problem with the casting. It's not quite right, but we so want to believe that we will go along with it. And there's a value to be gotten out of that tension. It frequently reminds me of... imagine a string quartet going to perform. And they're invited on stage. And they come up on stage. And as they come up on stage, the sheet music falls. And they quickly pick up the sheet music and sit down. And now they realise, 'Uh oh, I'm the cello, but I picked up the violin's part.' And the violin picked up the viola's part. And the viola picked up the second... Everyone is mixed up. But we have to go, you know? It's a thought experiment. And now, you can do it. If you're a talented string player, if you're playing the cello, you can transpose the violin into your range. But if the piece of music was written well, the composer took the strengths of the cello, and made the cello take advantage of those strengths.
And the same thing applies to the other instruments. Now the cello is interpreting the violin's part, as if it's the cello. And so there's a tension there that can fail completely. You can listen to that music and say, 'This is terrible. Why does it sound...?' Well, let me tell you, they dropped the music. So that's like bad casting. On the other hand, if the casting is not completely bad, and it's a certain kind of film that tension actually can produce interesting things... I didn't think it would work as well as it did.
But it really... There's something magical that happens because the cello's playing the violin's part. And the violin is playing the viola's part. And the viola's playing the cello's part. But you know, the composer would be horrified. As writers of films frequently are horrified when they watch films made of their work. But for an innocent, it's like, 'Oh, it's kind of interesting, you know?'
And that's one of the things that you have to accustom yourself to in films is taking advantage of the imperfections that happen because very rarely is everything perfect. You're always struggling with slight, 'I didn't think the weather would be cloudy this day.' 'Well, it's cloudy, so we're going to do it anyway. And maybe we can take advantage of that somehow. We'll find out.' So you're taking these leaps of faith. And casting is one of them. It's the most like nitro-glycerine, bad casting can sink a film. There's no question that if it's wrong, the film will not work, no matter how well everything else is done.
But that also, in the making of a film, can affect the process of the film because everyone is aware subconsciously or not that, you know, this isn't really working. And so their effort becomes compromised. 'Should I really take the extra 15 minutes to light this scene this way?' I'm exaggerating here. But improper casting can compound the problems in the making of the film, let alone the reception of the film when it's shown.

Stardom, if you could bottle it, you would make a fortune. But it's a very elusive quality, and very hard to predict. It's like that definition of pornography, you know, I don't know what it is. But I know it when I see it. Somehow you know it when you see that. And I think it has to do with the phenomenon that I'll call 'the red-haired prince', which is, if you read a novel, let's say, you are free to project onto that character things that the author would be surprised that you are projecting on. But they come from you, so you just... 'Oh, yes, that's like my cousin, Frank.' And so you think, 'Oh, that's like Frank.' And that kind of works for you. That person reading the novel doesn't... Sees something completely different.
And, let's say, to define a star, first of all they have to be good actors. They don't have to be great actors, technically. But they have to be good. Let's say, rather than define what a star is, let's define what a character actor is. And they are actors who are definitely who they are. That they're a particular kind of person, with a particular kind of face, and a particular approach to the world. And if you want that quality in your film, you say, 'Get me Chris because that's who that person is.' And when Chris comes in, the audience – and this happens in theatre, as well as film – they go, 'Oh, yes, I like this guy. And I know what he's going to do, sort of. And he's going to deliver it. And he's good at it. But he's very particularly who he is.' Whereas, a star is somebody who is that, but also allows the audience to project their hopes and dreams from inside onto that person. So they are capable of receiving the imprint of the audience, and amplifying it in a way that character actors are not.
Character actors put out. They beam a certain frequency at you. And you receive it. Whereas, stars allow you to beam into them, and kind of become them, in a sense. So you want a prince, who is princely, but not specifically red-haired prince. And I'm talking metaphorically here, rather than real. You want specific indicators, but not too specific. And a certain chemistry between physiognomy and the lens also works... That they are handsome, or interesting looking, but not too handsome, not too particular. And again, it gets into a psychological twilight zone. But I think the key to it is that ability, in spite of even some evidence that this character will receive whatever you want to project on them, they will receive it, and amplify it. And so in a sense, they become you, or become some aspect of you in the film, which the opposite of that is true in a character actor. They are beaming themselves to you. And you enjoy it. But they're not, as they say of a star: 'Can he carry a film?', or she, 'Can they carry a film?' And I think that vague phrase, what they're talking about is, will they allow the audience to project onto them willingly? And make the character hover somewhere in the interspace between what's on the screen, and what's in the audience's heart?
And it's a delicate thing that can go wrong. People can become stars, and then, not become stars. And this can devastate audiences. It can devastate the stars.

I was reading last night about Alan Ladd's life. And I mean, from what I know, it's kind of a tragic situation. He was able to achieve that moment. He never thought of himself as a great actor. You know, 'I'm not a good actor', he kept saying. And yet, something about him, the way he presented himself on screen, and the roles that he took, particularly in the '40s and early '50s, were right at that balance point that allowed somebody who was a good, but not a great actor. And for him that was a devastating thing of insecurity that gnawed away at him. And ultimately, there were shifts in public tastes, and shifts in the way the film industry worked that caused Alan Ladd to get side-tracked into a series of films that did not work. And the result was his early death under ambiguous barbiturate, alcohol circumstances sometime in the early 1960s, I think. But for a while, he was the biggest star in the world, in the late '40s, I think, Alan Ladd. And there was a tremendous tension there between what he was and what people projected onto him. But the key thing is that he was an actor who somehow at that time, given the films that were being made, the kind of films... That thing snapped into place, and that projection happened.
And the great thing about [The] Godfather, just to touch base with that again, is that the film itself is the story of the emergence of a personality, Don Corleone from somewhere to somewhere else. And you see it in the film. And that's paralleled in the emergence of Al Pacino as a star. He went into that film not a star. And at the end of the film he was a star. And you can hope that those things happen from time to time. And they do happen from time to time. But they are not... You can't count on them. There's some ineffable part that is very hard to predict.

[Q] So is Jack Nicholson a character actor, or a star?
I don't know enough about Jack Nicholson to know whether he is a character actor or a star. He certainly became... Sometimes, and I don't think this is true in Jack's case, but you can see it in other actors: they become stars, and then, they become caricatures of themselves. That the very starriness of it, I want to say, corrupts, or coarsens the template, so to speak. And it becomes very hard for them to bust out of that in the end.
Mickey Rooney, apparently always referred to himself in the third person. As 'Mickey likes this', or 'Mickey wouldn't do that.' And he was a huge star. Again, he was the most popular star for a number of years in Hollywood in the late '30s. And in a sense, there was a Mickey, and then, there was a costume, in a sense that was Mickey. And the real Mickey was inside. And he was making things happen. But he thought of that as something other than himself.
And there's a tension there. So I mean, the dilemma for an actor, which is unique in artistic life, is that the better you get at what you're doing – given all of the breaks, and everything going the correct way – the more you get known. And you may eventually become very well-known. But the stock and trade of an actor is the accurate reflection of human behaviour, which needs to constantly be nourished and updated. But a well-known actor eventually finds themselves in a sort of irradiated circle. That whenever they go out in the street, everyone aligns themselves with that famous person. And these people are no longer themselves. They're people looking at the famous actor. And they're behaving in a certain way towards this actor. And therefore, wherever this actor goes in ordinary life, he creates a force field around himself that changes human nature into an artificial construction. And the danger is that you will feedback from that. And you will become more artificial because you're not being nourished by: 'Oh, look at what that guy did when he picked up the piece of paper, and then, stuffed it in his pocket. That's a neat thing. I think I'll do that someday.' You're like: I, as a sound effects person, am always listening to the world, thinking, 'Oh, that's an interesting sound. I could use that someday, the way that tree makes a certain sound when the wind goes through it.' And an actor does that, but he's doing it with human nature.
And the danger of becoming a star is that you create this force field that changes the human beings that you interact with. And that's why, at a certain stage in fame, actors only like to associate with other actors who know the problem. But the danger of that is that you're dealing with, again, a kind of artificial situation.

I heard a story about Robert De Niro, which if it isn't true, probably should be true. Which is that to defeat this, he would simply put on a disguise and go ride the subways. He would pretend to be somebody other than who he was with makeup and costume. Just so he could nourish that part of himself, and keep that part alive. But it can be wonderful. And it can go terribly wrong. And it is not always under the control of the actors themselves. The situations can change, and you can find yourself in a bottleneck that would have been very hard to predict five or 10 years earlier.
That great line from Sunset Boulevard, you know, the William Holden character says, 'I know you. You used to be great.' And she says, 'I am great. It's the movies that became small.' And you know, she was the victim of a shift in the industry that made her personality not work anymore.

When I was in London, working on First Knight, which was 1994, I met Anthony Minghella, who phoned me up. And he was in negotiations with Saul Zaentz, who had produced Unbearable Lightness of Being, which I had edited back in the mid-'80s. And Anthony and Saul were planning to make a film of The English Patient, the Michael Ondaatje novel. And I immediately warmed to Anthony as a human being. And I loved the subject matter. I had already read the book, not knowing that Saul was thinking of making a film of it. And we bonded pretty quickly just as friends. And one thing led to another. And I found myself in Rome in 1995, editing English Patient.
There had been some last minute shuffles with the studio, who did not agree about the casting. They didn't think the casting was strong enough. From their point of view, they didn't like Kristin Scott Thomas. Not they didn't like her, they didn't think she was a star. And Ralph Fiennes, they didn't know really. They thought... Anyway, the suggestion that the studio had, instead of Kristin, they wanted Demi Moore to play Katharine. And there's a kind of symmetry here because Demi Moore had been in Ghost. And she occupied a certain blue collar, American wavelength. And the idea of her playing the part of cut glass English nobility, aristocracy just... There was a meeting where this was discussed, apparently. And Anthony and Saul said, 'Are you serious?' And the studio said, 'Well, yes, we know she probably wouldn't be good for the film. But she would be good for us', meaning, we would like to cast her in the film, which might make it difficult for you. But having her in a 20th Century Fox film might allow us to make a deal with Bruce Willis, who was married to her at the time. So it was part of this, you know, real politic negotiation that goes on a lot, and is responsible for some of the miscasting of films that we were talking about earlier. It has nothing to do with what people thought would be right. They even knew it was slightly wrong. But they wanted to have that because that would give them some advantage in the chess game, further on down the road.

As a result of this, 20th Century dropped out of the making of the film a month before shooting. And Miramax, Harvey Weinstein came in. Saul [Zaentz] was putting in a lot of his own money. So he didn't need the full support of a studio on it. But he did need extra support. And that's what Miramax was able to provide. I don't know all of the ins and the outs of the financing of it. But it was a delicate thing that could have easily collapsed at the last minute, even though we were all in Italy, getting ready to shoot the film.
And at the time, I was ignorant of a lot of this going on. I only learned about it later. And I had proposed to Anthony and Saul that on this film, 'Let's use digital editing equipment.' At that time, the only real option, as far as I was concerned, was the Avid. There were a number of other systems that were around. But I thought it might be good on this film to try it. And the answer came back that they didn't want to use it because Anthony had asked some of his friends in London, who had experience with it. And they said, 'Don't do it because it allows for too much studio interference. If you work in work print, there's only one copy of the work print. And that's it. And it's very difficult to get hold of that work print, and do things with it, without the knowledge of the... cooperation of the director. Whereas, when things are digital, it's easy to just clone a bunch of information, and ship it to the studio. And then, they do stuff with it. Don't do it', they said to Anthony. So Anthony said, 'No, I want to stay with film.' So we began shooting English Patient on film. And I was editing it on the KEM editing machine that I used on First Knight, just a few months previous. And everything was fine. It was a very slight disappointment on my part. Slight because it meant I would have to learn... Even though I was proposing it, I would have to learn the [Avid] system. I'd used it on some music videos, and some special effects sections of other films. But I hadn't really engaged with it on a deep level.

And then, about a month into shooting, I got a phone call from my wife, who said that our son, also named Walter, was in the hospital, and had been diagnosed with a brain tumour, and, 'Come home.' So I phoned up Anthony and Saul, and I said, 'Well, it's been great.  But here's the situation. You should find another editor because I don't know what's going to happen here. And if I were you that's what I would do.' And they put their heads together. And very quickly said, 'No, we want you to stay on the film. We're sure it's going to be all right.' It, in the end was all right. But how they knew to say that, I don't know. You know, 'Go home, deal with this situation. And then, we'll figure out what to do later.' So I did, I flew home.
And on the way home I thought, on the flight I thought, 'Well, it's very nice of them to say that. And I obviously hope that things will be okay. But I think I will re-pitch to them. If they want me to stay on the film, now I think we should use the Avid because we're going to lose a bunch of time editorially here. I'm going to be off the radar for a couple of months, anyway, while the film is being shot. So if we switch to the Avid, I have a chance of catching up because it's a faster system, supposedly.' So I phoned them when I got home. And I said, 'Here's what I think we should do.' And they said, 'Okay.' So we put that into motion, and starting getting the equipment, and figuring out how to negotiate the very complicated switch from film to digital, at that time. From one country to another, while you're shooting a film, you can imagine the detail that has to be gotten into to do that. And meanwhile, I was dealing with the hospitalisation and operation that eventually my son went under. And it was a successful operation. And he's still healthy and alive. And that's now 20 years ago. But you can imagine the emotional situation that that produced. Anyway, this happened in October. By mid-December we had installed an Avid editing system that was in the barn that was adjacent to my house. And I had hired assistants in the United States to help me with that. And I had kept my film assistants in Rome. And so we worked out a modus operandi of getting the material from there to here, with all of the ancillary complications that go along with that.
I think it was then, and will be forever, the only time that somebody made that transition [from film to digital] during the shooting of the film. That there had been instances where people shot on film, and were editing on film. And then, after the shooting said, 'Let's digitise everything.' And there were decisions made late to say, 'Let's digitise before shooting.' But to do it during the shooting, let alone with 6,000 miles difference, and many time zones difference? So it's a tribute to everybody that it worked, and worked very well. That I was in fact, able to catch up with the shooting.

Shortly after the end of shooting, I was able to show Anthony the four hour, ten-minute assembly of the film on digital equipment. And I had to learn the system, obviously, in the middle of all that. But it was a fairly quick learn. I had some books and papers written by other editors who had done that. This was very, very early in the process of films adapting this technology. But two breakthroughs had happened to make it possible.
One of them was that you could store the entire film online simultaneously, which had not been the case prior. Storage was very expensive and valuable. So you could work on, say, the first third of the film. And then, you would have to switch all the hard drives to work on the second third of the film. And then, you would have to switch all... And to get to use something from the last part of the film in the first part of the film was complicated. You couldn't just say, 'Well, let me see.' You had to... 'All right, if we want to do that, we have to take everything down. And then, build everything up again.' And [secondly] you were now allowed, because of software improvements, to have the assistant and the editor accessing the material simultaneously at the same time, which was not [previously] the case. It used to be that the assistant would work all night. And then, there would be a hand-off in the morning, when the editor came in. 'Is everything...' 'Yes, it's all there.' 'Okay, good night, have a nice sleep.' And the editor would work all day. And then, in the evening the assistant would come back. So you had only one portal, one machine into this material. And those were two pretty fatal roadblocks to the system being adopted on a wide scale. But by 1995, these barriers had broken. And you could do it.
So it was exciting. Learning anything new is exciting. Learning it under pressure, while your son is in the hospital is doubly 'exciting'. But we did it. And the twist that then is different than now is that you couldn't really look at the digital output, to get any sense of the film, because the image was so pixelated. 'Is that in focus?' 'I don't know, I can't tell. Well, when we conform the film, then we can tell.' So there was a separate team conforming the negative, or not the negative, but the work print to match what's in the computer. And you had to do that with numbers, very careful spreadsheets and everything. And so we really were operating on two time streams. You could look at the digital thing, just to kind of get a rough idea of what it was like, but you couldn't really see the film until this conformation process had been completed. And it was not worth doing it while things were still very fluid, if you weren't done yet.

And so it was a while. It was a month or two months, at least, before we were able to sit down and watch the film in a projection room, with a projector showing film of what we had done. And of course, there were surprises in that. But we worked through them. They were not huge surprises. But inevitably there were some, 'Oh, that shot isn't in focus after all.' And, 'Well, I thought this would be different than it was, but whatever.'
I remember some film... two of the film editors on [The] Godfather III were working with another video editing system [the Montage editing system]. And I was brought in late on that film. And I didn't have time to learn that system. And I was kind of suspicious of that system, to begin with. And so I cut on film. But the difficulty with that [Montage] system, which was still present on the Avid to a certain degree, was that you couldn't read people's expressions in long shots. It was just too granular, too pixelated. So editors would naturally prefer to use shots where they could see expressions, which were mostly medium shots and close-ups. So even though the director had shot long shots, the tendency in those early, awkward days was that films used more close-ups than they should have used because of this tendency. Anyway, we confronted those problems as they came up, and dealt with them.

It [The English Patient] was a very long film. The released version of the film is two hours and 38 minutes, or something like that, which is long. The first assembly was four hours and 10 minutes, which means you have to cut out an hour and a half, which is the length of a feature film sometimes, 90 minutes out of the film. And it was another example of a general principle that I have, which is that when you look at the assembly of your film, and subtract 30% from that, you will get a length, just doing the math. That length will be the length of the film where all of the essential scenes are in, and all of the characters, essential characters, are in. You haven't cut out any essential internal organs of the film, so to speak. So how long is that?
And so I'm doing the math live now, as we speak. Four hours, let's say, is 240 minutes. 30% of that is 75, 72 minutes. So we had to cut out more than 72 minutes. We had to cut out 90 minutes. In the end we did cut out more than 72. So we had to go beyond that threshold. And as a result, some scenes that were deemed essential in the film were gone. And some characters were gone, or virtually gone, from the film. Minor characters, well, intermediate characters are barely visible in the film.
A good example of one of the scenes that got cut out is a confrontation with Kip, after the announcement that the atomic bomb has been dropped on Hiroshima. This is in the book, and it was in the screenplay. It was shot. It's not in the film. There's no mention of Hiroshima. There's no aspect of that left in the film at all. And that's one of the ways that we were able to get below this theoretical threshold. I compared the cutting of those scenes to internal organs. And a little bit facetiously, but I call the 30% reduction 'diet and exercise'. Here's the first assembly. You come into the doctor's office, and you're overweight. I want you to lose 30% of your body weight. You can do that with diet and exercise. And it's actually pretty accurate. A strong regimen of diet and exercise can reduce your weight by 30%. It's not healthy to go below that. You know, if you're 200 pounds, well, let's say, if you're 300 pounds, will you ever get to be 150 pounds? That's tricky, but maybe you can get to 200 pounds.

Anyway, the difference is that by surgery, you've got two kidneys. A kidney weighs a pound and a half. If you want to lose that pound and a half, I suggest cutting out the kidney. And there's systems of cutting out people's fat, and stapling stomachs. There are cinematic equivalents of this, where you go at the internal organs of the film, and take them out. The difference, and it's a healthy difference, is that inevitably, if you do that to a human being that human being is not as healthy. With only one kidney, you are not as healthy as you are with two. Whereas, a film can actually get more healthy by the reduction of something that ostensibly looked very healthy. And the scene that I'm talking about, on paper, looked healthy. It was shot, it was well acted. But a problem was revealed with it when we saw the whole film, which is that we are now being asked late in the process of the film, very late in the film, to suddenly care about the people killed in Hiroshima. And of course, on a human level, we have to care. But on the cinematic terms, in terms of the internal dynamics of the film, we've already made up our minds what we should care about.
And to make a major plot device, this was the end of the Kip/Hana relationship. And really, the unwinding of the film happened partly as a result of this, where Kip went crazy because, 'You white people just killed 140,000 coloured people. And you wouldn't have done that to other white people. And I'm mad.' And it was important in the writing of the book for Michael that that be touched upon. And the book was constructed in a way that that was good within the book. But it didn't work within the film when we saw the whole film. So okay, we have to lose some time anyway. Let's see what happens if we take this whole thing out. The problem was that suddenly Kip becomes a different person. He's a Sikh, he has a turban. Suddenly the turban is gone. His hair is down. He's incommunicative. He won't talk to Hana. What happened? Well, the bomb happened. He's acting that way because of Hiroshima. But now we've taken that out. What do we do?

And we spent a week, quite late in the process, thinking yes, this works. The film is the right length, we think. But what are we going to do? And this problem sort of circulated around. And eventually, my assistant Edie Ichioka said, 'You know, a bomb is a bomb.' And she turned on her heels, and left the room. And I thought, 'Edie, what?' But she makes those kind of mysterious pronouncements. And I sat and thought: okay, I think I know what she means, which is that another bomb had gone off in the story, which was a booby-trap that killed Hardy, Kip's English assistant, his Lieutenant, so to speak. Because there was a big victory, Germans had surrendered. And Hardy climbed a statue to put the Union Jack on top of the statue. And the Germans had booby-trapped it and he died. And of course, a very sad thing, which is: they were a team, and now Kip had lost his team. So yes, we can make that transition of grief for the loss of his partner Hardy into a different person. He becomes a different person as a result. And so we did editorial things that made that happen. And it worked.
Another side effect of that was that a breakup scene between Kip and Hana, which again, was filmed in Hana's room at the monastery. We were now able, and the structure of the film encouraged us, to not have that scene... Not play that scene as a scene, but play it as Hana alone in her room, listening to the confession that the English patient, Ralph Fiennes, is making to Caravaggio, the Willem Dafoe character, about how Katharine died. And what happened as a result, what led to that. And luckily, early in the film there was a shot showing that the floorboards that separated Hana's room from the patient's room had rotted away. And Hana was able to look from her room down, and see the patient in his bed. And I was able, by retiming that shot to look like evening, to imply that she is looking at Hana... at the patient.  And Caravaggio is over here somewhere, and not seen. But we hear his voice, and so we think, 'Oh, he's there.' So that now it's a three-person scene. The patient, Caravaggio, and Hana, listening. And this is important because in a few scenes later the patient, having confessed everything, is now going to ask Hana to give him a fatal dose of morphine. Now she knows that he killed, basically, his personality defects resulted in the death of Katharine because he couldn't convince the English to go back. He became mad, rather than reasonable. And so she kills him, knowing the burden that he has relieved himself of. And she knows it, too. So it all makes perfect sense. The bomb is a bomb. And the confession is heard by the person that is now going to administer the fatal dose of morphine. And you can read this. You can look at the film and believe this was absolutely all in the screenplay because it makes perfect sense. And the film is long, by general standards. But given the nature of the film, it has the appropriate length for the sort of epic intercut structure that it has.
So we were able to get below [beyond] the 30% by cutting what seemed an essential scene. But in fact, removing that essential scene is not a diminution of the film. But it actually made the film a better film that in retrospect, those things were defects in the screenplay. Not defects that you could predict, really, although maybe you could in the case of the bomb, the atom bomb. Should we really care about 140,000 Japanese at this point in the story? But the scene was very important for Michael [Ondaatje], for reasons that had to do with the novel. And so it was... You would have had to been very brave to cut that out so early. But given the chemistry of all of the people, and the acting, and everything that developed, it was clear as it could be in the screening of the film that some structural... Big structural shift had to happen at that point, to allow the film to be as short as it ultimately was. But also to solve these problems that were latent in the structure of the film, given who these characters were, and how they were inhabited by these particular actors.

The story of the romance between the English patient and Katharine is built up in the film more than it is in the book. So that one of the things the screenplay did is shift the balance of the two love stories. There's a Katharine/Almásy love story, and then, a Kip/Hana love story. And the film pushed the Almásy/Katharine story more, relative to the Kip/Hana story. One of the scenes that is a turning point in the film is the little Christmas cracker paper crown that is discovered in the copy of Herodotus that Hana, reading to the English patient, says, 'What's this?' And he says, 'It's a Christmas cracker.' And what it is, is one of those silly, paper crowns that come out of the firecracker that you have at Christmas in England. You put it on your head, and you act silly.
And that triggers a memory of the final time that Almásy and Katharine made love, in a very dangerous situation. At a Christmas party in Cairo, where there are many English, British soldiers celebrating Christmas in this North African environment, unlikely. And all kinds of official people around, women, auxiliary women from the diplomatic corps in Cairo, who are there giving them tea, and everything, a big ho, ho, ho moment. And they decide, 'We're going to make love in the closet over here.' And all kinds of subterfuge happens to make that happen. So the love story at that point becomes intercutting the soldier's singing one of the Christmas songs, I forget which one, at the moment, and a love theme written by Gabriel Yared, and some Arabic music that is simultaneously playing. So you have these three unlikely things thrown together, the Christmas song, and the love theme that takes over. And then, the other one comes back. And we're doing with the sound the kind of thematic things that are happening at that moment. So it's a very mixed up thing, in a good way, that intensifies the precarious, and dangerous, and yet, erotic, consensual nature of what's happening here. And they're making love standing up, almost within view of everybody. And there's a shot where you are looking over the soldiers, and you see shapes moving on the other side of a semi-opaque window. And if you knew, you would know that that's them making love. And her husband could have seen that, and wondered, 'What?' You know, she was supposedly feeling ill and indisposed, and so had left her duties pouring tea for the soldiers.
So the blending of all of those elements, certainly the love story and the singing was implicit in the screenplay. I added the Arabic music on top of that just for my own devious purposes, thinking that this might be interesting as well, to add another texture to it. But it was a very rewarding scene to actually edit because of the ability to explore the eroticism of that moment, and the danger of it, and the obliviousness of everyone else to something that's happening right over there. Had they but known, including her husband. And then, very quickly after the finishing of the singing, the husband goes looking for the wife. Luckily, they had parted by this moment. He passes Almásy, 'Have you seen Katharine?' 'Oh no, I haven't', some excuse. And sure enough, he finds her. And she's sort of recovering from this. And he sits down next to her. And it's all kind of awkward. And he says, 'What's that smell?' And, you know, the whole scene gets very awkward. And you know, she finds some excuse and wriggles away from him. But for an editor, these are kind of the things that you love. And much is implicit in the scene construction in this that you can take advantage of in actually putting together the scene.

On another note, there is a torture scene that happens between Caravaggio, the Willem Dafoe character, and the German major, who has been tasked with interrogating him. He has photographic evidence of Caravaggio's duplicity that he actually is a spy for the British. Even though he's American, he's working for the British. And we, the audience know that. But the Germans have just found it out. And they try to get information from him. And the threat that the German uses to convince Caravaggio to confess these elements is how many names... I will exchange names for fingers. If you don't give me any names, I will cut off your fingers. If you give me any names, I will cut off fewer. And is a thumb a finger, I don't know? He goes into these kind of metaphysical discussions of what should... And this terrifies Caravaggio, of course.
And the nice thing about the scene, and the way it's performed is, you don't know if this is simply a threat that... Interrogators frequently use threats, but they don't intend to do anything. They are good enough actors to convince the interrogatee that I'm really going to do this. So it's a game of chicken. And it's implied indirectly that the major is not really going to do this. Very well played by Jürgen Prochnow, I think is the actor. And I had been reading the author, Malaparte, who I had met when I was... Or I had met his work when I was editing Unbearable Lightness of Being in Lyon. I had gotten a book, ironically, nothing to do with anything because it was on cosmology. But the author quoted a story of Malaparte's which was so compelling that I had to find out: who was this author? And I tumbled into a wide open rabbit hole that was Malaparte's books, and I became fixated on this fascinating author. And he was part German. His father was German, although, his mother was Italian. And he was born in Italy. He had a German last name, which was irritating to him because he wanted to be Italian. And so he changed his name. His author's name was Malaparte. His real, biological name was Suckert. Anyway, he'd made the observation that Germans in war were fine as long as you did not exhibit weakness. That if you were in a duelling situation with them, if you were both strong, everything was fine. As soon as you began to exhibit weakness, this drove the German psyche, according to Malaparte, to exhibit even more cruelty. And made this person plead for mercy, which made the Germans even more revengeful. So the thing you didn't want to do in that situation was exhibit weakness. You had to be strong. And then, you might get out alive, or only little damaged.
But I was thinking this, and thinking, 'Well, is there a moment here?' Because he threatened to cut off the thumbs. What causes him to actually do it? And I found a line reading, where Caravaggio says, 'Don't cut me.' And then, I found another line reading. And in the scene he only said it once. But I found another line reading in another take, where he said it slightly differently, and a little more wounded. 'Please, don't do it.' And so I constructed the scene for him to say it. And that got the major's attention. And then, he says it again with even more pleading in his voice. And at that moment the major decides, 'I am going to do it. I'm actually going to do it.' And so he puts things in motion to do this, which he might not have done – the implication is – if Caravaggio had been: 'Sure, cut off all the fingers you want. You know, I'm not going to tell you any... You know, whatever.'

And so it was a reconstruction, slightly, of the scene. But what we also did at that moment was completely take away all of the background sounds that had been implicit in the scene. The scene was shot in what was implied to be a subterranean room, with a grill, a street level grill. And you could see the sky through the window, and stairs coming down. And so we had, I don't know, distant clanking of tanks, and some voices, and other things that you're not really aware of. It's just part of the scene. But at the moment that the general decides, or the major decides, 'I'm going to do it', we killed all of that. And it just becomes quiet. And it's a version of the moment in Western films when the cowboys are sitting around the fire. And suddenly the crickets disappear. 'What's that?' That means: 'There's injuns out there'.
So we used a sudden transition to silence as an indication of danger. Something big is about to happen. And into that silence, we put the music that accelerates all of the events that led up to the actual cutting off of Caravaggio's thumbs. So it's not a fundamental reworking of the moment. But it's an intensification of the actual moment of decision that implies another... It could have gone another way. But we're now going to do it, actually. And then by changing the soundtrack at that point, it also shifts the environment in a way that tells you, on a kind of a gut level, this is now very bad. What's going to happen?

In 1997 I got a phone call from somebody that I had never met before, who had been at a lecture that I gave at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art on The Conversation. And his name was Rick Schmidlin, and he was a producer and was involved in a project to revive Touch of Evil, Orson Welles's 1958 film for its 40th anniversary in 1998, attempting to do justice by the film. And incorporate all of Welles's notes and reservations about the damage that the studio, Universal, had done to the film on its release in 1958. And I was overwhelmed at the idea of this, particularly coming out of the blue. But I had some time on my hands. I was in-between projects. And I said, 'Tell me more.'
It involved, principally, Rick's discovery of a memo that Welles had written on his first viewing of what the studio had done to the film. Contractually, the director is obligated to see this. But Universal had put strictures on it, meaning, we're only going to show you the film once. You cannot stop the film. And that's it. So there was Welles, sitting in a theatre, scribbling madly as the film projected. And then, he stayed up all night that night, and typed up a 58-page memo to his enemies at Universal, the people who had taken the film away from him. And said, 'Here's what I think.'
And the memo was rumoured to exist. Peter Bogdanovich had a couple of pages from it, I think in his interviews with Welles. But the entire memo had disappeared. And somehow, Rick managed to find it. I think, reading between the lines that it was in Charlton Heston's file cabinet because Charlton, the star of the movie, was also the producer of the movie. And as such, he would have been copied on any of these internal memos.

The story of Touch of Evil had begun with great promise. Welles had been in Europe for the last 10 or 12 years, trying to make films, and make a living at making films. And for various reasons, encountering all kinds of troubles. After having lived what could only be described as a charmed life in the 1940s when he emerged suddenly on the scene with the film, Citizen Kane, which frequently is at the top of the list of greatest films ever made. And this was his debut, followed up by a number of very well regarded films, although troubled: Magnificent Ambersons, The Stranger, and other films.
He rode very high in the galaxy of film stars, actors, directors, writers. And then, plummeted down in the '50s. And so the idea of returning to Hollywood, and making a film in Hollywood was suggested by Charlton Heston. The actor who was the producer of this film. And Welles was being considered for the role of one of the actors. And Heston, so the story goes, said, 'Why don't we let Orson direct it?' And various things were put in place. And so Orson became not only the director, and the actor, but the writer of the screenplay. He took the screenplay. There was an existing screenplay, and he took that and the novel from which it was made, called Badge of Evil, and rewrote it as Touch of Evil.
And everything began with great promise in 1957. Charlton Heston, Janet Leigh were the stars. And this was the beginning of a five-picture deal with Orson Welles and Universal. It was like a homecoming. Everything was great. Welles knew how to play this game. And on the first day or two of shooting, shot one scene with no edits in it that covered 10 pages of a script. And as far as the studio was concerned, this meant that this guy knows what he's doing. And we don't have to pay attention to him. So they took their eye off the ball of this film, which was Welles's intention. And then, he set about doing what he wanted to do. And there was nothing irregular about this. He came in on budget, under schedule, I think. And shooting on location in Venice, California, away from the studio lot. And mostly at night, which meant that there wasn't a lot of people hanging around.
And everyone had a great time. The actors all reported that this was one of the best experiences they had ever had, working with Welles.

Trouble only began when the delivery dates for the director's cut kept being put off. And I think the shooting had been in January, February, March, those kind of dates. And by May, the studio was getting anxious. We should see something. And Welles accepted an invitation to appear on The Tonight Show in New York. And when he was in New York, the studio unlocked his editing room, and basically stole the film, without his permission and screened it. And they were horrified at what they saw. By the lights of today, there was nothing to be horrified about. But they felt it was confusing. 'And this wasn't what we signed up to do.' A typical studio reaction to an artist's work. And Welles was an artist. And this breaking and entering caused a break between Welles and the studio. And he probably unwisely went off to Mexico to shoot some stuff on his Don Quixote project. And this created a further break. And they barred him from participating in the making of this film. And they hired a new director, wrote some new scenes, and reshot some scenes, and shot some new scenes, and recut the film. And so this was the film that Welles saw sometime in the fall of 1957. The 58-page memo was the result.
What Rick's intention was to: 'Let's follow this memo as if Welles were alive, and he had asked us to do these things to the film. Is it possible?' I read the memo, which was fascinating, which is fascinating to read this memo. You can get this memo if you buy the DVD of Touch of Evil. I think it's also online. And I had two other questions to Rick, who again, I didn't know. I said, 'Is there a soundtrack that separates... a master soundtrack that separates the dialogue from the music from the sound effects?' We call it a three-track, the shorthand is a DME, dialogue, music, effects. 'Is there a DME?' 'Yes, there is. It's in good condition.' 'What's the condition of the negative, the original master?' 'It is good.' 'Is there any, what's called, B negative, meaning any of the outtakes from the film? Are those available?' 'No, but there is a work print of the film that Welles screened in the fall of '57, which the studio then made substantial changes to.' So we have two things to work from. We have the original negative. And we have this slightly longer version of the film that was discovered in the archives at UCLA sometime in the 1970s. That's the material. So I said, 'It's too bad that we don't have B negative. But let's do it.'

And so we set up an Avid in my barn. The same place where I had edited [The] English Patient. And I got all of the material, and the memo. And emotionally, it was a very powerful experience because it was as if Orson Welles himself had handed me the memo. And said, 'Here's some ideas, do what you can. Wake me when it's over. I'm just going to go into the other room and take a nap.'
The nap lasted three weeks, which is the amount of time that it took me to do these notes. And I was disappointed and slightly amazed that he wasn't there to wake up because the memo itself is written in a way that gives you such a strong idea of his own personality, and what he was like as a person that I felt that he was very close in this. And it's exactly the kinds of things that an editor would like to get from a director. He never talked about frames, or individual shots... In a couple cases, individual shots. But more it was like: 'Here's the kind of feeling of what needs to happen. This area needs to be much shorter. This area was... The original plan was to intercut these scenes, parallel action. A little bit of Charlton Heston, a little bit of Janet Leigh, Charlton Heston. The studio undid all of that. I want to see it back together again', and so on.
The fascinating thing about the memo is that again, it was written to his enemies. And so he had to be very political about how he said things. And it's a great thing to study if you want to find out what a great filmmaker, and an artist, with a dash of politics does to try to convince people to get his way. It was unsuccessful. They didn't do any of these things. But it's still a great thing to read because he says things like, 'I am here to help you make your film the best film that it can be. I am under no illusions that it is my film, even though I wrote the script, I directed it, and I acted in it. So I know certain things about it that only I know. And I can help you by telling you these things.'
So he flatters them, and doesn't stand on a high horse about: this is my film and you bastards took it away from me. It's a very interesting document to study, which is one of the silver linings of this whole tragedy. Which is, I can't think of such a high profile example of a world class filmmaker under such duress, being forced to define, in 58 pages, what he wanted from a film. So we had this document. And we wouldn't have had this document unless the studio had taken the film away from him. So the greater tragedy is that they did this. And they denied Welles the ability to finish his own film. But we have this document, which in a sense was squeezed out of the awkwardness of the situation.

The main thing that he was asking was to reinstate the parallel structure of the first 30 minutes of the film, or so, which was intended to be with Charlton Heston and Janet Leigh at the beginning. And then, they get separated. And we follow a little bit of Charlton, a little bit of Janet, a little bit of Charlton, a little bit of Janet. Until finally, somewhere around the middle of the film, they are reunited again. It's implied that she was raped by some juvenile delinquents, who grabbed her, who were working for the mafia boss that controlled this border town. Never explicit, but something happened. And this causes Charlton to want to find the guilty people. And the person that this focuses on is the character of Hank Quinlan, played by Orson Welles.
So you can't really compare it to one of Orson Welles's other films, like The Magnificent Ambersons, which was apparently very changed by the studio, and particularly the ending. And we have no record of where the missing pieces of the body lie. So Touch of Evil, we did not – in re-cutting this film to Welles's specifications – we did not transform it from one kind of animal to another kind of animal. It is what it always... Even the studio's version in 1957 was a celebrated film. It didn't make any money at the time. But it won a prize at the Brussels World's Fair, and inspired the film critics Godard and Truffaut to make their own films. So it had knock on effects for film history, the whole French New Wave, in a sense, was inspired by this film.
But I think what we managed to achieve was we made it more settled into itself. It became more the film that it wanted to be. There were some peculiar things in the[memo for the] film that I would read. And I would think, 'Why would he really want to do that? I don't see what's the matter.' But my mission was: do these things. And then: look at the film at the end. One of them was the elimination of a close-up of Menzies, the sidekick to Welles's character, Quinlan. And in the memo Welles says, 'I wish you would remove this close-up. I made a mistake, and I used too wide a lens on this close-up. And it looks terrible.' And I read that, and I thought, 'Well, I see that lens being used elsewhere in the film. And it doesn't look particularly terrible here. That doesn't sound convincing to me. I'll do it, Orson, but I don't understand why I'm doing it.' So I figured out a way, under Rick's encouragement. I was resistant... That one thing I was resistant to do because I couldn't figure out quite how to do it, yet. And it didn't make sense to me. And Rick said, 'No, we need to do it. We need to do it.' 'Okay', and I figured out a way, editorially to make it not too awkward.

Again, we didn't have any of this so-called B negative, which you could kind of finesse things. I just had the print to work with. And I went on and did other things later in the film. But then, when we screened the whole film, I suddenly saw the reason, I thought, why he had wanted me to do this. Which was that it was the moment at which in the screenplay this Menzies character virtually admits to the Charlton Heston character that his boss is wrong. And then, he realises he had made an admission. Then he kind of stands up again, against it. But the damage has been done, in a sense. And now, the Charlton Heston character knows that he's got this guy. And I think Welles realised that that admission so early in the film did not serve the scenes later. And that it would be better to delay that moment until closer to the end of the film. So by cutting this close-up out that problem was averted. So that in this scene, which happens in the hall of records at the police station, the character of Menzies stands up for his boss all the way through. He doesn't... He quivers a little bit. But he doesn't break down.
And the question is, 'Why didn't Orson just say that in the memo?' Well, the reason is that he was writing this memo to people who were his enemies. And if he... First of all, would they understand all of that? And secondly, if they did understand that, they would say something uncomplimentary to Welles, maybe. So he simply said, 'I made a mistake. I used the wrong lens. Please cut it out.' So he simplified it for their purposes, which is a way of dealing with people who have power over you, like, the heads of the studio. And so it gave me an insight into the film, obviously, that this worked. Even though I didn't understand why I was doing it at the time. When I saw the final result, I think I understood why.

But also, the politics of how he wrote this memo really very quickly, and how he had phrased things politically to try to get what he wanted. And in the end he did not get everything he wanted. We were able to... We were told by the studio that everyone was dead who had worked behind the camera on the film. And Rick, who's a bit of a detective, thought, 'I bet you they're not. Let's see if we can find Ernie Nims, who was head of post-production at Universal at that time. Who had been an editor on The Stranger, a film that Welles directed in 1946.' And so he just started looking through the phone book in Los Angeles, and came up with a few names like that, and started dialling. And I think on the fourth or fifth call he found Ernie Nims, who was I think in his late 80's by that time, 86 or so. 'Is this Ernie Nims?' 'Yes.' 'Are you the Ernie Nims who worked with Orson Welles?' 'Yes, that's me.' 'We're doing Touch of Evil.' 'What a fantastic film, yes, the problem with Orson was, he was just ahead of his time. He was 20 years ahead of his time. If you made that film in 1977, instead of '57 there would have been no problem. But you know, he was ahead of his times, you know?' 'Do you have any additional material?' 'Yes, I've got a couple of boxes up in the attic. I'll tell you what – he said – I have to go play golf this afternoon. I'll put them on the porch of my house. You guys can come and pick them up.' 'Wait a minute, we're in San Francisco, we're not in Los...' 'No, I'll put them on the porch. You can...' 'No, don't...' So click, he hung up. So we called somebody at Universal. 'Could you go to this address? And if there are two file boxes on the porch of this house, pick them up.' And sure enough there were. When we got them, and they were delivered to us up in Bolinas, which is where we were working, and they had great stuff in them, memos back and forth from Orson Welles to the studio, and with Ernie Nims, private memos. And a great section of memos from Welles to Henry Mancini, who was the composer of music for the film, about the kind of sound that Welles wanted for the film. And this was Mancini's big breakthrough film. He had been kind of struggling a bit in Universal Television. And this possibility of doing the music for this film was a big leap ahead for Henry Mancini.

And there was also a very clear description in the memo, in that section that we got from Ernie Nims, of something that I had earlier called 'worldizing', which was a way of taking sound, principally music, and giving it an atmospheric colouration, according to the space in which it was supposedly being performed or played. So the sound of a band in a gymnasium has a particular kind of sound to it, a gymnasium sound, a high school auditorium sound. As different from a concert hall, different from a living room. And I figured out something. This is on my own. Very simple, which is well, let's just take the music, record it in a studio, good recording. And then, take that recording to a gymnasium. Have another recorder, play the music through speaker in the gymnasium. Record that sound on the second recorder. And now, take that sound and line it up in sync with the original sound. And now, we have two controls. We have the original, good studio sound. And we have this kind of echo-y gymnasium sound. Just add as much of this as you need to be convincing. Too much, and it sounds too rackety. Too little and it sounds too much like it's in a studio. Okay, that's just about right, there.
It's roughly the equivalent in audio of depth of field in photography. It allows a sound to be thrown out of focus. And as a result, it can sit in the background more happily. And I use this a lot in American Graffiti, and other films all during this period. What I discovered in this memo is that Welles was doing the same thing. He was doing it slightly differently, in that he did not also... He did not have two tracks that he could balance against each other. He simply took the music and played it through a speaker, what he said, in the alleyway behind the sound department to louse up the sound. That is what he said. And so he would record this loused-up sound, and that's what he wanted in the film, to give this atmospheric quality to it. The difference, which is significant, is that he then did not have control of how much to louse it up, by feeding in a little bit of the original sound, and getting a balance to it. Anyway, I retrospectively owe that discovery to Orson Welles. I may have put a little spin on in myself. I mean, I certainly saw Touch of Evil when I was at school, in film school. And I probably absorbed this idea without knowing what I was absorbing. So I bow before Orson's intelligence and genius. He had done a lot of this in radio because he had all throughout the '30s done a lot of radio drama. And had developed this technique of reverberating voices to make them slightly off axis. He's over there. And he imported this technique into film. And really made lots of use of it in Touch of Evil. And it was a fantastic thing to re-examine all of this.

He particularly wanted to change the whole music at the beginning of Touch of Evil, which had a title sequence, and a Henry Mancini score. It's kind of a famous score. Welles didn't want this. He wanted no titles at the beginning. And he wanted the characters of Charlton Heston and Janet Leigh to be discovered walking through this border town in a famous travelling shot that lasts three minutes and 12 seconds, or something, and ends with them crossing the border from Mexico into the United States.
And then, the car that we have also been tracking, also goes through immigration. And then, blows up on the other side because we know a bomb has been planted in it. The significant difference, I think, in Welles's mind, reading into the memo, is that if we know a bomb is in the trunk of the car, and we know this is a title sequence, and the music says: this is a title sequence, we know the bomb is not going to explode until the title sequence is over. Whereas, if the music is a piecemeal construction of various source music, the music from a night club, the music from a record shop, the music from a passing bandalero, you know, just this kind of out-of-focus pools of sound that go with the pools of light that the camera is moving through that we can't predict when, really, when the bomb is going to explode. And there's a moment where the car passes very close to Janet Leigh and Charlton Heston. The car itself has a radio in it that's playing music. And so we know that's the car that has the bomb in it. Maybe it's going to explode right now. So anyway, it adds a layer of tension to the opening three minutes that is missing in the original construction, as the studio had it.

But the overall was one of those unbidden experiences that came out of nowhere. A phone call out of the blue from Rick. And Rick and I have kept in contact since. We worked together on a project three or four years later, which was rehabilitating the first sound film ever made, shot by Edison in 19... or 1894, we think. I'll talk about that in a second. But for me, the project, it was one of the shortest times that I've ever worked on a film. I think, overall, I worked for maybe six weeks on working this memo through, and documenting it as best I could. And then, doing the final mix on it. We were very religious, again, on Rick's insistence, which I completely agreed with, not to stereoize the film. The film was originally made in mono. Welles probably would have made it in stereo. But he gave us no advice about that. And so we didn't want to go outside of the premise of this memo.
So we're just going to... we're going to improve the quality, make it better, with equalization and modern techniques, so the sound sounds better, and the dialogue is more understandable. But we didn't spread it out into a stereo field. It's still a mono soundtrack, which is a good discipline. We also didn't go anywhere else to get any of the additional music. Luckily, there was a CD made a number of years later of Henry Mancini's score, and all of the extra source music. So we had that as a resource. But it's all written by Henry Mancini, and performed by him and his orchestra in 1957. And because the dialogue was separate from the music, was separate from the sound effects, we had great freedom in moving these things relative to one another. And many of Welles's suggestions would have been impossible had we not had that ability.
There was a nice bit of archaeology at the beginning. Once we had not the Henry Mancini music at the beginning, I was able to hear what was on the sound effects track, which had been completely buried by Mancini's music, and kept abnormally low. So there's a whole miniature universe of sound effects, of bleating goats, and people talking, and the sound of carts going this way and that, police whistles that once we had changed the approach to the music, I was able to lift this sound effect. And let it breathe for the first time in 40 years. But again, just a very rewarding experience. Living in Orson Welles's world, even for such a short time was the kind of thing that an editor would dream about, but rarely get to experience.

There are a couple of interesting things about the film that film scholars know and I discovered. One of them is that in searching for locations along the Venice canal a couple of weeks before shooting, Janet Leigh fell and broke her arm. And her arm was in a cast throughout all of the shooting of this film. And if you look carefully, you see, I think, it was her left arm, it's held carefully against her body, and usually draped with something. And her right arm is free. I think I got it right, right and left. And it only comes off when the so-called rape scene happens, and in that case, it's a body double, it's not Janet Leigh, it's somebody else and the arm is moving around. But a fantastic example of the kind of things that happen in a film and, you know, I was talking about the conditions under which a film gets made. And: 'well, we thought today was not going to be cloudy but it is, but we have to shoot today anyway.' Here: 'I didn't think my leading lady was going to have her arm in a cast all the way through this film, and I don't want to reveal that fact. How am I going to do it?' So Welles figured out, and Russell Metty, the cinematographer, and the costumes designer, they all put their heads together and figured out some way for Janet Leigh to have her arm in a cast throughout the film and not have it be blatantly obvious.

The other thing that I appreciated about the whole experience is that I had the film on the Avid, I was working on an Avid. It would have been very difficult, not impossible, but it would have been very difficult to do it without doing this digitally. And in that sense, it... When you get the film on the Avid, the editing machine, it's like the surgeon having the patient on the operating table. You kind of see it in a very different way, different than sitting in a theatre watching it. Because it's there, under your knife, so to speak. You may not be doing much, but that attitude is very evident in your approach to it. I could cut here. I'm not going to, but I could if I wanted to. I'm only going to do what Orson tells me to do within reason.
And what I really appreciated about him and his technique is that, of course, there's the opening shot, which is this wonderful, famous, three-minute, ten-second shot all one, you know, one continuous shot with no cuts, camera on a big crane going over buildings and down, and then up again, and down. And just marvellous evocation of time and space. There's a funny thing at the end of the shot. Apparently, one of the actors who plays the immigration police, was so terrified of this shot being such a big shot, that at the end of the take when he had a line to say, he kept misremembering his line or forgetting his line. And so he would say something wrong, and then go, 'Oh, darn.' Of course, which ruined the shot. And finally, it was getting to be dawn almost, and you can see that this was the last shot of the night, because in fact the sky is not black, the sky is dark grey. And if you look carefully, you can see seagulls flying against the sky. And in the reverse shot, when the car explodes, and in all of the subsequent shots, the sky is black as night. So it's not perfect by any means, but you tend not to notice it. But in fact, they probably shot this, I don't know, I mean, in February, when they were shooting this was probably six o' clock in the morning by the time they... Maybe take seven? I don't know. A later take. And finally, Welles said to this actor, 'If you can't remember the line, just move your mouth, don't say anything, just go... And we'll dub it in, we'll add the dialogue later.' So if you look at the film carefully, you can see this man on the other side of the car, moving his mouth and there's no sound that comes out, and then they put some sound in. So he actually moved his mouth more than they had dialogue to fill it. But you tend not to notice that. And of course, the shot, they were able to complete the shot.

Anyway, there are these master shots, and there's a shot in the middle of the film. 12 minutes, 10 minutes long, I think the whole... Certainly eight minutes long of a scene in a house that moved from one room to the other, and there were walls in the apartment that had to be removed by the scene crew. When the camera was here, they would remove the wall, and they would put the wall back. Very complicated, and yet not flashy in any way. It's... You don't notice that there has not been an edit in eight minutes. It doesn't call attention to itself the way the other films with long shots might. It was a way, again, of... This was one of the first shots that they did in the film, and it was a way of Orson Welles getting the studio off his back: 'I'm going to cover ten pages of script in a single shot. Watch this.' So it's visually not flashy, but it's flashy in terms of: 'Look how much I can do, how quickly I can do it. I still have my chops as a director.' But later in the film, in the final chase, it's really a masterpiece of classic editing. Parallel cutting beautifully organised so that your eye is exactly where it needs to be at the moment of the cut, so that on the incoming shot there is a focus of attention at that same place that carries you to somewhere else in the frame. And then there's a cut, and you... There's a moment, a place of attention. Then the next shot that takes you further. So it's a beautifully fluid and rhythmic construction of Quinlan and Menzies walking and talking. We know that Menzies has a bug on him and he's recording Orson Welles's Quinlan. He's working for Charlton Heston at this point. Heston is tracking them with a recorder, so it's actually very modern technology, about circa 1957, radio transmission of a hidden microphone.

And the conceit of this section of the film is that, at a certain point, Welles is going to know that he is being bugged. And how this happens is that the action crosses a bridge, and Charlton Heston is forced to go underneath the bridge, in the water of the canal, and the sound of Welles's voice going through the radio is picked up by Heston's recorder, and that sound echoes underneath the bridge. And so when Welles talks, talks, there is a little bit of an echo, echo. And that makes Quinlan, Welles, go, 'What's that, that? Somebody recording me, me?' 'It's you, Menzies, you.' And that's when he realised the turncoat, and the struggle ensues, which results in Menzies being shot. But it's all down to the sound, and not only the sound itself, but the quality of the sound. The fact that the sound, the quality of the sound changed when Heston was forced to go underneath the bridge, underneath this arch, is the thing around which the whole plot resolution of the whole story shifts. So if you're looking for a very good example of how to use sound to help you tell your story in an economical way, there it is. And it's because Welles was a complete director, in the sense of having done radio drama, having done theatre drama, having done film. He knew all of the tricks, and was sensitive to the meaning of something as insignificant as, say, reverberation, echo, and how it could be used at the right moment to help twist the end of the story.

The Touch of Evil job occupied me, really, for the first part of the year, in 1998. And luckily, the next film that I was involved in was The Talented Mr. Ripley, which was shot in Italy in the summer of that year, 1998. And it was the second time that I had worked with Anthony Minghella. It's a novel, a film based on a novel by Patricia Highsmith, and it had been made into a film previously with Alain Delon in the 60's, I think. And this was a reinvention of the novel, with Matt Damon, and Jude Law, and Gwyneth Paltrow and Philip Seymour Hoffman, other wonderful actors who were not well-known at the time. Known, but not well-known.
And the film is about Tom Ripley, who is a serial liar, and as it turns out, killer, who is homosexual, and not the kind of person that you would say is the hero of any conventional film. And we have certain things that we do structurally in the screenplay, to help us... If that's the story we want to tell, then one of the techniques that helps us to do that is to adopt a single point of view. And this is similar to what Francis Coppola had done in The Conversation. Again, Gene Hackman, the Harry Caul character in The Conversation, is not the conventional hero of the film. And if you have a character like that, and you want to make that character the main focus of the story, one of the ways that will help you achieve that is by telling the story from that person's point of view. In other words, every shot in the film is either looking at Tom Ripley, or looking at something that Tom Ripley is looking at. His point of view or him. There is not a scene in The Talented Mr. Ripley where two of the other actors go off somewhere and discuss Tom Ripley.
There are constraints about that structure, but it does seem to be the way to make an audience perhaps understand, even sympathise with an otherwise unsympathetic character. Because there's nowhere else to go, the only other place to go is out of the theatre. Either you can't stand the film and you get up and leave the theatre, or you continue to watch it. And there's a kind of cinematic version of Stockholm Syndrome, which is if you accept this, eventually, despite the awkwardness of the situation, you kind of do begin to root for him, even though he is, on the face of it, a non-sympathetic character. If you just read his CV, you would say, 'No'. But because of the structure, it's... Anyway, this was the structure that Anthony decided when he wrote the screenplay. And we shot the film in Rome in studios, and in other cities in Italy. In Rome itself and also Naples, and Ischia, which is the island of Mongibello, which is the hypothetical town that much of the action happens in. Also Venice. So it was a fantastic experience being in Italy for that amount of time and seeing all of these different locations. Mostly, I was in Rome at the Cinecittà, which was the studio that Mussolini founded in 1922 [sic – 1937], and it had its origins in the Fascist Revolution. By the time I was there, Berlusconi had... I think he was in charge, so we were in a new sort of political environment, which the Italians were complaining about a lot.

There's a fascinating thing that happens in the film with the death of Dickie, the character played by Jude Law, and this happens probably half the way through the film. And it's the result of an argument in a boat between Tom, played by Matt Damon, and Dickie, played by Jude Law. Tom essentially feels that Dickie could come into a homosexual relationship, even though it's never implied exactly what that means. But we could live together, here's how it would work. And this is the first news that Dickie has that this is what's on Tom's mind, even though he's been trying to push Tom away in the scenes ahead of that. It's like, 'What, no, what? Are you crazy? I'm going to marry Marge.' You know, the Gwyneth Paltrow character. And as a result, they get into a shoving match, and Tom responds with a swing of an oar which clips Dickie and really seriously wounds him. The fight happens on the boat, it's very grisly, and it could go one way or the other, but eventually Tom kills Dickie. And if you read the screenplay, it's fine, it works fine. The twist that happened in the actual film is that Jude's portrayal of Dickie was so charismatic and such a revelation... Jude had been in a couple of films before this, but this was like... again, like Al Pacino in The Godfather. It was like: here is a movie star. And he played... The character is like a movie star. Dickie is kind of glamourous and famous, so a movie star approach to this character of glamourous, trips on a yacht around Italy with more money than you could ever spend, and what are we going to do with this $1,000? It's all a movie star world, to which Tom, the poor, mousey Matt Damon character, is fatally attracted to this flame.
And I had... It takes a while for the film, when you watch it, to recover from the death of Dickie. And as a thought experiment, if the Dickie character had been played by a less charismatic actor, then it probably wouldn't have been such a problem, but the brightness of Jude's performance was so brilliant and bright that your eyes got used to it, in a sense. Your mental iris kind of clamped down because of this brilliance, and then when he's gone, suddenly you're in the darkness. Where is this film, where can we go now? It's like you're sort of, like, 'You mean this is it? The rest of the film is just these people?' And eventually, you recover, and it's like, eventually, your irises open up again and you get used to the darkness without Dickie. And I don't know what the answer is; there isn't really an answer, because that character has to be charismatic. But I don't think anyone, even Anthony, knew exactly how charismatic the Jude Law character was going to be. So you confront these kind of issues in film construction, where you're trying... where the fact that something is great creates a problem. Again, the films, as we've been saying, are all about the internal balance of the film. And just as a bad performance, of course, can hurt a film, so a really, overly brilliant performance can also unbalance the film. Especially as in this case, the character disappears at the halfway point of the film and you've still got another hour or so to go.

[The Talented Mr.] Ripley also was a long film. I think the first assembly of English Patient was four hours and ten minutes, Ripley was four hours and a half. Cold Mountain, the next Anthony Minghella, was five hours and ten minutes. So it was kind of what came along with working with Anthony on those three films, were first assemblies that were very long. So we had to confront the same issues of, how do we cut out two hours out of this film? And you do it by various techniques. Mentally, how I approach this is... My shorthand for these are the 'spaghetti sauce' method, and the 'Procrustean method'.
The spaghetti sauce method is a little bit like I was mentioning earlier, 'diet and exercise'. You simply run the film and you question everything. Does he really need to enter this scene, or can't we begin the scene with him already there? Do we really need him to leave the scene, or can we just leave it when he smashes his fist on the table, or whatever it is? Do we really need this scene? In fact, this scene in which he professes his ignorance of the crime, in fact, we already know this because of something that happened earlier. So if that scene hadn't been so effective, we would need the scene, but because that is effective, we don't need the scene, so take it out. Redundancy, you're trying to remove redundancies. Again, diet and exercise, but there's a limit to that.
And then you frequently have to recourse to this other method, which I call the Procrustean method, which is named after a character in Greek mythology. He lived, apparently, Procrustes, lived on the road from Athens to Sparta, and he had an inn, Procrustes' Inn. And anyone who travelled from Athens to Sparta had to stay at the inn. And he welcomed you into his inn, you went to sleep on an iron bed, and while you were asleep, he crept in. And if you were shorter than the bed, he stretched you to make sure you were as long as the bed. If you were longer than the bed, he would chop off the offending parts of it so you were shorter than the bed. In other words, everyone who came to the inn left the same size. And it was a myth that tried to explain, in mythological terms, why is everyone more or less the same height? Because maybe beforehand, there were people this tall, and people ten feet tall. How did we all get to be the same height? Well, because we all stayed at Procrustes' Inn. And so what you do in a Procrustean thing is say, film is now three hours long, I want it to be two and a half hours long. I am just going to go through and put it on the iron bedstead, and cut, cut, do brutal things to it. Rather than the spaghetti sauce method, which is you just put the film over a low heat and stir it with a wooden spoon, and allow things to gently evaporate out of it. So that's a gradual process. And you taste the film, so to speak, time to time. Okay, it's almost there, it's still a little... The sauce gets better as more water evaporates, whereas Procrustes is chop. And then you look at the film at this new length, knowing that you're going to look at a brutally compromised creature. And then you say, well, that was a good experience in the sense that we sat down and, two hours later, we got up. Now, that feels like a good length. What do we have to do to fix this so that it works, so that you chop and then repair, rather than slowly compress the length?
There are some directors who love the spaghetti sauce method and don't like Procrustes, and the opposite. In my experience, Anthony loved the spaghetti sauce method, he didn't like Procrustes. And we rarely went there, and so it took a longer time to get Anthony's film down to length. Occasionally, we would make the chop, but he was not drawn to that first. Whereas George Lucas has a Procrustean kind of sensibility, you know? Let's just whack it, and fix it. Whack, and fix. And inevitably, I'm painting this more extreme than it really it. It's a spectrum that, you know, falls... We use both techniques, depending on the situation. It's just that some directors like one method more than the other. Anyway, we were able to get the film down to its final release length, which I think is somewhere around two hours and 25 minutes, something like that.

One of the big mysteries, to me, is the requirements for a studio giving a green light to a film, approval, 'okay, shoot this film', and the script: 'do we like the script?', the budget: 'is this an appropriate budget for this story and the cast?' And a kind of nebulous thing, a feeling for the director and what kind of sensibility the director has. And sometimes the director will produce what's called a 'lookbook'. Now, I don't know what they were called in the past, but you know, illustrations and pictures, this is how it's going to feel. What is not included in that is the director's timing of the story. And for my money, if I was running a studio, I would wave a magic wand and say, 'That's another requirement. Tell me the timing... Time this script, you know, scene by scene, and tell me what it is.' Because so much depends on that. Is this scene going to be a minute long, or five minutes long? As the famous, and the Light Brigade charge scene from The Charge of the Light Brigade. Well, whatever that is, it's a five or ten-minute scene, but it only represents a few lines in the screenplay.
The rule of thumb, which is pretty accurate, is that a screenplay is a minute a page. But there are these eighth page gotchas occasionally, which are, the Light Brigade charge. What does that represent? So the idea would be to flush these out early and confront them early, rather than at the other end. So Talented Mr. Ripley was four and a half hours long. How did it get there? Well, the screenplay was longish. It wasn't super long, maybe 130 pages. Whereas the average usually is 110-120 pages. So maybe 10-15 minutes longer, given that minute a page. But I think part of the issue, and this also is true of Francis [Ford Coppola], is that the person who writes a screenplay and then directs it, there's a tendency to remember in the shooting all of the other things that you thought of when you were writing the screenplay, which didn't appear in the screenplay. But now that you're shooting, you think, 'Oh, maybe we could have the something, or maybe she could do that.'
And so during shooting, these hidden ideas which are present in the mind of the writer, who is also the director, start to come back in. Also, Francis and Anthony, both Italian, are also very... 'We're all in this together. What do you think?' They're inclusive, and so they invite the participation. And so the actors will say, 'I think it would be nice if I picked up the basket and then walked across the street before saying hello.' 'Oh, yes, that's a good idea.' So suddenly, there's a new beat that wasn't in the screenplay, and so that adds a beat. And the cinematographer says, 'Well, if she's going to cross the street, I'm going to... and that would be great to show the height of the building.' 'Okay, yes, alright, let's do that.' And so it grows, and Anthony's rule of thumb, rather than a minute a page, it was really two minutes a page when the whole thing got done.

In addition, Anthony in particular, was... He had what I would call a 'very low water content.' What I mean by that is: it's an analogy with the grape harvest, in the sense that sometimes, there is a rain late in the season and the grapes soak up a lot of moisture. And then they're picked, and so now you have grapes that are full of water, that has to be kind of boiled off to give you a good wine. You have to condense it, otherwise it's going to be too weak. And Anthony's material was very rich, there was not a lot of water content. So that he might shoot, let's say, he would shoot... [Talented Mr.] Ripley, I think, was 340,000 feet of 35mm film, and the first assembly was four hours and a half. And if you kind of do the math, you can see what the ratio is.
Whereas Tetro, Francis Coppola's film that I edited, was... He shot the equivalent of 800,000 feet for that film, and the first assembly was three hours, so in that case, there was a big disproportionation between the amount of film shot and the first assembly. What meaningful stuff out of that... There was a lot of material in Francis's... I mean, it's a wonderful film, but there was a lot of material where you would just say, 'Well, that's not going to be in the film. That's the extra camera shooting the same thing', or something, whatever it happens to be. Whereas Anthony's material is very dense. He didn't shoot a lot of time, but it was very meaningful and dense, and it made for a very interesting... I mean, these first assemblies were fascinating things. They weren't like, 'Okay, that's four and a half hours, I'm bored.' They were fascinating films, but it was clear that you couldn't release a four and a half hour version of Ripley. It had to be cut down. So that puts you in the awkward position of finding ways to cut out material that is really very good and interesting, but at a certain point, it just becomes too much. It's like, you know, a 12-course meal, each course is delicious, but by the eighth course, oh, another delicious meal, you know? Another kind of fatigue sets in.

[Q] So Hitchcock, for example, his first assembly, it would probably be pretty close to the final screening length, would it?
Yes. Many directors, and I've worked with a few of them. Jerry Zucker was this way, and Fred Zinnemann was this way. They shot not a lot of film, and the first assembly of the film was very close to its final release length. So it's not that it's inevitable that you have big, sprawling things, it just requires a different approach of the material. And the reality of the timing process is that the timing is done by the script supervisor. And the dirty secret of this is that there is frequently double-entry bookkeeping going on, which is: the studio does need to see a timing by the script supervisor, but the script supervisor will shave things so that it comes out at a slow... at a small length. So that the studio doesn't shut down the film too early. 'What, three and a half hours long? You've got to cut something.' So you try to dance under the limbo bar, even though there's a little winking going on, which is, these timings aren't real timings. But the danger of that is that, as it is with any double-entry bookkeeping, you know that these aren't real, and then you have nothing to guide you because those weren't real. 'So what is the time?' 'Well, I don't know. Well, just shoot and see what happens.' And as a result, that's one of the contributing elements to making these films get super long.

I believe in timing, and I believe, although nobody ever told me that I should, but I believe that it's my duty as an editor to time the screenplay. I mean, so I will... Before shooting, I will go into a room somewhere with the screenplay, and for a day, sometimes two days, just kind of, sort of dance around the room, you know, imitating the characters and saying the dialogue. It looks silly from the outside, and probably the sillier it looks, the better, you know, the better it is to do, to be silly. Because you're actually physically doing what the screenplay tells you is being done, and with a stopwatch. Okay, here's scene 11, click. Dialogue, then he gets up, he walks over to the kitchen, he pours a glass of water. And I do these things, and then I sit down and talk, and things happen. And then, click, at the end. And I do this twice, I do it once and then I immediately do it again for that scene, so I have two times. Usually the second time is longer than the first because now I'm visualising more. So I have a number, at the end, to put alongside the number from the script supervisor. I would love to have a number from the director, but I've never known a director, ever, to time their own scripts. And again, it's one of these... It's a... I don't know why. Why is that not the case?
Anyway, then I line up the script supervisor's numbers with my numbers, and I have a program that compares them all. And any outliers get flagged. 'You said this scene was 30 seconds long, and I say it's two minutes long. What gives? Am I right or are you right? You know, 'Is there something I'm not understanding, or maybe there's something that you're not understanding?' So then I will go to the script supervisor and say, 'Can we discuss these ten scenes? You know, I don't understand something.' But it also allows me to inhabit the film before shooting. In a sense, I kind of get into the costume of the film, and I'm inside the film, because that's the only way you can time a script. You have to inhabit it. And once I'm inside, I'm seeing things, mentally I'm imagining things that are very awkward or hard to do in any other way. When you sit there and read a screenplay, you're projecting a lot onto it. I know how this is going to be, but when you're actually inside the film, like in timing it, you are being driven by the film. The film is driving you. It's telling you what is happening. And you see many different things, and also many problems are revealed to you. I frequently get lots of ideas about this story as a result of timing the script, and I keep notes of them and I send these to the director. And I say, 'Here's an idea, you know, might help, this one.' Or, 'I really don't understand this, why does he do this, really?' So it flushes out problems early, which is another reason to do it. There's no disadvantage to doing it. It's awkward, it takes time, but the advantages of doing it are very great, I think. And I would love to see more directors supplying that information.

The other people... I've never worked with them but I'm friends with them, are the Coen Brothers. Their first assemblies are very to-the-moment, and I think because they do this, the equivalent of this... I don't know that they actually time it, but they may time it. But they're very carefully storyboarded, and their first assemblies are well within reach of the final version of the film. There is an advantage in the long assembly. It's a little counterintuitive, but if you imagine, let's say, a four and a half hour first assembly, every scene in that is now called into question. It's as if these scenes are survivors of a shipwreck, and they are all on a lifeboat that is not big enough for all of them. And each of them has a loaded pistol pointed at the head of the person next to them. And everyone is saying, 'Not all of us are going to get out of here alive. For the good of the survivors, some of us are going to have to die.' And that's healthy in the sense that every scene, even scenes that are, on the face of it, deemed absolutely necessary. They all have this question mark: is it really necessary? Could you imagine it without it? And it's a very... It forces a healthy re-examination of everything, because you have to do it. There's no other way to do it, you have to say, 'Every one of these might not be, you know, in the film.' There's a question mark over every scene.
Whereas in a Coen Brothers film, or a Fred Zinnemann film, it just isn't the case. Yes, there is going to be some compression, but in almost every case, all of these scenes... We're not going to question each scene on this existential level. And it's an interesting, but kind of precarious, frightening experience to be working on those super long films, because... Is this ever going to... This may not ever work. We don't know. And I think directors like Hitchcock, and Coen Brothers, Fred Zinnemann, George Lucas, they don't like that experience of this sprawling awkwardness at a moment where... Maybe this won't work? They don't like that? So it's... I'm not saying those films aren't without uncertainty, but it's not that kind of uncertainty of five hours that we have to compress, we have to lose three hours out of a five-hour film, how can we possibly do that? And wonderful films can come out of that process, it's just that it's the equivalent of a high-wire act without a net. You don't know that this is really going to work. How are we going to do it? When you remove the scene of Hiroshima and the bomb, what explains Kip's behaviour? It wasn't planned, it wasn't foreseen that we can solve this problem, because it wasn't seen as a problem in The English Patient. Well, we found the answer thanks to Edie Ichioka, and it works perfectly, it's the perfect answer. And it's integrated within the film and everything. But until you discover that answer, you don't know.

So you're in the position of writing the film, but in postproduction. You are making these big writing decisions about the story at a very late date that adds a level of precariousness. And some people love that danger, Francis Coppola and, to a certain extent, Anthony. And some people are adverse to that. Hitchcock certainly didn't like that. He didn't... according to what he says, he endured the shooting process but didn't particularly like it, because of the danger. And he wanted to minimise the danger. 'I have it in my head, I just want to see it on screen in front of me, as close to what I have in my head as possible, and that's the perfect film.' Whereas the Anthony Minghellas and the Francis Coppolas are intrigued by the process of making the film, and what the process itself will throw up. Unanticipated things that were not in their mind to begin with. Chance, and the unbidden contribution and some member of the crew who came from breakfast and said, 'Here's an idea', that gets adopted. And the fact that this scene was supposed to be shot in the sun and it's shot in the rain, well, okay. Well, can we make something good about this?
That is literally what happened in one of Francis' early films, I didn't work on it, called You're a Big Boy Now, where the son in the story wanted to confront the father. And that day, they said, 'Okay, we're going to shoot on location at this house, in the suburbs of New York', but it was pouring with rain. And the crew just assumed, 'Well, we won't shoot it today, we'll shoot some set.' And Francis said, 'No, we're going to shoot.' 'What? You can't.' 'No, we're going to shoot it.' 'But you have to rewrite.' 'No, I'm not going to...' You know? He... And so they went and shot a scene. As written, the boy comes into the house and says to his mother, 'Where's Dad?' 'He's out in the backyard practicing his putt.' But it was supposed to be a sunny day, now it's raining. And so the son grabs an umbrella and goes out, and stands next to his dad, who is practicing his putting in the rain. And the dad doesn't want to talk to the son because it's a hot topic. I forget what the topic is, but it's, like, 'Don't bother me with this stuff.' 'But Dad...' And the rain only intensified the situation. The father so did not want to talk to the son that he would practice out in the rain, you know? So anyway, you encourage and want these kind of serendipitous awkwardnesses if you're the kind of director that Francis Coppola or Anthony Minghella is. And you don't particularly like these things if you're a Fred Zinnemann or an Alfred Hitchcock, who are more constrained. In a good way, but a different approach to the process.

[Q] Is it unusual for an editor to be so involved so early on in the making of the film, as you seem to be?
An editor is usually given the screenplay well in advance of shooting. Basically, 'Do you want to work on this film?' 'Then let me read the screenplay.' And so how much the director will encourage the editor, or any of the other heads of departments to chip in with ideas, that's up to the personality of the director. My own approach is to read the screenplay as far in advance as possible, and especially with a friend like Anthony [Minghella] or Francis [Ford Coppola], or Phil Kaufman, to make notes. And to type those up, maybe six pages or so of notes. What I thought was great, what I didn't understand from the screenplay. Maybe you have a directorial approach that will clarify this, but from just reading the words, I didn't understand. Or, 'Here's an idea I thought of, I'll just give it to you, you know, make of it what you will. Maybe it's a good idea, maybe you can throw it away. But here's an idea', like the idea in Unbearable Lightness [of Being] ending with the photograph. And it has happened that I have given the director these notes and they decide, 'I don't want to work with you.' Because either 'I don't like these notes that you gave me', or 'I don't like people giving me notes.' And you know, that's happened a couple of times with directors. And that's fine, in the sense that I learn pretty early that the kind of collaboration and give and take that I like wasn't going to happen with this person. And so better to not have that happen than to get deep into it and find out, it doesn't... This isn't working. You know, the personal interaction.
But I think in general, the editor is one of the people... Especially if there's a personal relationship or the basis for a relationship, that you get the editor involved fairly early. And the process, certainly always in Hollywood, less so in Europe but always in Hollywood, is that the film... You start editing the film as soon as the film starts shooting, so that... I mean, not the day after shooting, but probably at the end of the first week, there's enough material that you've got that you can start putting stuff together. And hopefully you, the editor, are following the shooting, not falling much behind, a week or two weeks behind. So that at the end of shooting, it'll take you a week or two weeks to catch up. And the ideal is for the director, who is completely exhausted by this time, to go somewhere, just do a mind-clearing experience of something, and then come back and sit down, and watch the assembly and take it from there.
Fred Zinnemann, his recipe for this was to go mountain climbing – he was a mountain climber – at the end of a film. And to put himself in life-endangering situations, where he had to absolutely pay attention to where he put his hand, because if he didn't, he would die. So he couldn't think about the film in those situations, he had to 'be here now', so to speak. And the climbing experience would erase all of the fatigue and poisons and uncertainties of the shooting experience to get his mind back to some neutral place. And then return from climbing and sit down in a screening room and now watch the film, almost as if... I mean, the way he would say it, almost as if 'I had nothing to do with this film. That a friend asked me to watch this film and see if I had any ideas about it.' That's a very... For Zinnemann, that was a very good place to be. 'Oh, look, a film.' 'Oh, that's interesting.' 'I don't understand that. And I had nothing to do with this, but I can come up with some ideas here of how to make this, how to reshape this material.'

There's a curious thing about red that I was reading the other day, which is that the colour red is created by the human mind, in the sense that we are what's called 'trichromatic animals'. We have three different kinds of rods in our eye. We have a blue rod, or a nerve ending that responds to the wavelength of blue light. And we have a green rod that responds to green light. And we have what's known as a yellow-green, let's just call it 'the yellow'. We don't have a red cone, and so how do we see red? We see red when the brain received nothing from the blue cone, so the blue cones are not seeing anything in that area, which is a red area. So the blue says 'nope', green says 'nope', and yellow-green says, 'I detect a tiny something which is leaving.' It's kind of on the north flank of the yellow-green cone. And yet, we see red. We invent a quality which we call red, which is technically the absence of blue, the absence of green, and a diminishing amount of yellow light.
And I... It meshes, for me, this idea with certain other ideas, because red is generally the most vibrant colour. We use it for stoplights, we use it on the camera to say it's on. Whenever we have to make sure: do you see this colour? We use red. And if you ask people point blank, to very quickly name a colour, red comes out. And yet, red is... We're not passively responding to red, we're creating red. And we're creating it in the sense that we create the impression we have of three dimensions, which doesn't really exist. Our brain is being fed by a flat image from the right eye and a flat image from the left eye, and because we don't like flatness and doubleness, we mesh this neurologically, somehow very complicated algorithm, into three dimensions. The chair is there and the table is behind the chair, and I feel that because of the three-dimensionality that I'm looking at. If I close one eye, I deduce that it's behind, but I don't feel it. And in the same sense, red doesn't really exist. It's a deduction. 'Oh, there is a light coming at me, and it's not blue, it's not green, but I'm not receiving a signal from a red cone.' Which is what, intuitively, that's what you would think. 'Oh, it's such a powerful signal that it must come from... 'There must be a red nerve ending. And when the red is stimulated, we see red. But that's not the case.
And in fact, I think you could generalise... I generalise it to say that the most vivid things that people see or hear are things that they don't really objectively see or hear, but things that they concoct out of other signals – that we produce three dimensions out of other signals. We produce out of red out of not red signals, but other things. And you know, it's generally a truism that the most powerful thing you can do to an audience in a film is not show them something, but make them think that they've seen it, to evoke their imagination. As soon as you actually show the thing, well, okay, there it is. But if you can imply it, you know, the whole lingerie industry is based on that. Which is, we're not going to show nakedness, because that is, you know, that has a limited shelf-life, so to speak. But lingerie, which hides the thing that you want to imagine, is an extremely powerful thing. So you know, if you wanted to reduce it, you know, filmmaking is kind of Victoria's Secret, but on a very high level. But I think it applies to all art and, you know, painting and theatre and dance. It's generally, we try to get an audience to a place, and it's difficult. But we try to get them to a place where they can imagine the thing that we do not show them. And because they have to imagine it, each person has to imagine it for themselves, it's a highly personal thing. What I imagine looking is something that this person looking at the same thing, may imagine something slightly different, or completely different.
Anyway, it's just curious to me that even in something as basic, but very complicated, as human sight and colour perception, you can kind of see a little evidence of the same principle at work.

There's a parlour trick you can play on people, which is to get them to do some kind of complicated, but simple, mathematics and do it quickly. 'What's seven times four? Okay, think of a number. Add that, divide that by that. Now, think of a tool. Okay, now take four and divide by six and add the number that... Now, think of a colour. Now, what is twelve divided by the number that you had', and whatever. So in these mathematics, you ask these questions, 'Think of a tool.' You, beforehand, on a piece of paper, have written down the words hammer and red, and folded it into a piece of paper. And now you say, 'Okay, what tool and colour did you think of?' And 80% of the people in that circumstance will say, 'A red hammer.' And then you pull the piece of paper out and show it to them. So it is very fundamental to us, and I think part of the reason is because we make it, we make red. We're not passively seeing red. We're making that out of other pieces of information.

When [Talented Mr.] Ripley was previewed, it didn't do very well because the hero of the story was a lying, murdering homosexual, circa 19... Whatever it was '50, late 1950s. And audiences that we were showing the film to weren't kind of prepared to deal with that, and it was a struggle for them. They liked certain things about it, but it was an unusual experience for audiences in 1999 to see this film. Paramount, who were one of the funding partners – it was a Miramax and Paramount film – when we went to Miramax, they had produced some trailers based on the material and they wanted to show them to us. In this case, Anthony [Minghella] and me, and Bill Horberg, I think, the producer, and some others. So we were sitting in the conference room that had a video projector, and they said, 'Okay, here's a trailer.' And we looked at it, and it was pretty good. Okay, good. Here's another one. And we looked at that, and then they cleared their throat and said, 'This is the one that we really like', which is sort of ominous when people say that. And so we looked at it. And when the lights came up, I looked at Anthony and he looked like he had seen three different kinds of ghosts, the colour drained out of his face. And he said, 'If you show that trailer, the audiences are going to hate me.' And the reason was because they had concocted the trailer to imply that Tom Ripley kills Dickie Greenleaf in order to get Marge, Gwyneth Paltrow. So that it was a conventional love triangle, and one man struggled with another man for the girl.
Anyway, he said... Anthony said, 'Audiences will hate me.' And the head of publicity at Paramount at that time said, 'Anthony, they already hate you.' Which everyone had to laugh at, but it was emblematic of a certain kind of attitude which you encounter in these situations. The job of the marketing department, the distribution, is to get people into the theatres, and what he felt, this gentleman, was that if we tell them that it's a film about a homosexual going, you know, doing serial killing, audiences won't want to see that film. Because of the preview scores that we had had. And so we're just going to lie in order to get people into the theatres, and then the thinking is, our job is to get them into the theatres, it's your job as the filmmakers to keep them in the theatres. The film has to be good enough to... But clearly there are times when that strategy doesn't work, and it didn't work, as I remember it, with Ripley. The numbers for the first week or two weeks were pretty good for the film, and then it dropped off precipitously. I think because they did run that trailer, and audiences did go in thinking, 'Oh, this is a love triangle with, you know, two handsome guys fighting over a pretty girl.' And then they got something else and word of mouth spread and said, 'It's not', you know, truth in advertising. It isn't really what it seemed to be. And the struggle of making a film really has three fundamental parts to it. It's the struggle of writing the screenplay and trying to get people to agree that this is a film that should be made. And then there's the actual struggle of making the film, and then once you've made the film, it's another struggle to show it and get people, get the right people, people who will like the film, into the theatres or whatever the venue is, to see your product. So that end of the business is something that I don't really... I've experienced it in situations like I've just described, but I don't know a lot about it. I've never worked in that area, so it's a slight mystery to me. Although you can look at it from the outside and sort of wonder about things that go on.

After having done Touch of Evil, I had a different attitude toward what you might call 'a director's cut'. Although in that case, it almost is a... It's as perfect a definition of that process as, I guess, you can make. Because Orson Welles made the film, and the studio fired Orson Welles, effectively prevented him from having anything to do with the film. They hired another director, they added new scenes, they recut the scenes. They ignored Welles's advice and released the film. And so Welles was prevented from finishing the film the way he wanted to finish it. The only, but very significant, asterisk to this is that Orson was dead by the time we tried to do this. So we have no idea really what he might have thought of what we did. But we were following his list, his 58 pages, as well as we could. So when Francis Coppola came to me in the year 2000, after [Talented Mr.] Ripley, and said, 'The French distributors want to make a new version of Apocalypse Now with a French plantation in it. Will you edit that for me?' And I thought, 'Okay, yes.' I think had I not done Touch of Evil, I would have had... My answer wouldn't have been quite so quick. And this was a different situation, because Francis, in the first Apocalypse Now, had final cut. I mean, there was no... You know, the studio said things about the film, but the version that was released in 1979 was approved by Francis Coppola. Every decision in that was something that he approved of.
So this is a new version of Apocalypse Now that actually began as a... The intention was that it was going to be a DVD release only, in France only, because Christian Marquand, the actor in the French plantation scene that had been completely cut out of the 1979 version, had recently died after a long illness. And so this was a tribute to him, a scene that nobody had ever seen other than a few preview audiences. Starting from that germ, the process evolved rather quickly to something that became in the end, a full-scale 70mm release of the film in theatres, at three hours and 20 minutes long. So it wasn't just adding the French plantation, we added lots of other stuff, because the material for the French plantation was stored in limestone caves, somewhere in Pennsylvania. A big storage facility, Iron Mountain or something. And it was in boxes, it was well-documented. But we had to go and get that, and bring the negative out of cold storage. And this... 'Well, as long as we're doing that, is there anything else we should look at?' And so Francis went through the screenplay, and I went through the screenplay, and we made lists of, 'Oh, maybe that scene, you know?' 'What about that?' 'Yes, okay.' And in the end, we added almost 50 minutes of material, of which probably 15 minutes, 20 minutes was the French plantation scene.

The original idea, short of the theatrical release, was that it would be a DVD that was what was called a branching DVD, so that in the menu options, you would see something like the Nung River going into Cambodia, with scenes sprouting off of it like branches. And you would decide, by clicking on them, which new scenes you wanted to see, or none of them. So you could put this DVD in and just see the original film, or you could see it with just the French plantation, or with all of the new scenes but not the French plantation, or whatever. The technology of the time was not quite up to that, that we could not do that without some significant stall in the process, so it would not be a smooth blending. I think you could probably do it now. And this involved taking the soundtracks from 1979 and pulling them apart, and adding all of our complicated treatment to this never-before cut material in a finished form. The French plantation did not exist as a scene that we had cut out. As we were working in 1978 and '79, the French plantation would shrink, and it would shrink again, and shrink, until finally... I think in the last time it was in the film it was just a few disconnected images. And then we thought, 'Well, let's just... let's kill the darling and put it out of its misery.' So I had to reconstruct the French plantation scene from... I had to recut it from its essential elements. And that applied to all the other scenes as well. So that was a fantastic experience, doing this. The archival aspects of it, digging back 20 years into the past and pulling out this beautiful negative that had been stored very nicely, it was very clean.

And then Vittorio Storaro got involved, the cinematographer. And he said, 'Well, if you're going to do that, you're going through all that trouble, then we need to make a new way of storing the negative. And so we're going to use the Technicolour three-strip process which is the best way – and it is – of storing negatives, which is to make black and white negatives from the negative, tuned to three different colours: yellow, cyan, and magenta.' It's kind of like our three trichromatic eyes, yellow, blue and red. And so that added another layer of complexity. So from a relatively modest beginning... 'Can't we just take the French plantation and pull it off the shelf and put it on the film?' 'No.' 'Well, okay, if we can't do that, then we have to do this. And if we're doing that, then let's do this.' And the end result is that [Apocalypse] Redux is a pretty accurate, pretty close example of the screenplay that Francis went to the Philippines to shoot. There's a couple of small scenes left out, but... And the whole ending with Marlon Brando, Colonel Kurtz, that was not really in the screenplay at the time, that was heavily rewritten once Brando was on location. So in that case, there's a caveat there. But if you want to get a pretty good idea of what the screenplay looked like when Francis when to shoot the film, Apocalypse Redux is it. Is it therefore better or different than the 1979 version? It's certainly different, not fundamentally different. The hard question is: we're sending a spaceship to another planet, and there can be only one copy of Apocalypse Now, which copy will it be? I would probably go for the 1979 version, because it was made in the full heat of that original impulse to make the film. And we were very proud of it at the time, it was a big, long struggle. But there was nothing about that 1979 version that made us think, 'Well, wouldn't it be better if we...' So Redux is an afterthought, kind of a glorious afterthought, but it is thinking after the initial impulse of the film.

There was a moment in the final printing of the film where we looked at the original negative for the original reel one, the first 20 minutes of the film, and it had been used so much in testing and in making the original 70mm prints, that it was very dirty. It had many technical imperfections in it, just from being run through printers so often. So we decided to clean it, which is what you would do. But it was so dirty that it wouldn't really clean. So we then resorted to hand-cleaning it with cotton wool and fine tweezers. I mean, there are tools to do this, to pick these... But the dirt was embedded in the celluloid. These things were like shards of dirt in the grain of the film, and we just couldn't get them out. So what are we going to do? The laboratory, Technicolor, said, 'Well, there is one thing, one last thing you can do.' 'What's that?', said Francis. 'It's a hot alkaline bath.' 'What's that?' 'Well, we do it over a weekend, and we have to empty out the tanks in the laboratory, and we fill a tank with hot water and Alka-Seltzer. We make the water hot and alkaline, and then we put your film through it. And the alkalinity and the heat expand the emulsion, and then at a certain point, we agitate the water, and these shards of dirt will float off into the Alka-Seltzer, and your film... and we put it through cold, non-alkaline water, and the emulsion stabilises, and then there you have a lovely, clean film.' Francis said, 'What's the downside of doing that?' 'Well, there's a 10% chance that the emulsion will simply fall off the backing of the film, and you will get just clear film on the other side. And you will see these coloured pools of ink at the bottom of the Alka-Seltzer, and there's your film.' And Francis said, 'Let's do it.' Because he's a gambler.
And we knew that we had a backup, there was a fine-grain inter-positive of that, which you lose a generation, but it was, you know... In a desperate situation, that's okay. But Francis decided to risk it and go for this. So we did it over a weekend, and luckily, we were on the 90% success rate and it did come out. And that's when you see the film now and look at the first 10, 15, 20 minutes, think in your mind, in the back of your mind, about the hot Alka-Seltzer that this film had to go through to be as clean as it is, the way you're looking at it.

In the middle of working on Apocalypse Redux, I received a plain white envelope from the US government, and my heart did a little momentary flip, thinking, 'What's this?' And it turned out to be a VHS tape and an audio cassette tape, both very low... the kind of things you might buy in a supermarket. And it was a transfer of a film made in 1894, of William Kennedy Dickson playing the violin. And what was on the audio tape was a transfer from a cylinder recorded in 1894 of somebody playing a violin in a rather chaotic situation. If you listen to the three minutes of the cylinder, there's a lot of stopping and starting, and people talking in the background, and extraneous noises. But buried within that sound, you could very faintly hear somebody say, 'Are the rest of you ready? Go ahead.' And this cylinder had been discovered just a few years earlier. Somebody going through Thomas Edison's backlog of damaged goods at his site, Menlo Park in New Jersey, had come up with this cylinder, which was in fact, broken. It had broken in half, and therefore nobody knew what was on it. And so it was sent to the Rodgers and Hammerstein Centre for Recorded Sound at Lincoln Centre in New York, and they fitted it back together very carefully without damaging it, and not using superglue or anything, but real restoration, and played it. And the sound that they heard on it was this sound, and somebody – it turned out to be Patrick Loughney, who was the head librarian of media at the National Library in Washington, DC – said, 'I wonder if this is the soundtrack to this piece of film of William Dickson playing the violin.'
When you look at this piece of film, which has never been lost from public view, it's part of Edison's... What he left to the nation when he died. William Dickson, who was one of Edison's key inventors, is playing the violin, and there's a big acoustic horn off to the left of him. So it's clear that that sound was being recorded. Is it possible? Yes, it is possible that this is the experiment where they were trying to do recorded sound on film for the very first time. But it was a failure at the time, for reasons I'll get into in a second. And eventually the cylinder was tossed aside, and eventually it broke and history moved on. But this was an attempt to make a device they called 'the Kinetophone' that would run in synchronisation with an image. So that you could see somebody standing there and talking, like we have in film today. They never solved the synchronisation problem. In fact, this was the first time human beings ever confronted the fact that synchronisation is difficult, that life is in sync, or it seems to be in sync. Therefore, if we have a photograph and a sound, we should just record them and something... It'll work. Well, it doesn't just work, because you have to have an agreed upon start, where do these things start, and that's what the clapstick, the famous clapstick in film is for. And then you have to guarantee that both systems run at the same rate. Because even if you start together, it doesn't do you any good if one of them goes slightly faster than the other, then you lose synchronisation. And so they made a few... What they called Kinetophones, but they were kind of music videos. You would put your eyes up to the machine in 1895-6, or whenever it was, and you would see a photograph of Niagara Falls today, for instance. Then you would hear a band, John Philip Sousa's band playing The Niagara Falls March, or something. So you know... But it wasn't synchronised, it was just however it happened to wind up.

And this was a problem that faced the library – how do we sync it up? And Rick Schmidlin, who I'd worked with on Touch of Evil, was at a conference in Italy, at a silent film festival [Pordenone Silent Film Festival]. And he went up to Patrick afterwards and said, 'Send that to my friend Walter, he'll do it.' And so here it was. And of course, I was right in the middle of Apocalypse Now Redux, and had very few brain cells left to spare. So I put it on the shelf, and every morning when I came in to work, there it is. Yes, okay, well. Eventually, the guilt overwhelmed me and I thought, 'Okay, let's do it.' And I gave the film, the tape to Sean [Cullen], my assistant, and we digitised it into the Avid (I was working on the Avid system). We digitised the sound and the picture, and the picture was clearly... It looked in slow motion. And that's because Edison shot at 40 frames a second, rather than 24 frames a second. And that's how you couldn't... Right from the get-go it was hard to synchronise it, because the sound is real, and the image is slow-motion. So the first thing was: let's see if we get this image down to 24 frames a second, which digitally is a fairly easy thing to do. We compress the time base of the image, looked at it and thought, 'Well, that's probably correct.' But it's hard to exactly tell because there were no records of, it was exactly 40 frames or what. So we got it in the ballpark, and then transferred the sound. And now it was just a case of brute force, trying stuff out. My dad played the violin, so we had a violin in the house and I kind of knew what that would sound like and what that string sounded like. And I had this valuable fragment of somebody saying, 'Go ahead.' And I thought, 'Well, that's probably where... if this is it, this is where they started the projector, the camera.'
And so I started to line up the beginning, and I would get: 'that looks pretty good', and then it would pretty quickly drift out of sync. So maybe that's not it. Let me try this, let me try that. No, no. And then I found something that was 'that's pretty good.' Now, we go to the end and find where he goes at the end, and see if I can get it synced there. And I did the same thing, just trying various things. And I finally got something that I thought was pretty good. And then I did the math to figure out what's the displacement between here and there, and then I would be able to expand the soundtrack, as it turned out, to fill in the gaps. It's like hanging clothes on a clothesline. I had a clothespin here and a clothespin there, and then I would move the clothespins to make the sheet hang evenly. But it didn't work. That's disappointing. And now hours had gone by, I started to feel guilty again. But I kept at it, inevitably... Okay, I'll try it one last time. And then I found the right clothespin for the end, did the calculations, and it was in sync. And instantly, I felt the hairs on the back of my neck rise up, because I was seeing something... I was seeing a piece of film, and the sound for that film that was recorded at that time, you know, 110 years ago, slightly less, but over a century ago. The only piece of sound film from the 19th century was there, and it was in sync. And not only was I seeing it for the first time in over 100 years, it's the first time anybody had seen it in sync, because they hadn't been able to get it in sync back then. As I said, 'They just didn't understand the difficulty of doing this.'

And we married it up, and sent it back, made a print with the soundtrack on it. We remixed it at Lucas Film, who contributed the cost of the mixing out of their own pocket, which was not much, but significant, and sent it back to the library. And it's now part of the, you know... They admit a number of films every year into the registry, and I think it was admitted a couple of years later into the National Registry of Significant Films, because of this. The fact that historically, this is the first, there's nothing older than that. There are some rumours about something else older with Dickson speaking, but nothing has ever turned up. And the other fantastic thing about it is that we also have no recordings other than this, that we know about, of people speaking in an ordinary situation, kind of off-the-cuff speech. Most recordings from the 19th century are very presentational: 'And now, we will have the something, something', 'And now I'm going to read the speech that I gave at the conference of...' You know? It's the equivalent of those era-type photographs with people sitting very formally. We don't have any candid recordings, and this is a candid recording, because the significant part of it only lasts less than 20 seconds. Because that's how long Edison's films lasted. But there's another couple minutes ahead of that, with people talking to each other about what they're doing. And Dickson noodling around on the violin. And it, unfortunately, is so scratchy and so off-mic, that it's hard to tell what they're saying. But technology is making very big strides in that direction. The day may come when we can decode that information and actually hear it very clearly. Edison himself – he certainly was there – Edison talking to Dickson about what it is that they're doing, and the last-minute preparation before they actually push the button and record this thing.

Another wonderful thing about doing this experiment with the early soundtrack was that I was thereby introduced to William Dickson, who is really the man, the point man at Edison's laboratory who invented film. Edison was kind of reluctant to go in this direction. Dickson, however, who was... I think his mother was French, his father was English, and he had seen the Muybridge Experiments and became convinced that there is such a thing as motion pictures. And he emigrated to the United States and camped out on Edison's door, saying, 'There's only one person who can invent film and it's you, and I want to help you do it.' And Edison eventually hired him and put him to work doing some kind of smelting device that had to do with copper extraction, just to see what he was made of. And he passed the test and Edison decided, 'Okay, let's do it.'
Edison's original idea was to embed the photographs in the cylinder itself, the audio cylinder, so that the cylinder would be a double-spiral, a kind of DNA helix of sound and picture. But to see the picture, you would have to look through a microscope as you leaned over the cylinder. And the idea was you could see the person singing or playing the instrument on the music. Very problematic, very difficult technically. They tried it, and to get the focus correct was impossible, the granular structure of the film was not up to resolution at that... Anyway, it was clear to Dickson that this would not work. And he said, 'Why don't you call your friend [George] Eastman and get some of that new flexible film stuff that has just been invented?'
And sure enough, Eastman sent a roll of this new film, which was 2 ¾ inches wide, which is that. And they looked at it and said, 'Well, that's too wide, let's cut it in half.' So they sliced it in half and made it 1 3/8 inches wide, and then said, 'Well, we need sprockets, holes in it to keep it registered. And we'll dedicate the 3/8 inch, so we'll split left and right, so each of those is 3/16 inch, and then the middle we will make one inch wide and that'll be where the picture it.' It turns out that 1 3/8 inches is a whisker different than 35mm film. It's like 34.92mm. But they were working in inches, they didn't care about millimetres. And it was only when the film was eventually brought to Europe and accepted, this is what we're going to be working with. And they thought, 'Oh, the stupid Americans, they meant it to be 35mm and it's just shy.' So it was then officially made 35mm. And a curious result of this is that 35mm film, the way we looked at film in the 20th century, is the only industrial product that is a mixture of Imperial and Metric measurements. Because it's Metric in its width, it is exactly 35mm wide, but it's Imperial, which is to say, inches, in the horizontal dimension. There are exactly 16 frames in a foot. And there's no way to make the number of frames in metres come out exact. So it was a turbulent birth, and the turbulence lives on in the fact that film is this odd mixture of Metric and so-called Imperial measurements.

[William Kennedy] Dickson, because of his visionary elements, clashed with Edison, and they separated a couple of years after this experiment with the violin, because Edison didn't believe in projection. He believed in one man, one machine. That you should sell a machine, and one person would put five cents or whatever, and look at it. That way, you could sell more equipment and more film. The idea of a room with one projector and one piece of film, showing to 400 people – Edison saw money going out the door. 'I could have sold 400 machines.' And so he didn't like projection, and Dickson did, he saw that. And he split and was one of the founders of... I will get it in a second, it just flew out of my head. The studio [Biograph] that eventually became the studio where D.W. Griffith worked. And Dickson, I think, was somebody who hired D.W. Griffith to be his cameraman, or actor or something, early on in his career.
And at the same time that this was happening, the Lumière brothers were inventing film, their own version of it. And strangely, they didn't see a future for film. They thought it was something like a hula hoop, that would interest people for a while and it might have some archival value. But eventually people are going to get tired of trains arriving at stations, because they can go to the station and see the train arrive for themselves. They were not visionaries in that sense, they were camera manufacturers. That was... The Lumière factory was where they made cameras. So they looked at it from a more technical point of view, compared to Dickson.
And I ran across this book which has been reprinted by the Museum of Modern Art in New York, and it's written by Dickson and made in 1895, so just a year after the violin experiment. And it's called The History of the Kinetograph. In other words, the history of movies, written just a few years after the invention of movies, but incredibly valuable from that point of view. But toward the end, he's talking about the future of cinema, and I'll just quote from one thing. He says, 'Not only our own resources – meaning humanity – not only our own resources of the entire world will be at our command. Nay, we may even anticipate the time when sociable relations will be established between ourselves and the planetary system. And when the latest doings on Mars will be recorded by enterprising kinetographic reporters.' Well, he's right, it happened. You know, we have cameras on Mars telling us what's happening on Mars. And he predicted films with naval battles and conflict and sound and colour, and essentially, even though he didn't talk about it, he predicted editing. Because what he's talking about is impossible without editing. And motion pictures were not invented with editing. The initial pictures were very much like kind of images you see today on YouTube for the most part. These single-shot versions of cat videos. Here's a cat doing a funny thing. Edison's version is, 'Here's a man kissing a woman, or here's a man sneezing. Isn't that amazing?' Yes, it is. But the idea that you could take fragments of images and weave them together into a tapestry that would imaginatively provide a continuity was something that did not occur to anybody for certainly 10-12 years.

And as far as we can tell, the first people to do that were here in England, in Brighton, the so-called Brighton School. A man named James Williamson, in 1901, made two films. One called Stop, Thief!, and the other one called Fire! And these were, as you might imagine, a chase of a thief with the police running after him and him crawling over fences, and eventually hiding in a barrel and then finding him in the barrel and taking him off to jail. And it's all done with what we'd call today as 'continuity editing', that you do a shot of the man running around the corner and running out of frame, and then you do another shot of him running into this frame and jumping in the barrel. And you can shoot the second shot first and the first shot second, and it doesn't matter because you can rearrange the order by editing after the fact.
And this was not evident to Edison, or to the Lumière brothers, nobody thought of this as even being possible. Hence, the Lumière brothers saying, 'Cinema is an invention without a future.' They didn't see how it could really levitate and become something grand, which is in fact, what has happened. But Dickson is somebody who, right from the get-go, against all the evidence... There was no evidence that any... He's talking about going to Mars, what? But he was a visionary, and cinema... Many human activity, much human activity, certainly cinema, depends on these visionaries who have an idea that nothing... there's no evidence that supports this idea. But this idea is something that drives them forward, and we make, inevitably, against reason, we make progress in this way. So wherever Dickson is right now, he must be having a good smile, the fact that things written in this book 120 years ago are, in fact, true.

I had worked with Steve Jaffe, the producer on Ghost in 1990, and we had kept up with each other afterwards. He continued to be, and still is, a good friend. And he approached me in 2000, after I'd finished work on [Apocalypse] Redux, to work on a film that he was producing, Kathryn Bigelow was directing, on a Russian submarine disaster that happened many years earlier during the Cold War. And I, as usual, read the script, I loved the idea of it, very exciting. I liked Kathryn Bigelow's films and it was exciting to work with her. And so we set out on this adventure. The film is called K-19, which was the class of the submarine that had this disaster, which was a nuclear meltdown in the North Atlantic sometime during the early 60s, I think, '61 or so. And it was going to be made by an American studio, and it was going to have American and British, for the most part, actors in it. But they were ultimately Russians. There are no Americans anywhere in the film, except very distantly, you see a helicopter and a ship, but you... It's as if it's a film made by the Soviet Union, in a sense, because it's completely contained within that world. And it was an expensive film, so it needed recognisable names and stars by the studio's reckoning. It was not Kathryn's original intention, but the budget... Technically, these films are very expensive because of all the visual effects and the sets that have to be built. And so Harrison Ford was hired to play the captain, Liam Neeson, his co-equal, his second-in-command, and off we went.
I was working on the Avid, as I had been ever since The English Patient. This was the system of choice, really the only option we had. There was another system called Lightworks that Thelma Schoonmaker, particularly at this time, very much favoured. I just, for whatever reason, I stuck with Avid. And the film was shot in Toronto, in Canada, simulating the northern part of Russia, and obviously, in the submarine. And a gruelling story, because of the... When the reactor started to melt down, what do you do? Because the chances are that it might explode. And that explosion might be misinterpreted as the beginning of a nuclear conflict, or what? And you know, then there's obviously self... how are we going to survive, with all the internal dynamics of activity within a submarine?
The first assembly of the film was longish, it was four hours or close to four hours, so we were presented again with the same... One of the issues of: how do we then cut this down? And eventually, we almost cut it in half. I think the film, when it comes out, is two hours and ten minutes or so. It's a wonderful film, but it got hit with an event, which happened while we were in postproduction, which was 9/11. We were editing the film when the planes ran into the World Trade Centre in New York, and the world shifted on its axis a bit. And the film was made on the idealistic premise that we need to understand that the Russians are our enemies, but they went through difficult things also, and responded on their own terms. And in human terms, heroically to a very difficult situation that, if it had been handled differently, might have triggered a nuclear exchange. And many people in the Russian ship died, and died of radiation, and they sacrificed themselves. Kind of like people going into Chernobyl to fix what they had to fix, knowing that that was the end of their lives, to do this.

And when the film came out the following summer, it did not do well. There also had been... It was a very complicated, long film to put together. The original intention, I think, was to have it come out in the winter of 2001, but because it was 2001, because of other things, it got delayed. And so it came out in the summer. And it's probably not really a summer film, because you're watching people struggling with very difficult situations. It's not a slam-bang action film, and you have to sympathise with Soviet military as human beings to get the film.
The other thing that frequently was cited against it was: these people have phony accents. And in fact, what you hear is people speaking English with a dusting of a Russian accent. And certain films can get away with it. I edited a film, Unbearable Lightness of Being, which was exactly that. We are looking at people who are Czech people talking to each other at home, and we're hearing English. And what we're hearing is English with a Czech accent. But what is that? Because they don't sound Czech to each other, they sound like they're... That's just their normal language. They don't have an accent. But we do as the audience. So from a certain point of view, they should just be speaking with their normal accents, Daniel Day Lewis's English accent. But that isn't quite right either. So films get into this funny place where certain films feel that the right solution is this twist. And I think the added element to look into consideration there is that on Unbearable Lightness, which is not a wildly popular film, it didn't make a lot of money and was not seen by millions and millions of people... Also, nobody knew, at that time, who was Daniel Day Lewis, and who is Juliette Binoche, and who are all these other Eastern European... Lena Olin, who? So you could accept their accents, because you didn't really know who they were, the average audience. Not that the average audience even went to that film.
But for K-19, which was an expensive film, you wanted a very broad audience. And now they were looking at Harrison Ford, who is Han Solo for crying out loud. He's the guy from Star Wars. And now he's playing a Russian, and he has an accent, what is this? And so... I mean, the fact is that Harrison Ford's mother is Russian, and his father is Irish, that's where the Ford comes from. But Harrison, biologically, is just as Russian as many Russians are, and so why not play that? Well, because of this tension between who you are, who you are really, and who you are as a movie star in the audience's imagination. And it was hard for people to go around that corner and accept this situation as plausible, for reasons that really have little to do with the film, but they have a lot to do with what was happening in the world at that time, in 2001, because of the crisis in the Middle East. And the fact that culturally, the United States had begun a process that is still continuing, which is an antagonistic relationship with other countries. We don't, now, generally want to understand those other countries. We want to build walls and we want to keep them out, and this is a worldwide phenomenon that has just gotten more serious. Whereas K-19 was at a time where the hope was that this would be shifting. The Berlin Wall had come down, and things were opening up in a way that was more hopeful than, in fact, they had turned out to be.

I had had a problem with [Talented Mr.] Ripley, working in Italy with the equipment that we were using, which was the Avid system. And it was an insignificant, relatively speaking, technical problem that had to do with how you got the film, which is what we were shooting. We were shooting an actual, physical film. How do you get that into the digital world? And it's a complicated manoeuvre. Back then, which was 15-17 years ago, it was even more complicated because we hadn't quite figured out certain things. And we kept having problems with this, and we kept asking Avid, 'We're having problems.' And as I remember it, they kept saying, 'It's your problem, you're doing something wrong.' 'Well, then, tell us what we're doing.' It was one of those pushback situations that became more frustrating because we were making a film, and film was coming in every day, we have to keep loading it in. Eventually, we found a friend who was working in LA, at MGM, and he said, 'Yes, we've had that same problem, and we traced it back to a third-party piece of software at Avid, and here's what the solution is.' And I thought, 'Why didn't Avid just tell us that? Why did I have to go around?' So I began thinking then, is there... This is not really a healthy situation, that there is only one system that everybody uses. It's nice that there's some competition or some other way of doing it, because that would make everyone more attentive to what is needed.
And so I began looking into Apple's editing system, which was Final Cut Pro, and I made the decision on the next film, which was Anthony Minghella's Cold Mountain, to switch from one system to another. And at that time, this had never been done before on an expensive motion picture. Final Cut Pro was used, but it was used for instructional videos, some documentaries, a few low-budget films had used it. And I talked to people who had used it, and there were certain things that were not really in place yet. If we wanted to shoot on film and edit in Final Cut Pro, how do you get back to the film, how do you make changes if you've already conformed the film? It was kind of a little rat's nest of issues that had to be addressed. Nonetheless, I decided: let's make the leap.
And so we went, of all places, to Romania to shoot a film about the American civil war. As it turned out, it worked fantastically well. We were in a country that had been one of the most 'ironical' of the Iron Curtain countries. I mean that in the metallic sense of the word, with Ceausescu and everything, just a few years earlier. And now here we were, breaking new technological ground, but we had great support from the Kodak lab in Bucharest. And Apple, ironically, did not support us. They said, 'You're too far away and it's too risky, you're on your own.' And that sent little shivers up and down our spines. But we did have support from a company in Los Angeles, named DigitalFilm Tree, who had been using Final Cut. And they said, 'We have your back, we can tell you... We can supply the equipment in the right constellation, and if there are technical problems, we know the answer to that.' But everyone was forging new ground because of the high-profile nature of this, and the fact that we were in Romania doing this. But all the equipment held up very well, and there were no technical problems at all. And as we approached the need for these other solutions, these solutions fell into place, thanks to the development at Apple.
And Apple eventually came around, and once we moved back to London from Romania, Apple breathed a sigh of relief and then they began to give us more support, thankfully. But really by that time, we didn't need it. And in fact, from a public relations point of view, not that anyone has ever... I don't think Apple mentioned this. But the fact that we did it without Apple's support really showed the robustness of the system. The fact that people who had never used this equipment before, and the equipment never being used in this way before, were going to a remote country in Eastern Europe with dodgy infrastructure. And in fact, it all worked fine without an Apple representative being there, saying, 'Do this, don't do that', you know? It was actually a testament to how well that whole system worked. And I continued for many years after using... On all the films subsequently, up until 2011, I used Final Cut.

The breakthrough was not just technical, but it was also economic. And it was significant in the sense that for the first time, the media itself, and the equipment that you were using to work with the media were not free, but insignificant costs. That Final Cut Pro was using off-the-shelf computers, it was not using any proprietary hardware, and the media is digital media, so you can make as many copies as you want just by pressing a key, clone this. You have to have hard drives and places to store it, but compared to working with film, the experience of working digitally is that it's free, that that's your feeling. With the Avid, the equipment itself was very expensive, because it was all proprietary at that time, proprietary hardware, and a significant thing. So you thought carefully about how many Avid systems are we going to use. Typically, two, but sometimes three, sometimes four. But that's a significant cost.
With Final Cut, with Apple system, given the budgets of film, this was an 80-million-dollar film, it was another couple of thousand dollars to buy a new Mac Pro and a monitor, and there you were, connect it up. What the offshoot of this was it was very easy for me as an editor to allow my assistants to have practice editing. Whereas in the old, old days of film, you could do that, but the film itself was very expensive to print, and the equipment, the Moviolas and the KEMs, were many tens of thousands of dollars to buy. In those days, you know? What it would be today is $30,000-$40,000 for each editing station. So now, by almost an order... More than an order of magnitude, these costs had come down, and a threshold was passed as a result of that. That you no longer had to think economically about, 'Oh, I have to get another print of that', to allow that person to experiment. You just make a copy of it, and then you no longer have to really think, because people could even take a hard drive and use their little clamshell iMac to edit with. It was inherent in the situation, but it was revelatory to experience that shift. Now that we don't even think about that anymore, because everything is like that. But at that time, that was one of the first big speedbumps that suddenly, we got over and on the other side of that we were in a slightly different world where you thought about things in a different way.

Cold Mountain was a big, expensive period piece. And for reasons that I don't fully understand to this day, the decision was made to shoot it in Europe. When Anthony Minghella first approached me about the film, I thought, 'Well, this is a film certainly where we will be shooting in the United States', which is where I live most of the time. Whereas [The] English Patient and [Talented Mr.] Ripley were shot in Europe and Africa. So okay, now we're going to do it in the American South, I thought. But cooler heads, or different heads, prevailed, and for economic reasons having probably to do with tax rebates or the European something system, the decision was made to shoot in Europe, in Romania. Which has mountains, the Carpathian Mountains, and they were standing in for the Appalachian Mountains. And in fact, because of climate change, global warming, the snows that you could reliably depend on in the 19th century in the Carolinas, you couldn't depend on those anymore. Whereas in the Carpathian Mountains, which are kind of a little bit higher in latitude, you could dependably need snow. You could get snow, and the script depended it on being winter for the later part of the film. The creative struggle with the film was similar to English Patient, in the sense... Unlike Ripley, it had multiple points of view. There was a point of view of Inman, the Jude Law character, leaving the Army, absent without leave, just taking off and going back to his home in the mountains to go back to Nicole Kidman, who was playing his love. They had exchanged a kiss early in the film, not much more than that, and now – Ada was her name – and now he was going back to Ada on a long kind of Odyssean trip through the war landscape of the Civil War. A beautiful book by [Charles] Frazier. And very attracted to the book, which I loved, very atmospheric, but it was long and sprawling, as these things sometimes are, and it was intercut between Ada and Inman. You'd see her, and then you would see him. So you weren't going back into the past and future as the way we were in Cold Mountain, but we were changing geography. And that's tricky, not quite as tricky as time transitions, but it's still... To get it right, you have to be very careful about the balance. And we worked a lot, getting that as correctly as we eventually got it.

The creative problems of Cold Mountain were similar, to a certain extent, in [The] English Patient. The first assembly was very long, longer even than English Patient, it was five hours and ten minutes. And it was intercutting two different points of view. There was a point of view of Ada, played by Nicole Kidman, who is stuck because her father is now dead on the family farm back in the hills of Carolina. And Inman, played by Jude Law, who has abandoned the Army, the Confederate Army for which he was a soldier, and is now trekking across the war-ravaged landscape of the American Civil War. It's a geographic shifted point of view, that we're going from the mountains farm with Ada, to the landscape of the war with Inman, and then back to Ada. Unlike The English Patient, where we're intercutting both geographically and temporally, we're going from the present, which is the monastery in Italy, to the past, which is North Africa ten years or so, five years, earlier. And they're both tricky, Cold Mountain probably a little less tricky than English Patient, because there is a sort of unity of time, but not of geography.
Anyway, we solved that, I think, to the best of our abilities. You never really know, did we get it really right? I think we did. But a problem that we don't... I don't think we ever really solved, and it was inherent in the story and I only really became aware of this as a problem from working on Cold Mountain, which is the riskiness of the Odyssean journey story. In the sense that you... In that kind of story, you have to keep meeting new people, new monsters to conquer, new people to interact with. And Cold Mountain, in the sense that it's following Inman on his trek, he keeps meeting new situations. Here's the woman in the caravan, who has goats. And here's the widow, whose husband has died and her baby is sick, and she's trying to slaughter the pig. And the difficulty is meeting those characters past the halfway point in the film. If you just think of it in very simple terms as a landscape of: we start the film here, we climb the mountain. At the midpoint, the landscape starts to... The watershed goes toward the ending, from the Atlantic, to the Pacific, to the Rockies. And rivers, on the downside of the mountain, are flowing to the sea of the ending of the film. And you kind of feel that. If you meet new people on the downside of the mountain, you – the audience – think, 'Well, maybe I haven't even gotten to the middle yet. When is this film... is this film going to end?' Because each time you meet a new person, you have to do a subtle, and sometimes not so subtle, reprogramming of: who is this person, and how significant is this person going to be, and should I care about this person or is this person going to be an enemy, or what?
So you have to do work, every time there's a new character, you – the audience – even if it's pleasurable, there's a certain amount of work involved. And the third time that happens, it's fine, but the fifth and sixth and seventh time that happens, it's... You kind of get a little breathless on the climb. And it becomes hard to predict, when is this film going to be over? And because it's a long film, it was well over two hours in the end... I like to say we cut English Patient over Cold Mountain, we cut two hours and 40 minutes out of the first assembly of Cold Mountain to make Cold Mountain. But that was so... I don't know that there is a solution to it. Say, if this is the film we're going to make, and it's based on this novel, and this novel has these people in it, and those are the expectations, and you want to do interpretative justice to the novel, basically that's it. This is the climb we're on, and if the audience has a difficult time, you try to make it as less difficult as possible. But it's a landscape that you have to navigate in a slightly different way than a normal, whatever that is, a normal film. Where on the other side of the midpoint, we're taking characters that are well-established and we're now knitting them together into something that will have a satisfactory ending.

We talked earlier about the single point of view, which in my experience, classically is... I mean, in the films I've edited, the classic examples are [The] Conversation and Talented Mr. Ripley, which are told from a single point of view, for the reason that the main characters in each of those films are problematical characters that are not user-friendly for an audience. They're not the normal kind of heroes for whom you root, for various reasons. And so a solution that's made at the screenplay level and the directing level is: never let the audience have any other options than to watch the film. Which means: a single point of view. And eventually, if the film is good enough, you will come to care for these people simply because there's no let-up. It's like, in a good sense, you're hostage to the film, and you begin to admire the person who is holding you hostage, even though if you stop to think about it, it's like, 'Why am I here?' Whereas Cold Mountain has multiple points of view, Ada and Inman, and when you have multiple points of view, there are...
To slightly oversimplify it, there are two solutions to that problem. And that's what I would call the divergent system, which is the solution that [The] Godfather adopted, American Graffiti adopted it. And that's: we are going to set a scene early on in the film, where all of the main characters are seen geographically in close relationship with each other. In Godfather, it was the wedding, everyone was brought to the wedding. And you saw Tom Hagen, you saw Fredo, you saw Michael, you saw Don Corleone, you saw the other families, you saw Connie. There they all are, and they're all exhibiting behaviour that is a thumbprint of their characteristic, and you get to see them, even physically, in relationship to each other. And once that's established, you can show the points of view and you can go with Tom Hagen to Los Angeles. You know who he is and you know his relationship to Don Corleone. And then you can cut back to Michael, and then you can cut to Sonny Corleone, to Fredo, and you can navigate the kaleidoscope of all of these different points of view, because you have a secure base from which to operate.
Against that arrangement is the convergent approach, which is to tell a story with multiple points of view, but begin with one story and then seemingly arbitrarily, cut to another story that doesn't seem to have any relationship to the first, and then you follow that. And then you cut back to the first, follow that, and cut back to the second. And then eventually, and as a screenwriter you have to decide where this point is, these two stories will merge. And this will intersect with that. The extreme example of this is [The] Godfather Part II, where the point of convergence is so late in the film that it exists outside the film. That we're looking at Don Corleone as he emerged from a childhood in Sicily, and then we're looking at Michael Corleone as he is navigating the heights of power of his empire in Lake Tahoe. And we're just intercutting these two stories, and the point of convergence is the moment that Don Corleone himself comes into the room and meets the young Michael, who is about to go to war as a Marine. In fact, the film stops before that moment. You hear Don Corleone's voice, seemingly, out in the hallway, but you're just ending on Michael sitting at the table, wondering what he's going to say to his dad when his dad comes into the room. 'I've decided to enlist in the Marines because I don't want to be part of this family.' And in both cases, the audience can enjoy those multiple points of view, because in a convergent system, we know they're going to meet and mesh. Although in Godfather II, it's an extreme version of that. And in Godfather I or American Graffiti, you see everyone together at Mel's, at the drive-in at the beginning. They're all, you know, there with, in a sense, little virtual badges that say, 'Hello, my name is Curt, I want to leave this terrible town', or whatever.

But to choose another way to do it is... It's not that you can't do it, it's just that there are... You should know the risks of doing that. That to tell a single point of view story and then, at a sudden point, to suddenly shift to another point of view when the audience, without even knowing it, has made up their mind that this is a single point of view. It's like, 'What's this?, 'What?', you know? You can do it, but you have to have very good reason for doing it and you have to be brave, because you're sailing into the wind, so to speak. The tendency is: establish something and stick with it, and tell your story, but don't change the rules on people in the middle. And to a certain extent, that's what the danger of what Cold Mountain did by introducing these new characters past the midway point. And it struggled a bit critically and in the box office. It's a very good film, but it... I think it... All films want to be great, and this film, I think, wanted to be greater than the reception that it got. There was a holdback, because it was too long, and something. I don't think many people put their finger on what exactly the problem was. There was an issue about the casting of the main characters: is Nicole Kidman right for that part, and is Jude Law right for the part? Frequently, you have to think through what people say, because how they articulate a problem is nothing to do with what the real problem is. So people will say, 'I didn't like Ada's costume at the end.' 'Well, okay. But is that the real problem?'

I was at a concert and a question-and-answer with Maurice Sendak, the children's author, in London many years ago, and he had produced an opera with a composer [Olivier Knussen] about Where the Wild Things Are. And with difficult music, kind of 12-tone music, and not the kind of music that you think kids who really want to go to a pantomime kind of a thing with people in costumes and... 'What's this weird music?' And afterwards, Maurice was, in his own lovely kind of curmudgeonly way, complaining about kids who didn't understand, who didn't like his play. And he said: I'll tell you how stupid kids can be. One little girl said, 'Mr. Sendak, I didn't like your opera.' And I said, 'Why not, little girl?' And she said, 'Because it took too long to get here on the bus.' And everyone laughed. And Maurice Sendak kind of said, 'Oh, silly kid.' But think of the dynamics of what's going on. It's a young girl being brave enough to say to a grownup, and a famous grownup, 'I didn't like your opera.' And what do you say? How can a child of that age say, 'Because you used 12-tone music, you know, it doesn't...' But what she was saying underneath what she was saying is, 'I didn't like your opera because as I was watching it, all I could think of was: it took a long time to get here on the bus. Your opera didn't make me forget the trouble that I had had getting here.' And frequently, with reviewers and frequently even with studio executives, and even sometimes with your friends, when you show a work, you have to listen very carefully to what they say, because many times, they are saying, 'It took too long to get here on the bus.' Some version of that. And there's a feeling that either they're afraid to articulate to you, because you're their friend, or that they haven't really figured out themselves. And so it gets expressed in code, in a way.
And you have to be alert to these things when you're trying to evaluate these very tricky moments when you've shown something that is still in the process of evolving, sometimes finished work as well, and trying to get feedback from an audience. And how frank can they be, and how frank is it possible for them to be? And you have to have not only two antennae, but kind of like, eight antennae to look at their body language, and what they say, and particularly what they don't say. And what they praise, and what they implicitly don't praise. And even how long they stay in the room. If an audience really doesn't like a film, they will get out of that projection room as fast as possible. They don't even want to be there anymore, even though they may say, 'Fantastic, great work', the fact that they leave the room is significant, and you should note that. And by the same token, people who really like a film want to stay in that room. The ushers have to come in and say, 'We have to clear this room because...' That's a very good sign. Even though the people may be saying, 'Now, the problem with your film is this...' But it means they're already fundamentally engaged with it on a deep level. And they don't want to leave the place where they just really had a very good time in that room. It's a little bit like reading tea leaves, it can be misinterpreted. But the fact is that there is some message in those tea leaves that you need to pay a lot of attention to if you are trying to, especially when you're still working on the film and trying to make it better.

To give some feeling for the difference between editing a film 30 years ago and today, simply on an economic level, it's worth remembering that the machine on which we edited films long ago was the Moviola. And in today's dollars, pounds, that machine would cost somewhere around $45,000 to get this machine. And film itself, ten minutes of 35mm film today, in today's dollars would cost $650 for ten minutes of 35mm film. Back then, it was 10¢ a foot. If you do the math, that's $100 for ten minutes, and working inflation and... So $650 for ten minutes of film. And then even splicing tape, the tape that you used to put the things together was then $10 a roll, and today that would be $65-$70 for just a roll of tape. Because it was very special tape that had a kind of adhesive that would make it possible to go through projectors. So simply to get in the door with equipment was this big investment of money that...
And that has simply disappeared. Everyone now has an iPhone, and you can actually edit a movie on an iPhone. And almost everyone has a laptop or a desk computer, and that's what I use to edit with. So I'm not using... Even on very expensive films, I'm using the same equipment that you use to write cooking recipes. And you know, the software for editing, you can find free software to edit. So people starting out in film today, editorially, are already way ahead of the game in terms of what... 'Give me something to work with.' 'Well, there it is', you know? Or you can shoot it yourself with your iPhone and start editing. And the downside of that, of course, is that because it's generally available and free, that there's more people doing it. Whereas back then, the bottleneck was much narrower.
It didn't seem, you know... In retrospect, it didn't seem... We knew, oh, that's very expensive, for a roll of tape? You know, you'd be used to, in those days, pay, you know, 35¢ for a roll of Scotch tape, and I'm paying $10 for a roll of Mylar tape? Well, the explanation that was given to us was: the tape has to be perforated and perforating the tapes... The machine has to be very finely machined, and it's only for this one industry, and the Mylar is actually very tough. And so the machines wear out and they have to be replaced frequently, and that's why it's $10 a roll. So it's reasonable, but nonetheless very expensive. So the doorway has vastly widened, and more films are being put together now. In some form than ever before, we live in a completely media-saturated environment compared to the way it was 40 or 50 years ago. And even then, we felt we were living in a media-saturated environment. But compared to today, there's just no comparison. So on the one hand, be very thankful that the costs have come down. On the other hand, be wary of the fact that that means that many more people are trying to do the same thing you are, and it's harder to make your voice heard. But there are forums for this, if you do something interesting, all you have to do is post it on YouTube and hope that it goes viral, and somebody says, 'Who is that person? Let's talk to that person.' So it's... These are inconceivable differences that are very hard for us to conceive who have grown up on the other side of that. We're used to them now, but still, when we compare one with the other, it's a big, big difference.

I got a call from Sam Mendes, the director who had talked to Anthony Minghella, and Sam was preparing a film called Jarhead, based on the novel by Anthony Swofford, about the First Gulf War in 1990. And did I want to edit it? And as usual, we exchanged... We had lunch and we exchanged ideas, and I got the screenplay. And then I had another meeting, and I thought the screenplay was very good, and I had some ideas about it and he liked those ideas, and so we moved ahead. And I was, again, using Final Cut Pro for the second time on Jarhead, after having used it on Cold Mountain. And it's... Again, it's a wonderful film, it's a war film about a conflict that was very carefully circumscribed in time and space, because some people thought that it was the beginning of a conflict that would lead to an invasion of Iraq. But it didn't, it involved pushing the Iraqis out of Kuwait and then slamming the door. Obviously, much more complicated than that. But it was based on the experience of Anthony Swofford, who was involved in this war, and it was peculiar because of the intense feeling for the... He was a member of the US Marines, and the intense feeling of that Marine environment, and the fact that it was a war without significant ground combat. Most of the war was conducted by airplanes and bombs. And so there was a level of frustration on the part of the soldiers, because we've been trained to have combat, he [Swofford] was trained as a sniper. And yet, 'Where's the opportunity to do what I have been trained to do?'
And so in a sense, it was kind of similar in a few ways to K-19. You were dealing with a military environment of people in a closed environment, you were following this one platoon of, you know, people who we came to know very well, and the interactions of these people in a stressful environment. And again, like K-19, without an overt big battle. K-19 does not have a big battle, the battle is an interior battle to survive in this impossible situation. And Jarhead is similar, the frustration is that there was... The battle was taken away from us, we wanted to fight and there was no opportunity to fight. We just had to see the aftereffects of a war, an aerial war that killed many Iraqi soldiers, but we didn't get involved in that. And again, events overcame this film because it was about a war in the Gulf in 1990, and now when we were making the film in 2005, the war in the Middle East in Iraq, was very hot and very contentious. And yet, superficially, if you just looked at the film, it didn't look that different. You know, military costumes and war equipment. The film was accurate, but somebody who was not really informed about the... 'No, in those days we only had 12 screws on the rifle rather than 16, you know?' It appeared as if it were a film about the war that was happening right now, and yet it wasn't.

And so again, it underperformed critically and in terms of audience reaction, to the hopes for the film which again, the planning for the film went back further than the beginning of the new conflict in the Middle East. And yet, the decision kept going to keep developing it. And was that ultimately a wise decision on... In another universe, an executive would have said, 'You know, it's risky to make this film about that war when we're fighting a hot war in exactly the same place. And this is not a hot war, this film.' But that particular button was never pushed, so the film got made. And again, it's a wonderful film that examines the psychology of what it is like as a Marine in that environment, and the frustrations of that, and the few triumphs of that, and what you do to compensate for that. So I am, you know... Everyone who worked on the film is very proud of the film, I certainly am. But again, it just shows you the difficulty of predicting many years in advance, because films have to be planned many years in advance. What is the world situation going to be like when this film comes out, and is that going to be a receptive environment? Of course, it could well work the other way. Something that seems unlikely, some project, you make the film and suddenly it explodes and becomes extremely popular.
I remember thinking, with American Graffiti—this was many years earlier—'It's too bad that George [Lucas] is making this now, because the peak of interest in old rock and roll has come and gone', by my perception, which is arguably very flawed. But I was aware of, in the early '70s, a number of collections of early rock and roll that were made and became very popular, and then enthusiasm for that seemed to diminish. So it seemed to me, if that film, if American Graffiti had been made a few years earlier, made it... maybe it would've been a big hit. In fact, it was a much bigger hit when it was released.
So George was intuitively correct or very lucky that what was just an initial wave was only the pre-wave of another huge wave, where people were really interested in those songs from that era, and the evocation of a world before the assassination of President Kennedy, and the kind of optimism that came along in America in 1962 as opposed to later.

One of the things that took me aside a little bit in the screenplay of Jarhead was that there was a scene in the screenplay and in the book, if I'm remembering correctly, where the soldiers watch Apocalypse Now to get them charged up. And I thought, 'Is this really something I should be doing?' Because it's... Taking a sequence that I edited in Apocalypse Now, and putting it into a film, and re-editing it in the context of: this is a film that the children are... that the soldiers are watching, and they're getting psyched up about it, whereas the original intention in Apocalypse Now was for you to be excited, but horrified at what you were looking... This is the attack... The Valkyries attack on the village. And the intention in Apocalypse was, yes, we want to stir you up, but we also want you to be horrified at what's going on.
And in the film, and in the intentions of the military people in the film, none of that mattered. It was simply, this is a visceral scene, it's going to get the soldiers stirred up so that they're going to go into battle. And it's a moral, ethical dilemma, in miniature. But I rationalised it the way many people rationalise these things by saying, 'Well, it is going to be done, so it's better that I do it than somebody else does it, because I know the material so well that I can figure out something that would be harder for other people to figure out.'
So, at a certain in the process of editing, I found myself editing this scene, where the Valkyries attack is on the screen, and then we cut to the reverse angle of Swofford [Jake Gyllenhaal] with veins in his neck, pumping up, getting really excited about what he's seeing on the screen. And I got into it, you know, you can convince yourself of anything. And it didn't take much to... For me to get into it. But it did give me that... A little of an extrasensory feeling. I felt like I was a little outside of myself as I was doing it, simply because it was very easy to imagine myself—whatever it was—25 years earlier, in an editing room, editing that very scene, and now here I am editing it on Final Cut Pro, digitally, for a film of a very different sensibility.

So the previous three films that I had worked on, which were Cold Mountain, and Jarhead, and K-19, were all done away from home, which in this case was San Francisco. So I was working in Romania and London for Cold Mountain. I was working in Toronto and Los Angeles for K-19. And then, on Jarhead, I was working in New York, which was where Sam Mendes was living at the time. And after Jarhead, which was... It was disappointing to... That Jarhead did not do better than we had all hoped for it, but it was fine, but, you know, you always have good hopes. And there was—on every film—a lot of work went into it, and very interesting screenplay, and the book on which it's based.
And Francis [Ford] Coppola, with whom I had not worked since Apocalypse Redux, which was six or seven years earlier, came to me with a proposal, which was to take over the editing of a film that he had shot in Romania called Youth Without Youth, which was a philosophical novel, again, a novel based on... The novel was written by Mircea Eliade, who was a Romanian novelist/philosopher. And by Francis's own admission, it was a very experimental film that he had shot. Self-financed, because he wanted the control of self-financing, and because he had found a way to make it inexpensively, and probably because of its experimental nature; it was not the kind of thing that you would take to a studio.
And I wanted to work with Francis again, and the appeal of this was that we would be able to work in San Francisco, which was a good thing for me because I could be at home for a while, also for my assistant, Sean Cullen, who I had been dragging around to Romania, and London, and New York. That's wonderfully exciting, but also, it's good to be home for a while. So I accepted this. And it was one of those jobs where you come in with something already in progress, and assembly had already been done by an editor in Romania on Final Cut 7, Apple's program, with which I was familiar.
And in addition, the film had been shot digitally, and this was the first time I'd ever worked on a film where the camera original was a digital. And it was, if I remember correctly, it was the Sony F900 camera, which is the same camera that George Lucas had used to shoot his later Star Wars films; Phantom Menace, etc. And I talked to George about that at the time, and then I talked to him prior to doing this job, and he said, 'One of the things you can do is blow the image up much more than you could if it were shot on a film original.' And I said, 'Well, why is that?' I mean, I understood, but I wanted to hear his explanation for it. And he said, 'It's because, with film, you are shooting something that has a molecular grain structure to it, the size of the film grains, these clumps of molecules, and when you blow up a film, you also blow up the molecules, you enlarge the molecules.' And our rule of thumb for films is that you couldn't enlarge it more than 20%. So, let's say, if an image is... If an image as shot is 100%, and you increase it by 20%, the new image is 120% of the original. And at that point, the... What you are doing to the image is still concealed, the grains are not yet revealed. Whereas, if you blow it up 121%, suddenly, you start to see the grain structure of the film. And the more you blow it up, the more you see this.
It doesn't prevent you from doing it. There's nothing technical inhibiting you. But you are, in a sense, announcing to the world that this is a piece of film that has been enlarged and it's not the way it was originally shot. And there are reasons why you would want to do this on a film. Certain documentaries would do that and completely get away with it. We did it a lot on Unbearable Lightness of Being because we liked the grain structure, and we, in fact, wanted to enhance that at times. But there are other times where you wouldn't want to do that. A certain kind of romantic film, the last thing you want is some two, kind of, scrabbly grain structure to reveal itself.
So, with digitally shot film, there is no grain structure. There is a pixelisation that is inherent, but it's not quite the same as grain structure, and so you can blow up a filmed image. If the lens was good in the first place, and everything was in focus, you can get away with much more than this 120%. And I said, 'Well, how much?' He said, '230%', and my eyes popped out. I said, 'What?' He said, 'Yes, you know, we did it.' And he said, 'You have to be careful, what shots you blow that much up.' Generally, if you're blowing up a shot that has a... That turns into a close up, you can get away with it. If you're to blow up a landscape shot, enlarge a landscape shot, it's more risky.

Armed with this information about digital structure, I plunged into the film and started experimenting, but I never went as far as George was suggesting, until I was working on a scene where the camera was positioned above Tim Roth, the main actor of Youth Without Youth, and he was lying on a bed and looking at the camera, and the camera moved down and made him into a big close up. However, there were three takes, and the two takes that... Where the camera did move, when it ended at the end, they were out of focus. It was just something technically wrong at that point. But there was another take, where the camera did not move at all, where it just stayed in this position.
So here's a good chance to try this blow up. So I did the appropriate things to the software, so that it appeared as if the camera were moving down by enlarging the image until I had a final big close up of Tim Roth. And when I looked at the numbers, it turned out to be, again, 230%, meaning, if the original image was 100%, we have gone 130% over that, so more than two times larger than it originally was shot. And now, I could actually test this by looking at my... The shot that I had blown up, and then going back and looking at the grain structure of the shots, which were out of focus, but at least I could... And sure enough, I couldn't tell the difference. And so I thought, 'Well, that's very interesting, because it gives the editor the ability to recompose the material.'

And this... That was ten years ago. Since then, shifts in equipment have only accelerated that process. By today's standards, the Sony F900 camera is very primitive, meaning, it's... The chip that was behind the lens was quite small. Now, those chips are much bigger, much more defined, and so you can blow things up even more. And that has precipitated a shift in filmmaking, whose implications are profound. We don't really know where it's going yet, but it is pretty well-entrenched now that, with many exceptions, we are talking not about shooting, but another term called 'acquisition', which is kind of a weasel word. It's not a very good word. But it means we're getting something with which we are going to do something later. This is not the final version.
And really, what it is, is an extension of the act of film-making into the individual frame itself. In a sense, you can think about normal film editing as horizontal, which is to say, we have a series of shots, and we are going to put these shots in a certain order, or put them in a slightly different order, but we are rearranging something on a horizontal line. Now, think vertically. Here is a shot, and now we are editing within the shot. We are recomposing the shot, sometimes, dynamically, meaning, it's not just a simple enlargement, we are enlarging and moving the focus at the same time. And more and more, this is happening. And more and more films are being shot intending that this will happen.

This was not really the case on Youth Without Youth. It, sort of, emerged as a result of experimenting with the story, and trying to be as adventuresome as possible with the image, and to push the envelope. But now, films are shot where the original framing is larger than you ever intend it to be, and that means – it's technically called 'overscanning' – and that means that: here's the frame, but we can now go wider, if we want to, or narrower, or anything. And you can combine different takes. So, if the actor's performance is good in take six, you can... And this other actor, his performance is best in take four, you can combine take four and take six as if the actors are talking to each other. In fact, they are, but not the way it seems in this particular take.
David Fincher, whose films Social Network and Gone Girl, and other recent films that he made, have really explored this very aggressively. And it's just another way of making films. It's not the... It's not a classic way. It's using... It's basically applying to the image things that we have always done to the sound. That we get sound, and we do lots of things to the sound in the name of making it clearer and better, and adding other things to it. And so, what we record at the time of shooting, the sound that we record at the time of shooting, for decades, has not been what you hear in the theatre. We do all kinds of stuff to it. And so now, that's beginning to happen to the image.

My experience of this, for the first time, was on Youth Without Youth. The film came out. It had a limited release. Francis [Ford Coppola] had, as we all do, great hopes for it. He would... He said he wanted it to run at a certain theatre in New York, and be at that theatre for six months, and that he would pay to have it be at that theatre. He knew that it was strange, but if it just kept at that theatre, people would eventually go to see it. Well, for various reasons, that did not happen. It played at that theatre, The Paris Theater on 58th Street, I think, 5th Avenue, but it did not perform well. People didn't want to go see the film. And there was another film that was hard on its heels.
And I, you know, I understand that the... It was based on a Romanian philosophical novel, and it didn't have a lot of action, and it was investigating things from a slightly sideways, artistic point of view. And this was the first film that Francis had directed in probably seven years. He had another project, very ambitious project set in New York called Megalopolis. It was a kind of science fiction film about the future of urban society, and that was dealt another... It was dealt a fatal blow, probably, by 9/11, that you couldn't talk about or even make a film about the reinvention of New York without mentioning the destruction of the Twin Towers. And once you start talking about that, that story becomes the main focus, which was not his intention. So that project eventually, sadly, got sidelined. And in order to start himself up again, he decided to make Youth Without Youth.
There was a review of the film that I found particularly apt. I think it was in the New York Times. And they gave the film a... It was a respectful, sort of grudging review. But at the end, it said, rated R for nudity and metaphysics. That's the only time, I think, that that particular rating has been published. And, you know, it is: it's an 'R' rated metaphysical film. But it... The great thing for me, as an editor, was this... It was, kind of, a sandbox in which I could explore all of these new, to me, and really, new to the industry, techniques of working with a very... With a highly manipulatable digital image. And that has continued for me over the last ten years or so, that every film I'd worked on, perhaps not as aggressively as that, I have found ways, you know, where it's suitable, to nudge the image.
And I think this is probably hard for cinematographers, because they put a lot of work into that framing, and to be essentially told by circumstance, 'No, that's not the final, we're going to change that, it's an awkward point, and should be discussed a lot, I think, of that...' You know, what is the correct dynamic between the framing that is selected at the time of shooting and the ultimate choice of the frame in the final version.

Before Youth Without Youth had come out, I think we were working on the mix, or about to work on the mix. I was approached by Kathryn Bigelow, with whom I worked on K-19, and she had a film that she wanted to... Me to work on, that was based on a bomb disposal expert. This was the film Hurt Locker. And I read the screenplay, and met with Kathryn, and I said, 'I don't think I want to work on this, because I...' Jarhead, which was in similar, but different territory, I was still a little bruised from that experience of working on that film and it not being as successful as we wanted it to be. And then I realised I had worked on five war films in a row, if you count [Apocalypse] Redux as a war film, and K-19 as a military film, and Cold Mountain as a military film, and Jarhead as a military film. Hurt Locker would be another military film, and I was just... I felt that it was just... I wanted to change the subject a bit from military stuff.
And it's, you know, it's one of those decisions that if in retrospect, of course, Hurt Locker went on to win the Best Film. It won Best Film, and it won Best Editing, and it won Best Sound, and it swept the Oscars. And that year, you look at that and say, 'Well, that could've been me', but maybe it couldn't, you know. It... The dynamics are very peculiar, but the chances are that that would've been a very successful film that I... with which I could be associated with. And I had had a run of films that were slightly less successful than they... than we hoped for them, so that would've been nice to counterpoint it.
But that's, as they say, that's the breaks, that's the business. You have to make decisions based on the information that you have at the time, and that was the decision I made, and you... That's just the... That's part of the world that all of us who work in this business live with. There's a great deal of uncertainty about how these things come together, and when they come together, and if they come together, and... But that is a particularly clear example of turning down a project, and then seeing, in fact, what happened as a result of that.

I continued with Francis [Ford Coppola], working with him again on his next film, which was Tetro, which is a family story set in Argentina, in Buenos Aires. But it's a reworking of a story that could just as well have been set in New York, about an Italian immigrant family, which is to say, his own family, arriving in the new world and things happening. Because of financial considerations, again, tax breaks and other mysterious things that I'm not too up to date with, we wound up not only shooting it in Argentina, but doing all the post-production in Argentina. And the… Short of the final mix, we brought the film back to Napa, which is where Francis Coppola has a mixing studio on his wine estate, and so we did the final mix back home, so to speak.
But basically, I was gone for a year, living in Buenos Aires. Fortuitously, my daughter had moved to Buenos Aires with her husband a year or so before that, and so I was there with her, and my son, Walter, was working as an assistant on Tetro, and my wife flew down a number of times, so we were all together as a family in Argentina, which was very nice. I'd never been there before. It's one of the perks of working in film – is you get to experience things that you would not experience otherwise, particularly because you're working, you're not a tourist, you see things from a certain perspective that you would not ordinarily see, and I appreciated that.

We were working again with Apple system and Final Cut, and Francis had taken over the lease of a building in San Telmo, one of the neighbourhoods of Buenos Aires. And so we had the whole building, and the whole production company was based in this building. The art department, and the costume department, and the administration, and editorial, and camera department all came out of this building. And we had a projection room, which we built from scratch. It was... It's easy, relatively speaking, to do this, because of the digital revolution. We have a digital projector.
And to economise even further, but also to explore what it was like, we decided to put the editing room in the projection room, so that one corner of this fairly large room, that held, probably, 40 people, was my editing bench, and my... the other paraphernalia of working. And then I hooked the editing machine up to the digital projector so that what was on the screen – which was a 30 foot screen, ten metres wide – was whatever was on my editing machine, so that I was editing, I could just turn and look, and it's as if I'm in the theatre watching the final result. And this has been, kind of, a holy grail thing that... You know, a thought that you think in the back of your mind, maybe, some day, we can edit and see the image on the big screen. But in fact, that's exactly what happened in this case.
To compensate for the fact that, normally, I don't have that luxury, what I do is I have the screens that I'm working on, on a, kind of, intimate basis, here, but then I also had the screen... Have that information sent to a liquid crystal or plasma screen over there, maybe a 50 inch screen, and if I want to check something, I look at that. And I also have cut out two silhouettes of a man and a woman scaled appropriately so that, if I placed them on either side of the screen, I can imagine, if those people are five foot ten inches tall, that that screen must be 30 feet wide. And this is a very good, very simple technique to remind yourself what you're working on is not a miniature, but it's a mural, that this thing is actually going to be projected, sometimes, 60 feet wide, you know, 20 metres wide, sometimes more.
And when that happens, the relationship of the audience to the screen is different than when they're looking at the screen. It becomes more of a 'look into' than a 'look at'. In fact, you could distinguish between, let's call it, home video and theatre, as home video, which I mean also broadcast television, is a look-at medium, theatre is a look-into medium. That, at home, you see the entire frame, and the image, kind of, bounces back at you. It's as if there's a little visual ping pong ball that hits the thing.
Whereas, in the best sense, what happens in a theatre, especially when the film is a good film in every respect, you are no longer sitting in the audience, watching this film, but you are imaginatively... Like Alice Through the Looking Glass, you have plunged through that surface, and you're in that world with these people, experiencing it along with them. Alternatively, you could think that that has leapt off the screen and has jumped into your head. There's a, kind of, a simultaneous leap inward and outward. You have gone into it, and it has come into you.
And there are reasons why this is true that have to do with the kind of subject matter that films get into versus what television gets into. And it's also the experience of watching a film with lots of other people, which adds a peculiar, very hard to define dynamic to the experience. But essentially, it means that the film is not there at your pleasure, you have to accommodate yourself to the film. To see this, you have to hire a babysitter, if you have a baby, and, say, the film begins at 8:10, we have to get there, and you have to pay to get there somehow, and then you arrive on the moment, and the film starts – whether you want it to or not, that's when it starts. And that puts you in a different frame of mind, which I think is as important or even more important than whether the film is technically sharper at home than it is in the theatre.

Until recently, that was true, that home viewing was less sharp than what you would see in a theatre. Now, that particular distinction has gone. We have... Now, you can have screens with, you know, 2K or 4K resolution at home, which sometimes exceed what you would see in the theatre. But what you never get at home is this feeling of: I have to displace myself, in all senses of the word, to go and see this. And when you're in that state, you have a different relationship to the image than you do when you can kill the image with a single flex of the button, or you can stop it to look at it later. If you don't like it, you can switch channels, all kinds of ways.
And it's in your home. It's... You're not only looking at the screen, you're looking at the lamp that Aunt Winnie gave you 20 years ago for your wedding anniversary, so it's in a domestic situation. More and more, this distinction is being blurred. But I think what you'll never get at home, by definition, is 600 people sitting next to you, and this creates this... Or helps to create this distinction between the look at and look into.

When I was working on K-19, I experienced, for the first time, a director, Kathryn Bigelow, after shooting, she came into the editing room with all of her paraphernalia; her books, and folders, and everything, and telephone, and installed her cell phone... the cell phone, and here she was, and this was how it would be every day. And that's fine. It... I'd never experienced before, so I had to, kind of, readjust certain thinking. And to help the process, I had another monitor installed closer to her so that she could sit on the sofa and look on that monitor, what was on my screen, so she didn't have to keep looking over here, she could just see what I was doing, and then she could do something else and then look up occasionally. And it became great. It was a... You know, we developed a nice working relationship, given that circumstance.
But my previous experience had been... Certainly, with Francis [Ford Coppola], is that he would not so often come into the editing room. We would more often screen the work, and then discuss what the work... the film, make notes, maybe spend a couple of days in the editing room looking at things. And then he would go off because he's got other things to do, and he would say some version of, 'I'll see you in a couple of weeks.' And my mission, as I understood it, was: try to do all these notes, but if in the process of doing those notes, something else occurs to you, do that too. Just use these notes as a springboard and... When I get back, surprise me with stuff. I... He likes that part of the process.
By... almost by definition, when the director is in the room all the time, that tends not to happen so much, because the agenda is being... is more driven on a moment by moment basis by the director. What I wound up doing is that she [Kathryn Bigelow] would leave usually around 6:30 or 7:00, and I would stay on for another couple of hours, doing some of the things that we talked about, but also investigating these other things that occurred to me that were kind of experimental, that, 'I wonder if that would work?' And I didn't want to take time out of her day to do the experiment, so I would do them at night. And some of them worked.
And our lingo for this was, in the morning, I would say, 'Kathryn, I came in this morning and discovered that the mice had been busy working on the film, do you want to see what they did?' 'Yes', she would say. 'Sure, show me.' And so we would look at what I did when she wasn't there. But, you know, the code for it was, 'the mice had been working on the film.' And it's a good way to work. But for every director, the relationship with the editor is something that you have to evolve, given the personalities of the directors that you are working with. I've rarely had the experience... Well, I haven't ever had the experience of someone like Thelma Schoonmaker, who exclusively edits for Martin Scorsese. So she and he are wed, editorially speaking, and every film he shoots, she edits. She edits other things as well, occasionally. But mostly, she... Whatever he's doing, she winds up editing. And of course, that binds them very close together. But my experience is not that. It's more like an average editor, which is that you go... You swing from one director to another. Hopefully, there are some directors with which you work repeatedly. But the rhythm of directing, with some exceptions, is that directors take usually two or three years between films, because of the publicity they have to do at the end of one film, and then figuring out what they're going to do next, and then working with the writer or writing it themselves, the next screenplay, and then development, and then they're ready to go. And just the economics of it are that directors make enough money so that they can afford this kind of pace, whereas editors don't, so I have to keep working more frequently than that. And as a result, editors and directors can and frequently fall out of synch. We took this job, and I can't work with you because I'm still working on this.

So, also, what happens, and happened tragically in the case of Anthony Minghella, is that he died unexpectedly in 2008, in the spring of 2008, as a result of an operation, where he... We all expected him to recover very well, and a week later, he had died. And I was in Argentina at the time, working on Tetro, and heard the news. My son had been looking online and suddenly saw this news that Anthony had died. And I made arrangements as soon as possible, flew back to London from Argentina to be at his memorial service.
But I absolutely not only enjoyed, but it was a deeply rewarding experience, working with Anthony. And I had, kind of, assumed, because Anthony was ten years younger than me, that this is it, you know, I would just continue... That I would die first. And we would continue working together on film after film, and it was not to be. Looking back at my... The films that I worked on, I can see the, from a distance, the shock of that, and the repercussions of that, in a sense, over the last... Well, it's been eight years since he died.
I still think he's still here, you know. It's an all too frequent reaction to the death of somebody, especially somebody younger than you, that... with whom you have a deep creative relationship. So it's a very sad thing in my working experience, and I've never... The first and only time that I've experienced that. And I'm still... Part of me is still trying to figure it out.

The film business is constructed in a certain way. And there was a crisis in film somewhere in the late '20s, where films were exploring what were perceived as dangerous areas culturally. And especially in the United States, there were preachers who would fulminate against the sins of Hollywood Babylon. And a decision got made somewhere that one of the ways to counteract this would be to have an award ceremony to celebrate the greatness of film. And out of this impulse, came this idea of the Academy Award, which in its initial incarnation was really just a get together of friends, almost a very low-key thing. And a funny award was created, this golden statue, that somebody said, 'That looks like my uncle, Oscar', and so it was dubbed 'the Oscar'.
And thought it was all, kind of, an in-joke. Not... Joke is not the right word, but it was a very low-key thing. But the hope was that something out of this would encourage good films, better films to be made, and that the good films that were made would be celebrated. Inevitably, the publicity machine begins to grind, and the Oscars become big and bigger, bigger, and now they are this big cultural icon. And if you are lucky enough, you get nominated. And you have to contribute your own, you know, hard work in whatever skill you have, but luck is a tremendous element in that. Because people can work very hard on films and do a very good job, and if the film is not a commercial success, the chances of it getting an Oscar are... commercial and critical success, the chances... even though those may be great costumes, if the film is not a commercial or critical success, it gets ignored.
So there's... It's a very complex bundle. And I've been lucky enough to have been nominated nine times for the Oscar, and I've won three of those times. Once for Apocalypse Now, for the sound. And then twice on English Patient – I won both for the editing, film editing, and also the mixing, the sound work. And it's a wonderful thing. On an emotional level, it's actually... Again, for me, it's better when... I enjoy it more when I lose, because it's a strange thing to say, 'This is the best', because how can you really compare it? What do you mean best?

There's a wonderful section of that interview with Feynman, where he talks about winning the Nobel Prize, and he said, 'I hate prizes. They warp people's perception of you, and the danger is that it warps your own perception of yourself. The real reward is this pleasure of finding out. That's the Nobel Prize that you win.' And the fact that there is something that you win because some committee somewhere decides that you win, that made him very nervous, and I share that feeling. I mean, on the other hand, it's nice to have won it, but you also think in the back of your mind, 'Well, what does that really mean?' So it's nice to be nominated. I mean, if they just had nominations, and they said, 'Here are five films that we think deserve respect for whatever stuff', and that's it. But because it's show business, we have to have somebody who wins.
And so the decision is put down to a vote. In the United States, it's the vote of the entire membership of the Academy, all 5,000 people. In England, for the... In Great Britain, for the BAFTA, it's the opposite. The winner is decided by a select committee of people who get together around a table, ten or 12 people, and the nominees, which have been selected by a very large number of people, are presented, and they, these 12 people, decide which of these nominees is going to win the prize. And it's a silent vote. You don't know what the other people voted for. But the topic of all of these films is discussed.
I actually prefer the American system. As arbitrary as it is, it basically admits it's a crapshoot, it's just... You know, who can really decide? Whereas, the British system, the BAFTAs, are... There's the illusion of: we kind of know who... which is best, and that's more like the Nobel Committee in terms of deciding who wins the prize this year. But having set all of that aside, it is a slightly surreal experience, being up there, holding one of those statues that, you know, has so much historical baggage behind it at this point. They're, you know, 85 years, almost... More, 85 years old, that idea of giving Oscars, so there's a tremendous history behind all of this.
And the fortunate and unique thing about English Patient, where I won both editing and sound, is that that's the only time that has ever happened in the United States. The only other time it's happened in Great Britain at the BAFTAs was also me, for The Conversation, that I won a double BAFTA for editing and sound on The Conversation back in the mid 1970s. So it's... I guess I'm the double trick person. And, you know, I don't see sound work and editing work as being entirely different from each other. They're – to me – they're the flip side of each other's coin. You need a different sensibility for each of them, slightly, but they're both in the service of the ultimate creative message that you're trying to put together for the film.

After working on Tetro with Francis [Ford Coppola], which was shot in black and white, with colour elements in it, very interesting approach to the film, and yet it also did not do fantastically well. It was an independently financed film, and it was distributed theatrically by Francis himself, I think, by Zoetrope Studios. But it got good, respectful reviews, but it was not a huge hit. Understandable, kind of, for a black and white film, but I... This was... You know, Anthony Minghella had died while we were working on Tetro, and I, after that, was trying to figure out what I should do next. And the industry also was changing. And I'm also getting older. And the next three or four... Three years certainly are... I'm wandering a little bit professionally, not... No, my personal life is fine. But what... Now what? What should I do?
And one of the things I wounded up doing was helping out on a film, a big Hollywood film called Wolfman, which is a Universal film, with Benicio Del Toro in the form of a wolfman. And it was a fascinating experience. I came in late in the process. And there were other editors on the film. And it was in Hollywood, at Universal Studios. And I was once again working on the Avid, this different system. You know, you can think of them, these different systems, as different kinds of pianos. They're all pianos, but there's the Bösendorfer brand, and then there's the Steinway, and then there's the Yamaha, then there's the Fortepiano, the antique instrument. And, you know, you... if you're a keyboard artist, you adapt yourself to each of these things. And none of them is perfect. They all have developmental issues. And the landscape in which we are operating is also evolving, technically, very quickly.
Every film that you work on now and for the last 20 years, a good, solid week or more at the beginning is spent on diagramming the workflow that you are going to follow. And for every film, it's different, because of the fact that it's a different film, and you're using different equipment, and more things have been invented in the... since the last time you worked on a film, and you have to figure out the best way to do that within the budget that you have. And that was certainly never the case back in the old days. It was just... there was one way to make a film, and it was a boilerplate issue, and these are the cameras that you use, and this is the editing machine you use, and this is the way work print is done, and there it is.
There were technological shifts, but they were, incrementally, very spread out. Whereas now, every three years, because of the rapidity of software changes, this whole new universe has opened up, and you have to adapt yourself to that.

So I was in Hollywood, and the dynamics of that particular film were that the studio had unsuccessful previews of that film. And it was directed by a friend, Joe Johnston, who used to live up in San Francisco. And they had essentially pushed him to one side, and hired other editors to work with the producer. But they didn't want to fire Joe. It hadn't gotten to that point, but it was an awkward situation. And I was hired to work with Joe on Joe's version of the film, cynically, to keep him occupied, but it was more than that, I think.
But I was hired just for three weeks. 'Can you come and work with Joe on his version of the film?' 'Sure.' And I was happy to get the work at that time. And I found myself working with two other editors who were working for the producers. And I was off in another room, working on my own, basically, with Joe. And, you know, inevitably, a sort of competitive edge enters into it. 'How long is their version running?' 'They cut out that much?' 'Should we do that?' 'How...' You know, we weren't looking at each other's work, but, you know, you're in pretty close quarters.
And so Joe and I worked together for three weeks. And then, at the end of the three weeks, I think we had made some progress. Joe was happy with what we had done. And so the studio arranged to have a screening of both versions of the film. And I guess, to their surprise, they liked what we had done, and so I was kept on. And eventually, the other editors peeled off and went off to work on other films, and suddenly, I was holding this, you know, $150 million film in my hands, which was never the intention. You know, I was just, kind of, came in for three weeks to do some ancillary editing. But, you know, I plunged into the experience. And, you know, once you get over the hump of: 'what am I really doing here?' 'Well, I guess I should do this.' And you have to commit to your... If you don't, then it becomes unendurable. So, you know, I had some doubts about the film. But, you know, you solve individual problems, and then pretty soon, you think, 'Well, that's pretty good. That is kind of working now. And let's try this.' And soon, you're deep into the process.

There was a particular struggle on that film with the music, which is indicative of the kind of things that go on. The film... Once we had gotten the film to a certain stage, we previewed the film with the music score that Danny Elfman, the composer, had written and recorded for the film. But he had recorded it to a previous version of the film, before I ever came on the film. So we had... We, the large we, music editors reshaped Danny Elfman's score to adapt to this new version of the film. And it worked well. But the preview did not go particularly well, and the studio was looking for something to blame, and it came down to the Elfman's music. And, you know, I could see the point, but it was kind of... but that was... you know, he wrote that music for another version of the film. Who else... What can we do?
He... By this time, Danny Elfman had started working on Alice in Wonderland, the Tim Burton film, and so they investigated and found another composer to write some other music for it. And now, there were, kind of, two versions of the film, and a different score written over here, and there were many moving parts to this equation. And after a month or so, I heard what was happening with that music, and I thought... My own feeling was: I thought Danny's score was still better than this new stuff for this particular film. And so I tried reworking the Elfman's music on my own, just pushing it around and trying to adapt it to... Even more to this cut. And then there was a... Now, there were, really, two streams going on. And finally, it came down, probably, five weeks before we were to finish the film, certainly, eight weeks before, we have to make a decision, which music are we going to go with? If we're going to go with the new music, we have to make that decision. If we're going to go with Elfman's music, that... There are certain things that now need to be re-recorded to adapt to this new version. And ultimately, a decision was made by the studio, that they... okay, they would go with the Elfman's original score, and it would be updated with new compositional elements. And Elfman was not available, but a composer was hired, who was agreeable... Whom Elfman was agreeable to, and that became the final music.
But the side effect of this was, I think, unfortunately, that because of the dissension in the music decision, the film was never previewed again. We had this one preview in, let's say, September. And then we had to finish the film by the end of January. And from September, the film was never shown to an audience again. There were screenings of it, but – internal screenings – but it was never shown to an audience. And for a film that wants and needs to be accepted by a large popular audience, it's a good idea to see where you are in that process. And that was one of the side effects of this indecision on the music front: was that the film never got previewed again, probably, to the disadvantage of the film, because when the film came out again, it was not particularly successful. Given its budget and given what one's hopes for it were, it was a disappointment.

I think you inevitably become proprietary about the work that you do, to a certain degree. Ultimately, the editor is there, I believe, at the service of the director. Certain dynamics would push you and the director towards the producer of the film, or the studio. But my personal feeling is that I'm there with the director, and I'm there, ultimately, to do what the director wants. On the other hand, I also believe that it's the job of the editor to provoke certain things when the situation is right. If you see the potential for a good idea, either dropping a whole scene, or having a different interpretation on a scene, or reducing the length of the film, or whatever it is, you can and, I think, should be proactive about that. In other words, I don't think you should, as an editor, say to the director, 'Okay, what do you want me to do? And I will do it.' In that case, you are... The director really should be editing, and in that case, you're simply a pair of hands that is doing what the director wants. And, you know, that's not the way acting works at its best, or any of the other departments.
A director will choose an actor based on what that actor can contribute, and the director will direct the actor, meaning: I want you to interpret it this way. This scene is about anger. You are angry with the situation. And, you know, how best to express that anger, at the micro level, I'm going to leave to you, the actor. I'm not going to say, 'Before you bring the glass down, could you look to the left, tilt your head 32 degrees and smile, before you suddenly turn it into a frown, and then smash the glass?' Well, that... Those are not instructions that actors like to hear. Sometimes, they do hear them in the process of making a film. But the actor is a self-motivated person who is in control of their instrument, which is, to say, themselves. Sometimes, not in a totally conscious way, but in an organic way. And that's what you hire when you hire an actor. And to a certain extent, and there are limits to that, obviously, but to a certain extent, that's what the relationship is with a cinematographer, or an editor, or others: do something, put the scene together, and then let's look at it, and let's... we'll take it from there.
So, almost always, the first assembly of the film, the... In my experience, has been done without the director ever being anywhere around. In fact, with Fred Zinnemann, he deliberately said, 'I don't want to know anything about what you're doing. Just tell me if there's something really wrong that needs to be reshot, but don't... I don't want to see what you're doing, and I don't want to know about anything until you've put it all together.' And so, in general, that's kind of the situation, with a number of exceptions, on a scene-by-scene basis. Sometimes, there's a problematical scene, and then the director will come in, and we'll look at that while the shooting is going on.
But in general, the editor, me in this case, is given a great deal of freedom for the first assembly. And then the director will either immediately come into the editing room, as it was with Kathryn Bigelow. Or as it was with Fred Zinnemann, he will come in progressively more and more, and in the last couple of weeks, he'll be... he will be in the editing room on a daily basis, but that progresses over a series of months, and with everything in between.

There's an interesting technique that I wrote about in the book, Blink of an Eye, that comes from dream therapy. And I've never experienced it, but people have told me about it, where if you had... If you've hired and are working with a dream therapist, you get together every morning, and the job is, 'Tell me what you dreamed last night', and then you discuss the dream. Frequently, what happens is you arrive at the meeting and you can't remember what you dreamed last night, or you have a very fragmentary image of it. Something about an aeroplane. I don't know. It's... And what the dream therapist does is fill in the blanks, but purely on a speculative way. Meaning, 'Yes, an aeroplane flying over Africa, filled with walnut shells', something silly. And once you hear that, which is not what the dream was about, you say, suddenly, surprise yourself, and you say, 'No, it wasn't Africa, it was South America. And it wasn't walnut shells, it was half inflated balloons. That's interesting. I... Now I remember it.' But I remember it only because I had been challenged by an alternate version. And frequently, that's what we as editors are doing, because it is rare – unless perhaps you are Hitchcock – that as a director, you can think of everything down to the final detail about something. But it is... When you see what the editor has done, which is this alternate version of the aeroplane filled with walnut shells, so to speak, you say, 'No, it was... I don't mean that, I mean this', but you wouldn't have realised that quite so precisely unless you had seen this alternate version which is not what you want. So, even when we editors produce something that is not what the director wants, obviously within reason, the director can profit from that, because that sharpens the: now I understand.
And we're, both editors and directors, we're kind of groping in the darkness at times, about where are we actually going with this film? Because frequently, not everything worked as well as it should've worked. And by the same token, sometimes, some things worked much better than we hoped. And so... But because they're better, that means that the original plan... we really should not do what the original... We should take advantage of this great thing, but if we do that, that's going to unbalance this other thing, so what's the correct answer? And the whole thing is too long anyway, so we have to drop some scenes, and... So we're, you know, we're, kind of, to a certain extent, feeling our way in relative darkness. And the thing that helps this process, I think, is this proprietary feeling on the editor's part, which is: I'm going to shine some of my own light on this, and even though it might be wrong, at least it will provoke a response from the director. And sometimes, the chances are that not only is it right, but the director – if the director is a certain kind of person – will say, 'That's better than I even could've thought of myself. Where did that come from? That's fantastic.' And, you know, you live for those moments, where – you know, not only editorially, but in all of the other crafts – something emerges that seems to be better than the sum of all the parts that went into it.

But a large part of that goes from... The responsible part is being more proactive and, let's say, even aggressive, pushing things, than you might think at first glance, about what is the relationship between an editor and a director. And, you know, it can go too far, and you can veer off the tracks. My own rule of thumb for this is: if I have an idea, and I propose the idea, and the director does not like it, I will retreat. Okay, but then, at the right moment, maybe a week later, I will say, 'You know, because of what we have done in the last week, maybe we could look at that idea?' And if the director says 'no', okay. And then, at an extreme case, I will pitch it one more time – again, it has to be at the right moment – and if the director still says 'no', then I drop it forever. I won't... I can't make a pest of myself about this idea. If I've been turned down three times, I will abandon the idea.
Anthony Minghella had a phrase for that, which says: if three Russians tell you you're drunk, lie down, because they're the experts. Not two, but three. You need the number three to certify that you, in fact, are really drunk. But... So, three is a, kind of, a magic number in these circumstances.

In this uncertain period – this was, probably, 2010 – I found myself directing an episode of animation for Lucasfilm, which at that time was producing a weekly animation... Half an hour animation programme called Clone Wars. And it was an entirely animated show, featuring this army of the white suited clone warriors. And it was an unusual thing for me to do, but I like those kind of challenges. And it was just a... I think it was a ten-week... 12-week engagement. Maybe 16 weeks. Four months, let's say. To take a script and – that was slightly less than half an hour – and design the staging, and animate characters in that space, and these are warriors who are fighting things, there's a battle... Battles that happen, and all kinds of science fiction type stuff on a distant planet.
And you learn how to use a version of the Maya software, which is what animators use. I had to at least become familiar with this. I had a team of four animators working with me... for me, who obviously knew that software extremely well, and I will assign various scenes in this episode to each of them, multiple scenes, and work with each of them as they develop this, the way any creative process would go. 'This is... that's very good. Can we move quicker from here to there? And let's try this different angle on this.'
There's a tremendous amount of flexibility because nothing is really being shot. It's all just, what they call, 3D animation, which is not optical 3D. But it means that you have characters placed in a space, virtual space, and you can put the camera, in a sense, anywhere in that space, and you can change the lens of that camera during the shot, or at the beginning of the shot, or the end of the shot, or you can... Yes, great flexibility. And the... One of the challenges of this, which was particularly interesting to George Lucas, was to try to imprint the techniques of live action shooting on animation.
And this is different from the normal approach, because the final animation is so expensive on a frame-by-frame basis, the rendering time and all of the details, that, in general, animation is done on a shot-by-shot basis, like animated storyboard. So, here's a shot, we go from A to B, with a little overlap at either end, but we're very careful about excess. And in a dialogue scene, you would animate this shot, and then you would animate this shot, and then animate this shot. And what George said was, 'No, animate it all. So, pretend that there are two cameras on these characters, shooting the way you would shoot live action, then you just... you generate all of this material. And then, editorially, you decide where the best place to edit is. You don't decide the editing beforehand. You treat it as if it's live action.'

And this is simple enough in a dialogue scene, but he wanted to do the same thing for big action scenes so that you had lots of coverage, and the kind of software that they were using allowed this to happen without incurring huge costs. Because what we were looking at was not, in any sense, the final animation. It was schematic, in a sense, that when a character walked, they really just glided across the floor. We weren't yet making them walk. And, you know, heads would tilt when they talked, but there wouldn't be over-articulation like there would finally be.
So the idea would be to rough it out using all these techniques, and then cut it down to whatever the final time would be, 28 minutes. Voice it with the... You use temporary voices. You would just grab, sometimes, your own voice. And then, finally, you would get the actors in and they would voice it. And maybe you... I think we added temporary music. You would get it to a certain stage. And then George [Lucas] would come in, and you would have a screening of your episode, and he would look at it and say, great, or speed up the middle, or something. And the final changes will be made.
And then this would be shipped somewhere, mostly, I think, to the Far East, Singapore. There was an animation office in Singapore, using people who were not being paid as much as animators would be paid in Europe or the United States. And, you know, very good animators. And they would take the template that you gave them, and they would flesh it out into full animation. So, at that point, my job was done. When we approved this particular version of the sketch, then I left. And the full animation would take another six or eight months to complete, and I would have nothing to do with that. That was all overseen by the producers of the show. So my job was simply to work from the script, get this visualised, and the action staged in an interesting way. So it was a, you know, a great learning experience for me, because it... I'd never worked in animation before like that, and working with creative animators, and the whole machine that had been established, administrative and talented machine, to produce this television show on a weekly basis. And the results are really fantastic, for, certainly, for the budget that they did. It was by far some of the most, at times, beautiful work being done in animation for limited budget. Certainly, not on the scale like Pixar. But Pixar films were, you know, ten to 30 times as expensive as these... Per minute.
So I look back on that with interest and affection. At the time, it was... I was straining at my leash because it was so... A lot of this was such new material to me, and I, you know, I wanted to do a good job. But I'm very happy that I did it. And that series has now ended, so that... The opportunity to do it has stopped. But I... It was an enjoyable, different way of approaching the film-making process.

Shortly after the experience of working on the Clone Wars, the animated show, I was talking to Phil Kaufman, a director whom I had worked with on Unbearable Lightness of Being. And we had known each other since the early '70s, when I was working on [The] Conversation, and he was directing and editing, in the same building, the film White Dawn, about explorers north of the Arctic Circle. And we had tried to work together on The Right Stuff, his fantastic film about the early astronaut programme. And I was intending to work on it as editor, and in fact, did a number of months of work on it, assembling the archival material that was used in the film. But then the option arose, and began to become serious, about writing the screenplay for Return to Oz right about the same time.
So I couldn't do both things, so I regrettably said goodbye to Phil on The Right Stuff. And had the opportunity to work together on Unbearable Lightness. And now, in 2011, work on a film that he was directing named Hemingway & Gellhorn, which was a biography, principally, of Martha Gellhorn and her relationship with Ernest Hemingway. And they were married for a number of years, a romance that involved, you know, while Hemingway was married to somebody else. And then the two of them, Hemingway and Gellhorn, moved to Cuba, so Hemingway's Cuban years were much living with Martha Gellhorn.
And the plan was, and in fact, the film used an advancement on the technique that we had used in Unbearable Lightness of Being, which was to take archival footage from the Spanish Civil War, mostly, but other areas as well, and put our characters actually in that archival footage. So it was different than Unbearable Lightness of Being, where if there was a shot that was... That contained Daniel Day-Lewis and Juliette Binoche, that was something that we actually shot on the streets of Lyon, and timed to look like it was archival footage. But then the real archival footage of the Soviet tank in Prague had none of our actors in it. Whereas, Hemingway & Gellhorn, because of the advances in technology in the last 25 years, the idea was: we're actually going to put the actors in those shots.
It's an extension of the technique that was by Woody Allen in Zelig many years ago. And... But since then, there are all kinds of other improvements that had happened that allowed us to insert our actors, even in shots... Archival shots where the camera is moving, which technically would've been very difficult many years ago. So... And the price of doing this had dropped tremendously, because, again, because of digitisation. And it was great to be working with Phil again. And we were also working in San Francisco, so I was working from home, which was nice. And we had – similar to what Francis [Ford Coppola] had done in Argentina – we had taken over a series of abandoned offices in the southern part of San Francisco, in a kind of industrial area, and converted them to, very similar, to costume department, and production department, and editing, and administration, and producers' offices, and a projection room.
In this case, the projection room was not big enough for me to have my editing room in it. But one of the editorial assistants did live, in a sense, in the projection room, and he had the luxury of, if he wanted to, looking at his work on the screen. But whenever we had a version of the film, we could just all go into that room, which was smaller than the room we had in Argentina; it could hold maybe 15 people, 20 people, and see the projection of the version of the film as it was at that time.

I was back to using Final Cut 7, the Apple program. So I had gone from using Final Cut on Tetro, to Avid, using Avid on Wolfman, and then now back to Final Cut. Changing from the Steinway to the Bösendorfer, and back again. And, you know, it all... I go through a period, even when I'm not... When I haven't switched pianos, so to speak, if I haven't edited in a while, meaning in a couple of months, a lot of the instant reactions to, what key do I press to make this happen? Goes away on a, kind of, a superficial level. And I call those my 'shoelace' moments, because it's... I have to ask somebody, usually, one of my assistants, 'How do you get from here to there?' Yes, it's that key structure. But it feels like, 'How do you tie your shoelaces? I forgot.'
So, elementary things, I have to relearn. But I haven't really forgotten them, they just don't come to me immediately. So... But once I remember them, then they pretty quickly come back. It usually takes about a week to get back up to speed again. In this case, it was slightly more awkward, because I had to make the transition from another program to... Avid back to Final Cut. And I had been doing this animation in the meantime, which is a completely different system entirely. So it'd been a year at least since I had worked in anything editorial, and almost two years since I had worked with Final Cut. So... But this is just what... This is the world we live in these days. It's... There's lots of changes, and it's very fluid. Unless you have a regular job and you're not working freelance, then you can, kind of, stick with the same program, but that's not, certainly, not what's happening in my case.

This was also the first time that I had worked in television, although I didn't experience any of the... There was nothing television-y about it, from my point of view, but the financing was coming from HBO, the channel. And it's indicative that this film, this script, which easily could've been a theatrical feature, it didn't elicit any interest from the normal studios because, who knows? They're interested in masked superheroes. And... but HBO was very interested in it, and they came up with the financing. Of course, the budget was low, and the time frame that we had to make the film was restricted. We started shooting in March of 2011, and the film was finished by the end of September. So, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, so seven months.
And for a feature film – and it was long, it was two hours and 45 minutes, or something along that line – you know, to do all of that and all of the visual effects that were necessary to insert these characters into this archival footage, and, you know, make... Come to all of the decisions about the overall length and how we're going to tell the story, it was challenging in a very good way. There wasn't much time to sit back and think about it because of that schedule. The film was never previewed. We never showed it to an audience. I think that was part of the appeal for Phil [Kaufman], because he doesn't like previews, and just the way this was constructed.
There were screenings for the studio, and they weighed in, and they gave us notes about what they thought should happen. But Phil, I think, had final cut, or something very close to final cut. It never came to any big dissension within the creative process of making the film. It... There were high-profile actors. Nicole Kidman played Martha Gellhorn, Clive Owen played Hemingway, and other very well-known actors were in the film. It was a film that actors responded to, because it was an interesting script, and, you know, interesting situations for actors to get their teeth into.

Technically, a fascinating thing happened during the shoot, which is that Apple announced in February, just before we began shooting, that there was a new version of the software coming out in June, and it was going to be revolutionary. And we, meaning the editorial team, before shooting, went down to the Apple headquarters and, along with another 200 people, had a demonstration of some of the aspects of this software. And it was clear to me that it was different. It was not clear to me then just how different it was going to be. Because what emerged in June was what is now known as Final Cut 10, or Final Cut X. So they jumped from Final Cut 7 to this Final Cut 10.
Final Cut 8 and 9 disappeared. They were somewhere never... they were virtual creations that never came to light. Although, I heard later that there was a Final Cut 8 that they were working on. And then Steve Jobs, the head of Apple, came in after they had been working on that version for maybe a year, and said, stop the presses, down your tools, we're not continuing in this direction, we're going to go off in another direction. And what emerged was a piece of software that is very good at what it does, but it is definitely... Especially in its early incarnation, it was not tuned to the needs of people who work professionally in film.
It architecturally seemed to be fundamentally based on iMovie, which is the consumer level movie, but that had been professionalised to a certain degree. And the hope was, I think, and that's been partly realised, is that the... Apple would offer this software up, and third-party developers would be encouraged to come and supply the missing pieces that would lift it up to a full professional model, but that Apple themselves would not have anything to do with those things. I... You have to read between the lines a lot with products that come out of Apple because they're fairly closed mouthed about it. There's a... But it seemed that they were not... they were no longer interested in pursuing professional hardware, not only Final Cut, but certain other pieces of professional software that they were making, they backed away from. Because it is the case that professional software has, with a few exceptions, has an increasingly limited base of people who buy it; it's just the people who are doing that professional work, and they're very demanding. As the technology matures, they say, 'But it must have this and this and this.' And if you're feeding that group of people, you have to respond to those requests, and that takes a lot of time, and there are competing agendas. And I think, eventually, Apple must have said, 'Is it worth it to keep doing this?' Because Avid certainly had a very large share of the professional market. And Adobe Premiere was emerging more, and they were after the professional market.

And I think Apple said, 'You know, we're going to go somewhere else, and we're going to pursue...' I've never heard them say this, but actions seem to speak louder than words, which is, a time is coming shortly where you will not graduate from high school without making a film, but that's part of our... That will be part of our education. And this is already true in certain schools. In fact, it's already true in certain schools that you have to make a film even to get into the school. It's like: show us your... show us what you can do, a kind of video CV of your life, and that will allow us to get a sense of you.
So this is all in the name of media literacy, which is undeniably important, because of what we have been talking about earlier. The culture now is so deeply suffused with media in all of its forms, thanks principally to the internet, but also many other things, that we live a huge portion of our lives in that world. And it's... Even if you don't make media yourself, it's good to know about it so that you can know when you're being manipulated, or just to have some insight into it. And so I think this is part of the reasoning behind a full education now.
100 years ago, 150 years ago, obviously, you couldn't graduate from school without knowing how to read, and how to write an essay, and how to do relatively advanced mathematics for a teenager. I think those are still in place. But added to that now is: can you make a film? Do you know how to shoot images, and then put them together, and present something? And this is a market that is, I would say, ideally suited to Final Cut X, which is full-fledged, but not with all of the dangly bells and whistles, and multiple levels of sophistication that a professional piece of... You know, a totally professional software needs to have to work on $150 million movie.
And clearly, from a marketing point of view, from an economic point of view, this is a good decision, because the market for those things... How many high school students are there in the world? Many hundreds of millions. And if you can sell this software for whatever it is, $250, to 100 million students all over the world, do the math. It's... That's a big item. And because they offer a platform that other third parties can populate with added bells and whistles, Apple doesn't have the responsibility for those things. They can simply say, 'If you're having problems with that, you have to talk to that person, not us.'

And this is all an interesting fallout, I think, of an economic concept that the shorthand for which is 'rebar', as in the metal steel that you put in the middle of cement construction. Concrete buildings need not only cement, but rebar in the middle of them to give them strength and resistance. And what happened to the steel industry in the mid 1970s, '60s and '70s, certainly in the '80s, was that an advance was made in steel production, the name of which I pretty sure is 'minimills'. These were miniature steel mills that you could almost put in your backyard. I'm exaggerating, but not much. Compared to these giant steel complexes that we were familiar with from, you know, 20th century industrial product, these are relatively small things, where a small group of people can actually produce steel.
And this was a study of... By an economist from MIT, Clayton Christensen, who reviewed what happened to the steel industry, and he specifically was talking about the revolution in rebar. And what that meant was a big steel industry saw that minimills were emerging, and the question is: what do we do with that? And a lot of these were emerging in India. And it... they were in advantage, but they were not an order of magnitude advantage. They gave you maybe – I'm inventing a figure here – but maybe 15% advance in economics. Significant, but not enough to... Not to... revolutionise your whole approach.
So the decision of the big steel manufacturers was: let them have it. You know, they can use these minimills to create rebar, which is the lowest grade of steel that we make. That's fine. We'll concentrate on everything else upmarket from there. And so that's what began to happen. But the rebar started to be manufactured at a significantly lower price than it had been being manufactured. And now that it was at a lower price, inventive people were finding new uses for rebar that were not part of the classic use of rebar. 'Look, you can use it to tie a package up and give it to your wife for Christmas', silly thing, but other uses that were not what rebar is usually used for.
And because of this, the market for rebar went up. More people were buying it than normal because new uses were being found for it because the cost was lower. And this made these minimills more profitable. And their answer the next time was to go up a notch from rebar to the next whatever it is level of steel, and this posed the same question to the big steel mills: what's our answer? And their answer, as I understand it, was the same: let them have it. We'll concentrate on the high end. Let them have the low end.
Well, you can imagine, over time, what happened is the low end just got bigger and bigger, and that these minimills started taking over more and more of the market. Until finally, the big mills were only making this very finely crafted, professional, highest end steel for certain, very exotic things, and as a result, the whole basis for the economics of these giant mills suddenly disappeared, and they were out of business. U.S. Steel does not exist anymore because it was eaten from below by rebar. And what Christensen's advice, implicitly, was to industries is: if you don't rebarise yourself, somebody else is going to do it for you.

So that became a shorthand, apparently, in Silicon Valley in those decades. All anyone had to do when there was discussion around the table: what should we do? And somebody... All somebody need... had to say was: 'rebar', and everyone knew what they meant. Meaning, we have to disrupt our own technology, because if we don't, somebody else is going to do it. So, in a sense, I think, Final Cut X is the 'rebarisation' of professional editing, and that... What we are left with in the other systems is this high-end, very specialised, very necessary... You have to have this stuff, just like you have to have somebody who's making high-end steel products. But in terms of the economics of it, the hope is, which is being realised, I think, is that the switch to a simpler model that doesn't require such hand-holding, and so many precise details to it, and you offshore those precise details to third-party people and let them take the risk, that's a wise decision for a corporation. The problem for us filmmakers, of course, is that we are now totally dependent upon these pieces of software to do what we do.
In the old days of the Moviola, you, at a certain level, you didn't even need the Moviola. You could edit the film on film the way they used to do it, just cutting it, making inspired guesses, looking at the still images on your cut here, and then taking it to a projection room, looking at it, taking notes, going back and trimming and refining it that way. So you didn't need any more complicated technology than a bench, a synchroniser thing to hold things in synch, and then a projector. But we're not in that world anymore. The film doesn't exist to even begin to put a film together. You need to have digital machines that can deal with it because you can't hold that in your hand. There's no way to deal with it other than with these machines.
And so we find ourselves in a bit of a dilemma at the moment, because we are dependent upon, certainly, Avid. We want Avid to stay in business, because if they don't, what are we going to do?

My personal path at the moment is that I'm using Adobe's product, Adobe Premiere. I don't feel comfortable using Final Cut X, partly because I was so emotionally bruised by the experience. It was as if I was – again, the piano metaphor – as if I was playing the piano, and somebody came down and closed the fallboard on my hands as I was playing it, because not only did they introduce Final Cut X, but they took away support for Final Cut 7.
So they simultaneously zombified abandonware Final Cut 7, which was no longer... It was just a piece of floating software that you could use it, but it wasn't being maintained or brought up to date to any new things. And they pointed you in the direction of this other software, which I felt was like saying, 'We're disconnecting the plumbing to the house you have been living in, and there's a nice house over there', and I looked at it and I said, 'Yes, but it... I don't see any roof on that house yet.' 'We'll get there. You'll love it.'
So my response at the moment is to be using Adobe Premiere. And I'm new to it. I've been using it for the last year or so. Still, every day, learning new things about it, which you would expect. I mean, in fact, I was learning new things about Final Cut even after using it for seven, eight years. The good thing about Premiere so far for me, other than the fact that it's a very pleasant environment –  I like the feel of the keys, so to speak – is that there's a good relationship between myself and other editors, and the people who are running the software at the corporate level, and the engineers who do the actual code writing. And they encourage filmmakers to say, 'It would be good if you did this and that, the other thing.' And so they're listening... We feel that they're listening to us, and actually implementing suggestions that we make.
And the turnaround for their software is that they certainly issue new updates, major updates every six months, maybe every four months during the year, so maybe two or three times a year, rather than our previous experience, which is you have to wait probably a year and a half or two years between major rewrites of the program. So there's a quick turnover. And we feel, I think correctly, that we're being listened to. And so far, that's a very good sign. At least it's very healthy, I think, that now we have three options to choose from. Ironically, they all begin with A. There's Avid, Apple, or Adobe. And you, as an editor, you can choose which piano, so to speak, you want to use, depending on your own preferences and the needs of the particular project that you're working on.
It means that you, to really be effective in that environment, you have to know how to play each of these things, so it's more work, and keeping on top of all the changes. But that... Again, that's the environment that we're in, is very changeable at the moment, and probably for the next, certainly, the next five years, which is about as long as we can see into the future at the moment.

The nature of a film like Hemingway & Gellhorn and is that the... Going into that process, where you know you have to go from a standing start, so to speak, to a finished film in less than seven months... Usually, a film like that would take, certainly, a year, from starting shooting to the final answer print. Sometimes 11 months. Sometimes 13 months. Sometimes 15 months. But seven months is on the short side. But not for television. But this had... The challenges of this were that – of Hemingway & Gellhorn – was that there was this level of technical difficult challenge on top of everything else that goes on. And then you see certain opportunities that you have to take advantage of things that emerge out of the whole process.
One of the things about the film is that it travels back and forth from black and white to colour, to a kind of, let's call it, 'Lumière' colour, sort of turn of the century, early version two-strip colour, where things are not completely fleshed out. And we had filters that we evolved in the process to... For each of these stages, and sometimes even more. And I would discover things that were new to me as a result of this process, which is a scene, for instance, in the trenches during the Spanish Civil War, where Hemingway and Gellhorn are there as reporters, and the battle is going on all around them, and then at the end of the battle, they are... they're still alive, they're not wounded, and a romance is blossoming between them, and we're making the transition from the black and white archival footage back into a more high-definition image. And what we wound up doing was taking that... Even in the... even when we were not looking at them, buried in this archival footage, we still maintained this subdued colour, as their relationship was... They were kind of feeling each other out. And then at the moment that they realised, 'there's something happening between us', then we were able to turn the colour up more. It's as if they began to blush with full colour when they realised that they... The possibility of some romantic something was growing within them.

When we were shooting Unbearable Lightness of Being in 1986, the end scene, where the Lena Olin character, Sabina, has emigrated to the United States, and she is a painter, and she's painting in this house, visiting... Visited by two older people who seemingly are her benefactors or supporting her in some way, the house that was chosen for this is the house that we live in in Bolinas. It's my family house. Because it was there, and it was... Phil [Kaufman] liked it, and it seemed to fit. It looks vaguely New England-y, even though it's a California house. And the actor who played the older man in the scene is a... or was a screenwriter named Niven Busch, who was also a novelist, who wrote The Postman Always Rings Twice and some other classic films, Westerns and other things. And Phil had met him at a party. He lived around the San Francisco area, and Phil met him at a party and casually said, 'Do you want to be in a movie?' 'Yes.' So they... Niven Busch was cast as this... The protector of Lena Olin.
And when we were shooting the scene, in between takes, he was sitting at the kitchen table. And Aggie, my wife, was serving tea. And he didn't want tea, but he wanted a nice dollop of sherry in a teacup, because this was... That was his predilection. And he asked, 'What's the name of this film anyway?' And I was passing through the room, and I said, 'It's The Unbearable Lightness of Being.' And he took a sip of sherry and said, 'The Unbearable Lightness of Being. The only thing worse than that on a marquee of the theatre would be: closed for repairs.' So, I mean, I still... Whenever I say the words, 'This film is The Unbearable Lightness of Being', it kind of trips off my mouth, but I always... in my corner of my mind, I see Niven Busch sipping his teacup of sherry, saying, 'closed for repairs.' It's a very challenging name for a theatrical motion picture, but it's the name of the novel upon which the film is based.

At that same time, when we were in the editing [of Unbearable Lightness of Being], I was, for reasons to do with just my focus, I was interested in string theory, just as an interested citizen. I heard lots of about string theory in physics, and: what is it? And what's going on? And I heard that there was a gentleman in the Saul Zaentz Film Center in Berkeley, who had a PhD in particle physics, and he was working as an assistant in... on one of the other films. So I found out who he was. It was... turned out to be Mark Levinson. And I said, 'Let's go out to lunch someday, I want to ask you about string theory.' That wasn't his specialty, but he knew enough about it to keep me satisfied.
Anyway, our... That started a friendship 30 years ago now. And he wound up not becoming a professor in particle physics, even though he was qualified to do that. But he was a specialist in what's called ADR, automated dialogue recording, which is the replacement of dialogue in a film after the film has been shot. And it's a very specialised, very tricky area to get right, to know exactly what to say and how to do it. And you... As... Mark would work very closely with the directors on films, but it's a very... it's an area where it's easy to get things wrong, and Mark is one of the best in the business at that.
Anyway, he and I worked together on [The] English Patient. He was the ADR supervisor on that. And Talented Mr. Ripley, and Cold Mountain. He became a very good friend of Anthony Minghella. And we also worked together on K-19, Kathryn Bigelow's film.

ADR, which stands for automated dialogue replacement, or automatic... There's a little vagueness about what it really means, but we just all say ADR. For... You can get into a situation, and almost every film gets into this, where either dialogue for a scene was recorded, but there's too much noise in the background and you have to replace it. Science fiction films are full of this, because the actors are on sets that're probably also almost always made of plywood, but you want to imagine that they're made out of molybdenum or some fantastic metal, and so footsteps, which sound, clunk, clunk, clunk, have to be replaced, and that means you have to replace the dialogue as well. And so you get the actors in, after the film has been edited together, and you say, 'We want you to say these lines of dialogue again.' So there's nothing wrong with their performance, but it's just... Technically, it was very difficult to get a clean recording.
At the other end of the spectrum, there are times where you need to change the dialogue so that people understand the story better. For some reason, the dialogue as written doesn't work anymore because, who knows? You drop the scene, and now that dialogue doesn't mean anything because that scene is gone, so we have to change that scene. So, even though, in that case, the dialogue was recorded perfectly well, we have to replace it because we're now... we've written new dialogue, and we have to very carefully infiltrate the new dialogue, sometimes, into mouths that are not saying exactly those words.
Of course, this is what happens all the time when you make a foreign version of a film. A film... the actors may be speaking English, but now we're making the French version, and we have to fit French words, artistically, as closely as possible, into these mouths, and you can never do a perfect job of that, because it's not true. On the other hand, you can do it so that it is not gratingly obvious what's going on. So, if you imagine a full spectrum, from the technical problems with the recording of the dialogue to wholesale replacement of... reinventing the whole basis for a scene, that's what an ADR supervisor will work with the director to achieve.
And it's very tricky because you can never exactly tell how the actors are going to respond to this. Some actors, who are very talented actors on camera and even on stage, are not very good at ADR, because it's a completely artificial thing. You're looking at something that you acted in, perhaps, six months or eight months earlier, and you're trying to get back into that moment, and you may have done three other films in between... 'What was this?' And then you have to be very exact about how you say the lines of dialogue. And that particular skill is... It's a skill, kind of, like being able to stick your tongue out and turn it upside down; some people have it, and some people don't. It's just... You can never really predict how it's going to turn out. So there's a lot of very delicate handling of actors in, sometimes, fraught situations. There's a classic scene in... What's the name of that film? With Gene Kelly, where the whole idea is dialogue has to be replaced, and the actor has a nervous breakdown trying to replace the dialogue. So it's... Anyone familiar... If you've made a movie, you know the angst that surrounds this situation.

I remember I was on [The] Godfather I. I was working with Francis [Ford Coppola]. I was the ADR supervisor for some of that film, and—in addition to other things—and we were working with Marlon Brando. And we had gotten, perhaps, halfway through the film, he... There wasn't a lot to do, but it was significant. And at... but at the halfway point, Francis suddenly stood up and said, 'Well, this is going great. I have to go somewhere else now, so you guys continue', and he was gone. And suddenly, I found myself in a dark room with Marlon Brando, doing ADR for The Godfather. And we finished the reel that we were working on. And the technicians, at the end of that, they have to take down everything and rethread everything up for the next section, and so there's a five minute break in between. We were sitting there in the dark. And then I suddenly heard this voice out of the darkness. Marlon Brando, he said, 'Some people say I mumble', and I had to think very quickly what the correct answer to this was. I was 26 years old at the time, or something. And I said, 'That's right, some people do say that you mumble.' And I wondered, 'What he's going to say now?' And he said, 'They're right, I do mumble, and I'll tell you why. Because – now they were threading the film up, he said – I don't know, when we shoot these films, I don't know whether that scene is going to be in the film or out. And if it's in the film, I don't know whether it's going to be in the position it was in the screenplay or somewhere else. I don't know that it's not going to be cut in half, and the first half will be put with the second. So, when I see this finished film, I sometimes say to myself, if I knew you were going to do that, I would've said something different, or I would've said it in a different way. So, in self-defence, when we shoot these films, I don't move my lips very much. I keep my mouth kind of closed so that, when I see the film before we finish it, I can change the dialogue and make it better. If I move my lips a lot like that, I can't... you can't... It's harder to change the dialogue, so I don't move my lips very much.'
So that was his analysis of the ADR process. And he enjoyed it. I mean, some actors hate it. They just... They have to be dragged, kicking and screaming, or even refuse to do it. But Brando, in fact, likes the... It does... If you accept it, even though it's technically challenging, if you accept it, it allows you, kind of, an escape clause, you can modify things at the last minute.

This was what Mark [Levinson] did for his bread and butter, and he was developing other films along the way. He wrote and directed an independent film in the late 1990s, I believe, about Russian émigrés from Soviet Russia. And in the mid 2000s, 2005, 2006, he moved to New York from San Francisco, and met a physicist, David Kaplan, who was planning to make a film about the Large Hadron Collider in Geneva, the atom smasher, that was planned to be 14... to have 14 times more energy than the previous atom smasher. And it was going to turn on in 2008, and he was anxious to make a film, just to document what was going to happen.
Because it had been so long since the last powerful atom smasher had been built, that there was a drought of data. Physicists were making theories on the basis of no new data, because everyone was waiting for this machine to turn on, and it had been decades since the last one. And so, no matter what happens, when this machine turned on, even if they didn't discover anything, the fact that they didn't discover anything at this high energy would be a significant fact for physicists.
So it turned out that nobody was planning on making a film, a documentary about this, and so David began raising money independently, and he contacted... He became friends with Mark. And one thing led to another, Mark wound up directing this film. It was the first documentary that he had directed, and it occupied six years of his life. Starting shooting in 2008, and, well, finished at the end of 2013, and the film was finally released in 2014.

I got involved after Hemingway & Gellhorn, a project that I was going to do fell through some... As a result of the economic uncertainties of the world at that moment. And I... Mark [Levinson] sent me a copy of the film, saying, 'Do you want to work on this film?' Or rather, 'What do you think of this cut?' There was... he had an assembly of it done. And I thought, 'Well, it's good, and here's some suggestions.' And then, one thing led to another, and he suggested, 'Why don't you come to New York and work for a couple of months on the film before you get your next assignment?' And I was at loose ends, and, 'Okay, let's do it.'
I moved to New York, and started working on this film. I love science and physics, and my... the things I choose to read at night as I go to sleep are all mostly popularisations of science, or things along that line. So I already knew something about what was going on. So, on a certain level, I didn't have to be brought up to speed. Of course, there was a lot for me to learn, specifically, about what this actually was, and how best to tell it as a story. But I was not completely innocent about particle physics, coming into it.
And after working for a couple of months on the film, we began to hear drum beats from Geneva, kind of, jungle drum, so to speak, saying, 'Something's going to happen in July.' And the closer we got to that date, it became obvious that they were going to announce that they had discovered the Higgs. And this was fantastic news. On the other hand, it meant that we had to shoot that, obviously. And that information meant that we had to change how the film was going to end, because now we had a real ending for the film, rather than it just, kind of, petering out and saying: more work has to be done. We actually had a fantastic ending to the film.

And so Mark [Levinson] went to Geneva, and worked with CERN. He had a very good relationship with the person who supervises the media for CERN, mostly because, you know, he's a personable fellow, and also, he has a PhD in particle physics, so they trusted him. He's... He'd been through the hoops that they had all been through. And I, then, I wound up working on the film for almost... For over a year. The... even when we had this ending for the film, the film was turned down by film festivals. There was no studio behind it. And so the only venue for getting a distributor was to take it to film festivals and try to see if somebody would pick it up. But film festivals wouldn't take it because it was too science-y, even though it's, you know, it's not, but just... People are scared of physics. Physics, for some people, is like, 'I don't want to know about that.' And we finally were accepted thanks to Taghi Amirani, who saw the film in New York, and had an in with the programming committee at the Sheffield Film Festival. We were able to get into the Sheffield Documentary Festival, and it wound winning the audience's favourite film. And after that, doors opened up. And eventually, it did get a distributor.

I loved working on the film. It was as simple, in a certain sense, as it can possibly be. It was just me and Mark [Levinson] in a single room. He was the director of the film, but he was also my assistant editor. And we both had Final Cut workstations. And I would be working away. And we would screen the film. We did many, many screenings of the film, which – for audience – which I think was an invaluable part of, certainly, this film, because in a film about physics, we also had to explain some of the physics. Why do these people care about any of this stuff? Why are they spending $10 billion on this machine?
So a certain amount of the physics had to be incorporated into the film, but it was clear that we had to be very careful about how much physics we dosed out, and when we did it, and there's a limit to people's attention on that stuff; they very quickly get their cup runneth over very quickly if they're not physicists. So audience screenings for a film like this were very important.
And it was very clear, when we showed the film at any one screening, 'Okay, this... in this screening, we've run away from the audience. They... we lost them.' And once you lose an audience in a film about mathematics or physics, you never get them back. They just... even though subsequent scenes may be perfectly understandable, they feel – correctly or not, but that's how they feel – 'I didn't understand that, therefore, I won't understand anything else.' And so we had to be very careful about how we... that was the principal challenge of the film.

I remember, at the time, when we were first talking about working together, I said, 'Do you have anything about the Super Collider in Texas?' Which was the Americans' attempt to build an even more powerful collider in Texas. And Mark said, 'No, we don't, but we're planning on doing that.' And David Kaplan, the producer, got very excited, because he really wanted to do that, and to hear from an outsider like me, at the time, that I knew about this, and that I thought that was important.
So we wound up shooting a scene of David Kaplan going to the site of the Super Collider, which was now an abandoned warehouse in the middle of Texas, and, kind of, like, looking at the ruins of Persepolis or something. This... It was going to be built here, and now it's just an empty shell. And they actually made... I think they dug 14 miles of a 50 mile in circumference tunnel. There's a book written about it called The Hole in Texas. So it was a big deal. And much of... Ironically, the story of the... The history of... subsequent history of Wall Street would've been very different, because the plan at the Superconducting Super Collider was to have, as in CERN, to have 10,000 physicists doing advanced mathematics there. And when the whole thing collapsed, there were 10,000 physicists who had to go somewhere. And 5,000 of them went to CERN. The other 5,000 went to Wall Street, because the problems of advanced particle physics and the problem of Wall Street are not that different, which is, succinctly stated, the fire hose of data, that, in both cases, there is a unbelievably intense stream of data, and you have to create mathematical algorithms to pick the significant data points out of chaos.
And so the mathematics that were used in... to do that at Superconducting Super Collider were useful for doing credit default swaps, and other arcane, weird things, that probably never would've been even attempted if you didn't have the people doing the advanced mathematics. And most of them came from particle physics, or many of them did. And in fact, that's where the funding for this... Much of the funding for this film came from. Those same people who went to Wall Street and made a fortune, or relatively speaking, a fortune, felt slightly guilty about having abandoned the serene world of particle physics, and to compensate, contributed money to the making of this film. It's a way of paying back. So the fact that the film got made is due in part to the cancellation of the Superconducting Super Collider in Texas.

When we put the Texas scene in the film, the original thought was: we'll begin with that. We'll show the abandonment of this site, and then say, and there was another one of these really built in Geneva, and it turned out that that sent people... that sent audiences down the wrong track. We didn't quite know why at first, but we learned that it was because it seemed to put the film on a political footing, that it was going to be about the politics of United States government and capitalism versus European government and capitalism. And people told us, in the way that audiences tell you, 'We don't want that stuff.'
So then we thought, 'Well, we'll put it later.' And we'll put it after the breakdown of the Geneva... The Large Hadron Collider, because nine days after that collider started up, it broke down catastrophically. It was an explosion. And now, people are depressed, 'Will we put it back together again?' And the idea now was, 'Well, this moment reminds me – one of the physicists – of when the Super Collider was cancelled. This was a bad moment.' So let's go for a little bit of history. And what we learned there was that people didn't even care about it then, that that was... They were already committed to thinking about the Large Hadron Collider, and they didn't want to know about this other stuff. In a way, we... it was as if we had shown what a beautiful horse this Large Hadron Collider was, and then it had attempted to jump over a fence and it broke its leg. And now, we were saying, 'It reminds me of the other horse I had, where not only did it break its leg, but we had to put the horse down.' People just... they didn't want... they want: what's happened to the horse? They wanted to know. So, okay, we can't put it there.
Eventually, it did find a home. And we wound up condensing it severely, that idea of the Super Collider, and putting it as if it were part of a lecture that David Kaplan was giving, where, in fact, he was talking about other things, but we made it seem as if he talked about the Superconducting Super Collider as part of a lecture. So it was very brief, and it was seen as part of another way of laying the groundwork, but it wasn't a complete scene in itself. So it was a fascinating example of the kind of structural things that you wind up doing in any film. I mean, we do this kind of things in feature films all the time. But here, in documentaries, you can probably do it more because of the more, let's say, unstructured nature of what it is that we're trying to tell. But it was... That was one example out of many of those kind of transpositions that you do when you're trying to work out the structure of a story like this.

Working on the Edison/Dickson film, that film, my oldest film, shot in 1894 by Thomas Edison, made me think, as I was working on it, a kind of... an improbable thought, which is: what if film had been invented 100 years before this? So it's in a nature of a thought experiment, because, clearly, film was not invented 100 years earlier, but what if? And to, kind of, grab hold of some of this idea, it helps to know that there is nothing that would've prevented the ancient Egyptians from inventing the zoetrope.
The zoetrope is a cylinder with slits in it, and pictures on the inside of the cylinder, and you've probably seen it, but when you hit the cylinder and started spinning, and then you look through the slits, you see these drawings on the inside do... they look like they're walking, or animating, or waving at you, or doing something. And all you need for this is a semi-rigid material, like papyrus, and a spindle of some kind, and the ability to make slits in the papyrus, and then do drawings on another slip of papyrus, and the Egyptians were great at doing drawings. And they didn't do it, at least as far as we know. It may be that, when we push on that wall in King Tut's tomb and discover Queen Nefertiti's hidden chamber, maybe there's a zoetrope in there.
But I guess the point is that, there are some inventions like the zoetrope that are limited not by the technology of the time, but by the imaginative world that needs to be in place for that to happen. That, the 20th... The 19th century was beginning to think about the – in relatively primitive terms, but enough – about the quantisation of the universe, that the universe might be made up of bits. At that time, we were just beginning to discover – this is in the 1830s, when the zoetrope was invented – we were beginning to discover that there were such things as atoms and molecules, and that nature was discontinuous, made out of bits. Since then, we've really begun to discover how quantised the universe is, but this was the beginning of it. And in some way, you need to be able to think about the chopping up of reality to even begin to conceive of the zoetrope.
So there is that. On the other hand, there are things that you might call... Just as we call that 'the Egyptian zoetrope', you might also talk about the Aztec wheel, because the Aztec civilization in Mexico did invent the wheel, but they never put it to use. It was kept as a toy for children. And you would have a sculpture of a little llama or something with wheels for feet, and you could move it around. But the idea of building a cart and putting wheels on the cart to transport this material over long distances didn't fit within the world of the Aztecs, because I don't know why. They weren't capable of thinking of that. Or, 'We had always dragged things, and we had plenty of people to do the dragging, so why do we need wheels? This is fine.'
The point is that, there is a kind of an imprecise alignment of inventions that are ahead of their time and inventions that are before their time. And so I'm thinking, what is it that... We know that film was not invented then in 18... In 1794, but would we have known what to do with it if it were invented? Let's say that it was invented, maybe it would be like the Aztec wheel, we just wouldn't know... Kind of, how do we... what do we do with this? Because we weren't yet sensitive to the quantisation of nature. I don't know. Something.

The other side of that argument is that, in 1894, we knew exactly what to do with film, and very quickly, within less than the space of a generation, within 20 years, we had Birth of a Nation. So the world that we live in now, which is the world of a big feature film shown to lots of people on a mass scale, that went from nothing to fully implemented in less than 20 years. Why did that happen so fast? Didn't it... wouldn't it take more time to figure all of this out? It just... it seemed to explode. And that took me down another pathway to thinking about what... who were the people who really invented motion pictures?
There was, of course, the Lumière brothers, and the Edison, who did the... And the William Dickson, who did the invention of the mechanical nature of it. How do we actually make photographs move? But then the question is: what do we do with it? And what I would propose is that there were two, at least, two other streams contributing to this. One of the streams I will name: 'Beethoven'. And it was principally him, but it could be other people as well. And Beethoven, let's say, invented dynamism in music, that the music pre-Beethoven was, what we call, classical music. Mozart and Haydn are the best examples of this. And the form of those... The music that they produced, for various cultural reasons, was what you might call an architectural form, that each movement of the sonata, or whatever it might be, is the composer introducing us to a room within the palace of this piece of music, and showing us the architecture of this room, and allowing us to explore, in all of its variety, this particular room of the movement of this piece of music. And then that comes to an end, and the door opens up to the next room, and we see a different room that has a different architectural shape, and we explore all of this. And then that comes to an end, and we go into the next room, and so on. So there's an orderliness to it, that it suggested that the... Some of the chaos of the 17th and early 18th century needed to be calmed down, all of the wars between the various European states needing calming, and classical music was a way of calming things down. I don't know what the answer is, but that style of music was in place.
And Beethoven came along, and his early music is sort of like that, but then it's as if he becomes impatient with that model, the architectural model, and changes the rules to a more natural model. He was a great walker. He loved nature. And when you're in nature, you aren't in a room, you're in a complex natural environment where things can happen, sudden thunderstorms can happen. And he... his music begins to evoke that kind of a world, in the sense that, in any one movement, he's not afraid to change the rhythmic signature of the movement to something completely different, to go from a certain mass number of instruments to a single instrument, and keep that instrument going for a while, and then counterpose that with something coming in from the side, and then suddenly explode into a mass of notes, and then go back to something simple, and then introduce a different rhythmic signature.
And the people who were exposed to this early, who were used to the other way of making music, found this, like, crazy. I forget who it was, one composer said of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, 'Beethoven has just written his passport to the madhouse', because that's how it seemed to them. It... another music critic looking at one of the other symphony said, 'It's as if Beethoven puts crocodiles and doves in the same cage.' So their experience of the previous music was sitting down and having a nice conversation with somebody at a coffee house. Here, it's like they're sitting down, and somebody starts explaining something, and then he suddenly stands up and starts shouting, changing the subject entirely, and then he sits down, and it's like, stick to the subject. What... but that wasn't what Beethoven wanted to do.
So there was a complete revolution in music as a result of Beethoven. And really, the rest of the 19th century was stamped with the imprint of Beethoven. Everyone had to come to terms with Beethoven, either by imitating him, or reinterpreting, or rejecting him. But he and others of his ilk were the dominant force all throughout the 19th century. And so, at the end of the 19th century, people were completely familiar with dynamism in music. It didn't strike them at all anymore as peculiar. In fact, certain composers like Wagner were moving away from that, into these long, luxurious lines that didn't have this kind of dynamism in them for long stretches.

Another stream alongside this dynamic stream is from literature, the representation of reality, as practiced by, let's say, 'Flaubert and others like him', where they found that they... By paying very close attention to specific things, not worrying about what's happening, but just describing what is seen as ordinary reality, you could evoke a kind of poetry against one's expectations, that the simple description of an ordinary scene in somebody's dining room, even when nothing's happening, was very poetic. Madame Bovary is full of this kind of stuff. In fact, Flaubert would write to Louise Colet, his lover correspondent, 'I just finished so many pages, and I can triumphantly say that nothing at all happened for five pages.'
And so he was trying to sustain this. And this idea of realism in literature, where you were describing ordinary reality, rather than Sir Walter Scott, Ivanhoe, fantastic things that we could never see, he's describing things that we saw all the time, but he's describing them in a way that makes us see them in a deeper way than ordinary. So he's extracting poetry out of ordinary reality, which a valuable thing for literature to do, any kind of art to do. And so, by the end of the century, that stream was well in place, realism in literature, and obviously, in photography as well, which had been invented in the 1830s. And dynamism in music, if you had to define the 19th century, you would say it was the century of novels and symphonic music.
And along in came – in the 1880s, 1890s – a new form of expression, which was motion pictures. And it turned out that we very quickly understood, because of our familiarity, that motion pictures were ideally suited to the dynamic representation of closely observed reality, that if we take ordinary reality, and we photograph it in a poetic revealing way, and we organised those shots dynamically, that we get a rewarding experience of watching this film. The suggestion, at the end of this, is that we did know, at the end of the 19th century, film came along and, in a sense, supplied a need that we already knew how to scratch, so to speak. But had it come along 100 years earlier, those traditions of closely observed reality and dynamism in music were not in place. And so, what would've happened? I don't know. It's a thought experiment, so we're allowed to imagine anything. But it could've been that film went off in a completely different direction than the one it has taken in the 20th century. Or maybe it would've eventually landed where it did, but it would've taken much more time to figure out that process.

So, when you think of any new invention that has a cultural dimension to it, like film certainly has, it is not simply the technical invention of the mechanics of it itself. It is also the cultural penumbra that surrounds this invention that can shift it into something that it is more ideally suited to do, but that is not obvious at the beginning.
As we were talking about Edison and Lumière brothers, they did not know quite... This is an invention without a future. What... How could it possibly be? Because they were too, perhaps, too focused on the technical aspects, and they couldn't imagine. Whereas, somebody like Dickson, who had this other inspiration, was able to leap over all of the logical holdbacks and say, 'No, we are going to do this. It, somehow, will happen.' And, you know, his mother was a, I believe, a singer. He was... she was involved in the arts. And, you know, he was probably more aware of these aspects than, say, Edison, who was not particularly artistic.

My father was a painter, and he did paintings that were exhibited in galleries in New York on 57th Street. He was out of a mainstream of American art in the 1940s and '50s, which was heading toward and deeply involved in abstract expressionism. He was a... He painted realistically, and what you might call intimate still lifes of enigmatic mechanical objects, for the most part. But to support himself... he didn't make enough money, selling these paintings, to support a family of two kids and a wife, and living in New York. So he also did some commercial illustration. He did covers for Scientific American, and Fortune Magazine, and other things for department stores.
And I remember him... When I was five, I think, he brought home some props. He'd been decorating some windows for one of the department stores, and he brought home some props from the window, which were little wooden butterflies, that, I guess, were hanging at the end of threads, as if they were real butterflies. But they were little pieces of plywood, painted... that he had painted in butterfly shapes. And I loved them. And I got excited about them, and coerced my... two or three of my friends to work with me on a butterfly factory. And we were going to take these wooden butterflies, and trace the outlines on pieces of paper, and then cut the pieces of paper around the outlines, and then colour in the butterflies with colours of our own design, and it would be a paper butterfly. And this, in the end, occupied the better part of a day. I saw it going on for weeks and months. I was going to be the butterfly king of the neighbourhood. But my friends, their interest in it was limited. And I organised it according to some kind of assembly line. I'll do the tracing, you do the colouring, you do the cutting, and that's how we will work.
And I think of that frequently when I think about what it is that I do today, that the editing room is, in a sense, a kind of butterfly factory, that we're taking these templates and colouring them in, and cutting them out, and exhibiting them on a kind of assembly line. There's me, and my assistant, and other helpers, obviously. The director, who is, sort of, dad. But the feeling that I get, I mean, it doesn't sustain... You know, examining it overly much as an analogy, but the feeling that I have when I'm in an editing room, I can, kind of, very easily trace back to the feeling I had in the butterfly factory, and I really liked it. And I like that environment, where everyone had a job to do, and it was clear how it was organised, and yet there was an artistic side to it. It was an interpretative artistic side. We weren't creating these butterflies, we were remaking them. So there's some indication there, in embryo, of some sensibility, because it was very easy to imagine kids who had absolutely no interest in butterfly factories – as was proven by the two people I was trying to get to help me – they worked at it for a couple of hours, and then they didn't like it anymore. Luckily, in film, you can find people who like... you know, who are similar, like the butterfly factory. But it's also a general principle that has to do with: what is your inner sensibility, and how do you express that in life?

I remember, also, my dad, who was, I think, probably going through a difficult economic time – although as a kid, you had no real sense of this. And he'd been working all night, and he was sleeping on the sofa in the day. And I was in the living room, doing something. And suddenly, in his sleep, he called out. He started shouting. He was having some nightmare. And it startled me and kind of... I was afraid, like: what's happening? Because I'd never heard anything like that before. And my mother came into the room and, you know, saw what was going on, and calmed me down by saying, 'You know, Walter, not everyone in life gets to do what it is that they really like to do, and your father is very lucky that he is doing something that he really likes to do.' By implication: it is sometimes difficult, and he's struggling right now. But he, basically, really likes to be an artist.
And, you know, I took that in, both as the son of this man, who was having a nightmare, but also as a general principle about life, which was, sort of, surprising to me at that age. Because, as a kid, generally, you, sort of assume that people are doing what they want to do, and you learn later in life that that – as my mother was telling me – that's not always the case. We find ourselves doing things for... find ourselves, sometimes, in alleyways and corners of existence that we were surprised: how did we wind up here? Through whatever confluence of external events and our own internal drives.
But I certainly became very interested in sound and recording sound in my early teenage years. And looking back at myself, and looking at my own kids, and looking at the kids of other people, it seems that there is an age, a, kind of, a sweet spot, maybe from the age of nine to 12 or somewhere in there, where some inner compulsion, some inner drive that you have has a chance of being expressed. Because you've been around for ten years, you know, you're... you've had experience of the world, so you know certain things by the age of ten, let's say. But you're not yet a teenager, you're not yet subject to the crowd control that happens when you're overly influenced by what your friends are doing.
There seems to be a little window that opens up in those years, where something that is essentially finding a way of expressing itself. And then, as you get into teenagerdom, and the hormones begin to take over, and peer pressure starts to exert itself, you may find, 'Well, now, I have to get serious, or I have to do what everyone else is doing.' And luckily, in my case, I found a way to link up later in life, at the age of 20, with something that I really enjoyed doing when I was ten. And I suggest, as a general principle, that that might be true, or more true than not, which is that: if you can find something in life that is at least a reflection of what you really loved to do when you were ten or 11, that this... that you have the best chance that you have of really liking what it is that you're doing, if the circumstances of your life are favourable enough to allow that to happen.

The success rate of films, given the investment and the payoff, is not very good. If you look at it as an industry, many people throw themselves onto the barricades of films, and I don't know what the real statistics are, but maybe 5% make it. Fortunately, that 5% pays off enough that it sustains the industry as a whole. But the attrition rate is very high, because, I don't know, the difficult of making films, and the imponderables, and the things that can trip a film up are legion. And the factor of combination of talent and luck and hard work on everybody's part that it takes to make a film are a precariously balanced house of cards that everyone on the film has to struggle to protect and encourage. So the question I would ask then is: why are we doing this? Is it... we're certainly not, on a large... Some people are making a lot of money at it. But most people, if you average everything out, it's not a way of really making a living, given how many people are doing it and the success rate of that compared to other more stable industries. And yet, as a culture, we seem to need this. We like film. Some people are obsessed with film. It seems to be necessary to us at the present time, in the same sense that, let's say, in the 19th century, music and novels were necessary. That's how they, sort of, defined Europe. They defined their cultural presence with, certainly, with those two things. And I think – again, this is very speculative – but I think part of the answer comes from the way... what films can deliver to an audience, and how that is reflected in the way our brains are structured at a deep level.

Nature is fairly parsimonious, especially with complicated things like neurological structures. Once you've built something, and 'you' being evolution, once a neurological structure is in place, it's very difficult to undo that and replace it with something else. Expensive. And life doesn't really stop to give you a chance to re-plumb the depths of the way our brains are structured. And I'm... When I say our, I mean, life on earth. Vertebrate life, let's say. But... So, what nature seems to do is to... As our brains evolve, we take a system, and then develop a new system that, sort of, wraps around it, and integrates with it on a... To a certain extent, but it's not a deep, complete reworking. In a sense, we have two operating systems working now. We started with one, and now there's another one, and they talk to each other, but it's sometimes problematical. And then along comes another layer. And to overly simplify it, we have what might be called the reptilian brain, and wrapped around that, the mammalian cortex, and wrapped around that, the neocortex, the human primate brain. And roughly speaking, these would be instinct, emotion and logic. And each one of those brains is capable, under the right circumstances, of taking over the situation.
If you're in a desperate situation where your life hangs in the balance, pretty much the instinctual brain will take over, because you can't afford time to think about things. You have to really act instinctively, without emotion, sometimes, and maybe without logic. You just have to react and hope for the best. There are other times in completely different situations where emotion... Where instinct has to be overridden by emotion, and that's... One of the main values of emotion is that it acts as a, let's call it, a clutch that separates out the gears of instinct, and allows a certain amount of flexibility in our reactions. That, if we are emotional, and I mean that in the largest sense of the word, we are not so tied to obeying our instincts, we have a little more flexibility and difference of response.
And that is a way of defining what mammals are, because mammals nurture their young. Reptiles, in general, do not. They lay eggs, and then abandon the eggs to whatever life will afford to them. There are some exceptions to that, and they're notable. But in general, the reptilian response to reproduction is: you're on your own, kid. And reptiles are born fairly, very quickly, functional in the world. They're weak and vulnerable, but they're able to function. And now it's up to chance and how many predators are in the neighbourhood, whether they survive or not. But the parents are not there to help them so much.
With mammals, and to a certain extent, I would include birds with this, there is this element of nurturing, and what makes nurturing possible is emotion. And I'm going to say that there's no question that the mammalian animal, and even the bird... Not even, the birds, have some emotional connection with their youth, their kids, because they're expending a tremendous amount of energy trying to make sure that these are not... that they have the best chance in the world, even after they're born. I'm going to support you up to a point where you're able to fly on your own, let's say. And... Or I'm going to suckle you and give you milk for... I'm going to eat, turn that food into milk, and suckle you to nourish you. On a certain objective level, why should I even care about that? You're something different from me. But there is a bonding there, and that bonding is something that... Let's call it 'emotion'.
On top of that is something that is predominantly human, but we can see it in... We can glimpse it in other primates, and even in other animals, and even, to a certain extent, in birds, and it's working things out logically. So that we're not responding instinctively, and we're not responding emotionally, but we are looking at the situation, saying, 'What's the best solution to this problem?' How can I work this out? Language is a big element in that. And language, even if we don't speak to other people, the language with which we talk to ourselves is something that helps us to work problems out.

There are times when emotion rules the roost, and these two other operating systems have to follow along behind. And there are times when logic rules the roost, and the other two; emotion and instinct, have to take a slightly backseat. And then there are other times when emotion... instinct, reaction rules, and the other two things have to follow along behind.
This is all part of the research that was done by [Paul] MacLean, who was a doctor at the National... a neurologist at the National Institute of Mental Health in the middle of the 20th century. He died only recently. But the concept of the triune brain, that the brain is a nested series of operating systems that are effective at different times in our life, depending on the situation. And it's an efficient way to work. And it also is, kind of, necessary, because it's rare that evolution can afford the expense of reverse engineering something that is already in place. We have five fingers because ancient fish had five fingers. Maybe it would be better for us to have seven, but we don't have the time to work that out. It's just... it works. It's well... it's good enough. And so, in a sense, this is the neurological equivalent of that. Although, obviously, neurology is much more flexible.

Various arts... When we look at the novel, which is an art form based on a code, in a sense, we have written a code, which is language, and when we read a novel, we are interpreting that code, that language, and ascribing emotion to it. But we are not being addressed overtly in emotion. We are being addressed in a code that elicits emotion from us, and maybe even elicits an instinct from us. Pornographic novels try to do that. They try, through a code, to make us respond instinctively to a certain situation. Music, on the other hand, talks on emotional terms. There's less logic there. To be a composer, you have to have real command of a language, which is how to write the music. But the music itself is talking in more purely emotional terms about things. And instinct is addressed by certain primal images that we can present, and primal sounds and rhythms that come along.
So I'm suggesting that each art form has a venue in which it is able to express itself. The unique thing about film, from this point of view, is that it can actually talk across all three of those spectrum, that simply by presenting an image, instantly, along with a certain kind of sound, you're talking... you're addressing the audience in an instinctual... What... They instantly react to what they just saw, whatever the power of that image is. On the other hand, by a certain artful construction of character, and the way it's presented, and certain kinds of music, you can elicit, without question, an emotional response to what you're looking at that is very hard to distinguish from your emotional response to a real life situation. And then, through the architecture of the story, and through the language with which it is expressed, and the sensibility of the construction of the story: does it make sense? Does it hang together? We're addressing this logical aspect to it.
And in that sense, I think it... First of all, it's unique. And it also is an echo, in a sense, an amplification of what you might call mythic structure at its most powerful. Because when myths – and I mean this not in: 'oh, that's mythical, that's...', but in the deep sense of what a myth is – myths work best when, at a... when they are addressing each of these levels, that when you hear a mythic story, somehow, your instincts and your emotion and your logic are stirred in equal proportions. And when a society is... agrees upon what the myths are – I'm just going to say, ancient Greece, to pluck one society out, you know, a certain period in ancient Greece's history, they all agreed on what are the myths – that society has a tremendous advantage because everyone has... is agreed upon what the story is. What is our society? And they agree on the logical level, they agree on the emotional level, and they agree on the instinctual level. And a good myth is capable of activating each of those operating systems in proportion.

The brain, which has a tendency to, sort of, go astray sometimes... We wander off and have an emotional response, and we wander off of working out the logical something or other, or we have an instinctual thing. You don't want too much of that disorganisation to happen in a coherent society. You want everybody to, sort of, hang together. And an agreed upon story, at the mythic level, is something that can help to compensate for the fact that – again, in the MacLean, triune brain concept – that we have three operating systems which is, at times, kind of dangerous, because they're not hierarchically organised. You can't always depend on logic to overwhelm emotion to overwhelm instinct. Sometimes, the bottom surges up and overwhelms the top. That, I think, incidentally, was one of the discoveries of the 20th century as opposed to the 19th century. The 19th century and the 18th century, the feeling was: now we've got it sorted. The Enlightenment, the idea, through science – we are going to organise things properly. And that was the idea of controlling everything from the top-down. And then, obviously, through people like Freud and Darwin and others, they began to hint at: no, there's something that can burble up from below and overwhelm even the most rational, logical of structures.
So, when we make films, we are, I think, responding to the fact that in our hands is a medium that at least has the potential to address these three things simultaneously in a way that other art forms don't, that we can be logical, we can be emotional, and we can harness instinctual things in the service of a larger art. And I don't think we've succeeded at it, or I certainly don't think we have the perspective yet to even know that we've succeeded. And misused films can clearly cause a lot of damage, because they are so powerful. But at least we should acknowledge that one of the things that makes films powerful, and why so many of us, kind of, throw ourselves on the barricades of film and try to work at this thing that is so very difficult to pull off, is that we are responding to a sense of potential in film, which maybe we're very far from realising it. Maybe, you know, we need another 100 years or 200 years in order to really figure this out. I mean, certainly, if you look at the history of music, the potential of music in 1500 was not fully realised until the 19... It took them 400 years to really figure out how to harness the full panoply of what orchestral music is potentially capable of. And we're probably somewhere along that trajectory with film.
But in film, we have something, which is the harnessing of, certainly, two senses: the sense of vision and the sense of sound. And if we put them in the right alignment with each other, as frequently happens, we can create – because of the alignment of these two senses – we can create, synergistically, the impression of smell, or the impression of feeling, or the impression of other senses which are not being directly addressed by the film. It's a little bit like what we were talking about earlier, in terms of the colour red. Red does not really exist as a neurological signal, but the certain signals can provoke it. And by aligning sound and picture in the right way, we can at least give the audience a whiff of the other.

My head is a certain distance from the top of the frame here, I don't know what it is. I believe that this is sort of the bottom of the frame. But if you gave a picture to 100 different cameramen and, I think, 100 different people in the street who were not cameramen, 92.5% of the people would adjust the frame so that there was a pleasing, whatever that means, distance between the top of the head and the top of the frame. Because if this camera were to give me more space above my head, I would look silly. And you see this in newspapers: if you want to make a politician in an image look small, they recompose the frame so that the person's head is down at the bottom of the frame, and there's lots of empty space. On the other hand, if you want to make somebody look overbearing, then you lower the frame line so that there is less space, then they sort of dominate the frame. But my point is that there is a sort of instinctual idea of where the top of the head... really where the eyes are relative to the top of the frame and that people respond to this instinctively, in the same way that when you put on a hat, you adjust the brim of the hat to be a pleasing place, let's say a more neutral place. When I go out into the street wearing a hat, which I don't, but if I were, I not only am wearing a hat, but I am expressing an attitude of who I am. And if I take the hat and push it back on my head, I have a kind of... I'm telling people, there's a certain attitude that goes along with that. If I cram the hat down on the head then that says something else, if I tilt the hat to the side or if I turn the hat around like a baseball cap, I'm saying something else. And how we choose to frame the image is essentially putting on the hat of the frame on the person and by adjusting this one way or another we can express an attitude of the camera, which is to say the film-maker towards this person, we're forcing people to have an attitude towards this person by how we adjust the frame.

This concept is moving from the camera into the editing room because now more and more with software we are able to manipulate that distance later on. We could always do it even with film, but it was cumbersome and very expensive. Now it is something that you can do very easily and there are developments now, something called the [visual] field camera is being made available. You can buy it now for movies. I think it costs $150,000 so it's whatever that is – four times more expensive than the RED camera or the Panavision camera. But the field camera simply takes data at the time of filming, and you decide later where you want the focus to be, you decide later even what lens you want to use. You can make it telephoto or make it a wide-angle lens after the fact. You can change the framing very easily. You can even determine where you want the information to cease as a function of distance and probably many other things as well. So, if I'm photographing you who are perhaps... the back of you is maybe 8' 2.5” from me, the camera, I can say later anything that's further away than 8' 2.5” turn into nothing. Basically, it turns into a green screen. In fact, it's better than a green screen because it doesn't have a colour at all, it's just raw emulsion, so to speak, ready to have something else put there. So, right now, rather than a wall and a window, we could put the Amazon jungle behind you, just like that which is of a piece with everything that is happening and happening increasingly rapidly. That shooting a film, people are even starting to say, rather than shooting, we are... this is a period of acquisition which sounds like, I don't know, some kind of... the thrust of empire. We are 'acquiring' this and later we will decide what we want to do with it. Which has always, sort of, been the case, but now the decision level of what we are able to do is now at the level of the individual pixels out of which the image can later be constructed. With implications about what filmmaking is, and where decisions are made and what the Director of Photography is. You can change lighting, even, later. I mean, it's mind boggling. And it may be that it will now take 20 years to finish a film, because everything that you have to decide, you will decide later! And then, it all has to work together. I don't know. It's a brave new world! And, I'm looking at it with interest and, even participating in it up to a point, but there's... we're punting the ball down the field in a big way now, and we don't know yet what the implications of all of this are going to be.

Hitchcock shot a film called Rope in the late 40s I think, which looks like it was all one take, and... there's a film, Time Code, that Mike Figgis made, which is four stories told, it was a screen split in four and in each of those quadrants was a long single take of a series of events that sometimes happened in the same place, and other times didn't. And there is this recent film, Victoria, which is one long take. The difference with Victoria, so I understand, is that it is really one long take. I think other films, certainly Hitchcock's film was not one long take, he would... the most he could shoot at any one time is 10 minutes, so he would have somebody back into the camera, and then they would back away from the camera, and there was an invisible edit at that point. Whereas Victoria is one, really one continuous take, but, I think they shot it a number of times, over a period of three or four days and then said, that's the best one. So the editing was reduced to simply the decision, that's the best one, we are going to go with that. And I haven't seen it, people tell me it's very powerful in the way that single-take films are powerful. Is that going to sweep the field? Are we going to make single-take films such as we made at the beginning of cinema? Editing was invented 14 years or so after the invention of motion pictures. Are we going to go back? I don't think so, because there are certain things that that film cannot do. You can't intercut Moscow, St Petersburg and Berlin in real time, I don't think. Maybe... I guess if you had camera crews... I don't know. Not as a single take from one camera.  

The logistics of it, beyond a certain place, become absurd and counterproductive. There's also the feeling that we get from cutting from one shot to another that has a powerful and, I think, beneficial, recognisable place in our consciousness. If you think: how do you feel when you suddenly get an idea? You are sitting somewhere or walking, and in the middle of the 45th step, you go, that's it, I get it, something that you just realised, oh that's why something. Editing can make you feel that way by cutting from one thing to another, you feel, oh that's it, that's what I wanted to see, or that explains what was just happening. Now I know it's her who put the letter in the mailbox. And of course you can do this in single-take films, but it's much more cumbersome and clearly, if there are problems with a single-take film, then you have to resort to brute force to fix them somehow.

Francis Coppola wanted to make a single-take film which was One From the Heart. That was originally planned as a single-take film. That was in the days of film and the most you could shoot at any one time was still what Hitchcock was feeling... had to do which was 10 minutes. That's the most film people could shoot at one time. Anyway, he shot the film on that premise as I understand it, I didn't work on the film. But then later, there were problems with it, problems of comprehension or performance or what, I don't know. But then, how do you solve it? With a film that's edited, it's relatively easy to say, well, we'll just cut that shot out, or, you know, get rid of the bad bit. Or, reverse the order of those two things or find another take. So, it's... you can interfere in the DNA of the film. There's a lot in the news now about editing DNA that we can look at DNA and say: there's the problem, and now we have biological scissors, literally, that can go in and snip out the bad part of the DNA, and put in a good part and off you go. So, a film that is shot in one continuous take, has an aesthetic that precludes doing that.
So, I think it's fascinating that we can do this, and we can do it now because of digital technology in a way that we could not do it back then. But I... my hunch is if somebody's listening to this 50 years from now, that single-take films will remain an interesting but isolated compartment within the continent of cinema.
There's also something that... as you watch a single-take film, you are looking at a performance, it's like a high wire act. Are they going to fall? Can they do it? Can they do it interestingly? And you will tend, I think, to become more and more aware of the guy who's balancing on the wire with the balance bar, who is the director, that the danger becomes... you start thinking of the director more and more. And, there's something to be said for that – the quote – that when a film is well edited, it makes the film look like it was well directed, but when a film is greatly edited – whatever that means – it looks like the film wasn't directed at all. It just tends to happen because it has the fluidity of thought to it. And, thought, the way our thoughts work, is very similar to the way films are edited. You'll be going along and then suddenly you'll think of something else, and you'll follow that for a while, and then other things will intrude, and then you bounce back and forth between two thoughts, and then you come into a long contemplative long shot so to speak, and then you go into big close-up thoughts. And it's John Houston's observation that cinema, film is the most like thought of any of the arts because we have this great ability to be fluid in what we pay attention to. Which would bring me back to the thing that Beethoven contributed to music which was exactly that. That he invented, in music, this concept of, so to speak, the long shot or the alternating close-ups, and having things intrude in the middle of movements that other composers from an earlier generation would dismiss as not following the rules. And Beethoven just said, I don't care about that. I want to do this, this interests me, and his music, certainly in the 19th century, carried the day.

When we were shooting Apocalypse Now, Marlon Brando who played Colonel Kurtz in the film, read an early version of the screenplay and in conference with Francis, said, 'Okay, I will do this film, but I don't like the name Kurtz. American Generals don't have that kind of a name. They have flowery names, because they all come from the South', Brando said. And Francis thought, 'Okay, well Marlon, what name do you want?' And he thought, in a Marlon Brando way and said, 'Colonel Leighley'. So Francis wrote down Leighley, and in the next version of the script, Kurtz was gone and Leighley was in. And the entire film, up to a certain point, 80% was shot with this person being called Colonel Leighley. When it came time for Marlon to shoot the scenes, his scenes, I think he had a 2-week window of shooting, he and Francis got into another tussle about the screenplay and what it was going to say, and production shut down for days while Francis and Marlon discussed this. And Francis kept saying, 'Just, what you're asking me', whatever it was, 'it's in Heart of Darkness. Just read it. Conrad does a much better job than I could ever do. Just read it'. And Brando would say, 'I've read it, I don't like it, I hate that book'. And Francis would be like, 'What? Now what?'
Anyway, at some point in this process, Brando emerged from his house boat where he was staying on one of those Philippine rivers, and he had shaved his head which it wasn't shaved before, and everyone was astonished. And then he astonished them even more by saying, 'And now I want to be Colonel Kurtz'. 'Why?' Francis asked. 'Well, Heart of Darkness, I picked it up and I read it'. 'But you said you hadn't read it!' 'I lied', said Brando. 'I read it, and it's a great book. And forget Colonel Leighley, I want to be Colonel Kurtz, just like the book'. So costumes were changed, Leighley became Kurtz, things were shot, the whole ending of the film was shot with him as Colonel Kurtz.

This presented problems earlier in the film, notably in the scene where Captain Willard is getting his orders of what to do, because G.D. Spradlin and Harrison Ford were saying, 'Colonel Leighley this, Colonel Leighley that, Colonel, Colonel, Colonel'. And now, we had to change it to Colonel Kurtz. Now, Leighley is two different syllables than Kurtz.
So, while I was editing this scene, I'm thinking, well we're going to have to change this to Kurtz. One easy way to do it, of course, is to make sure that nobody ever says that name on camera. Which could be done, but in a way that would be like a magician holding the handkerchief in a certain way that told you there was an object behind there. So, you don't want to do that. So I selected three or four places and looked at them carefully thinking can we shoehorn Kurtz into those lips that say Leighley? And I think I chose the ones which were malleable in that way and at this point, we arranged for the actors to come in and change their dialogue. This is the, what's called ADR, automatic dialogue replacement. And G.D. Spradlin came in, he plays the Colonel, the General, and he did it, and you see it in the film, and it works to the extent that people don't run out of the cinema screaming, I just saw something that didn't sync up.
The problem happened with Harrison Ford, who - I wasn't there - but Francis called me up from Los Angeles and said Harrison has refused to do this line. Why? Well, because that's not what he said, and he thinks it's absurd to change Leighley to Kurtz. He can't do it. And, I said, 'I'll take care of it', not knowing how I was going to take care of it. But, we arranged that Harrison come to San Francisco and I think he had to come for other reasons as well, and I took him down to the basement of Francis Coppola's house in San Francisco which was a screening room. And it was a nice comfortable area, well upholstered, and I had two recorders with me and people with me to run the recorders, and I said, 'Here's what we're going to do Harrison. Listen to the tape, the sound on this one tape'. And he said, 'Where's the picture?' and I said, 'Forget the picture, don't worry about the picture', because, reading between the lines, that was what was freaking Harrison out, that he had to look at himself saying 'Leighley', and he had to say 'Kurtz', and he just, I don't know, couldn't do it. So, no picture, so just listen to what's on this tape, and what it was, was I had prepared a loop of that line, and 'Go to Colonel Leighley's command. Go to Colonel Leighley's command. Go to Colonel Leighley's command'. Over and over.
And, here and I gave him a little button. 'When you're... just say that over and over, and close your eyes, and when you're comfortable, just press the button, this tape with turn on, and just say, and: Go to Colonel Kurtz' command'. So he did that, it was, I think he did it in one take, if not one, maybe two, it just... he just said it, and he said it in exactly the same tonality that he had said before. If you're not looking at the picture when you do this, it's much easier to kind of get into what your performance was, especially if it's repeated quickly over and over again. 'Go to Colonel Leighley's command, go to Colonel Leighley's command, go to Colonel Leighley's command, go to Colonel Kurtz's command'. And I said, thank you very much, shook his hand, and that's what's in the film. So there are frequently strategies that you have to employ sometimes at the last minute to make these things function in the best way that they possibly can, knowing that ultimately it's not true, and you're... when you look at the film, the lips say 'Leighley', but you hear 'Kurtz', but because everything else matches as well as it does, you get away with it.

When I started doing this stuff - film-editing - the machine that we all used in the United States, certainly, was a machine called the Moviola, which was if you think of a sewing machine on stilts that's what it looked like, and it sounded that way and it had cantankerous elements to it which were that every time you ran the film through it, it damaged the film sometimes lightly other times catastrophically, ripping it, scratching it. It could only run 1 or 2 minutes of film at a time so you had to organise things accordingly, and you had to stand at it to really make it work. It was... you were like a machinist at a lathe standing there working at it, and standing actually made a lot of other things easy because not only did you have the Moviola, but you had a rewind bench here which involved that - making those kinds of motions and taking the film and putting it in the Moviola and running it through. In other words there were lots of big muscle movement stuff going on. And this seemed that this was the, kind of, the only way to do it. But, paradoxically, it also had health benefits. We now know that it's healthy to stand rather than to sit in a chair for 12 hours a day. And it's healthy to make these kind of movements. And, when I made the transition, which was some time in the early 70s to the European editing machines, we were still using film, but these were the so-called flatbed editing machines known by the name of Steenbeck and K-E-M who were the companies that made these beautiful machines, German, French also, they had a machine called the Prévost [sic – Moritone] and in Italy there was a machine called the Moritone [sic – Prévost].
So this was the dominant way of working in Europe which corresponded to the fact that in Europe, generally, films were shot in much longer takes. You had a master shot that was very carefully composed, and a shot could last 3 or 4 minutes which is cumbersome on a Moviola which is better at little short pieces of film which is the American way of doing things, or it was. So I started to sit at these editing European desks and I immediately began to have problems with my shoulders because I was no longer doing this kind of motion; I was just sitting there flexing my wrist and pushing a button. And I called it 'Steenbeck neck' because somehow the tension of the thing just built up here, and this was an irritant over the next number of years, until finally I decided in the mid-80s, I'm not going to sit any more, I'm going to stand up. So, I built two plywood boxes out of thick plywood, 1-inch plywood and 16 inches tall, I think, and lifted the K-E-M up on to them. It's a 600 pound thing - heavy - but once it was in place, then I could stand at it and immediately everything - I loved it - everything was better and I've never gone back. And when digital editing came in in the mid-90s, it was an easy transition. I just got an architect's table for, I think, $100 which has a tiltable top to it. Architects generally at that time worked standing up with a high chair that they could sit on if they wanted. I have one of those, and I thought of myself as an architect of film! So architects stand up, why not me? And I had been doing it anyway with the plywood boxes. So for the last 20 years of digital editing, I have been standing to do it. I would recommend to everyone thinking about this to think about it seriously because I think it's a positive thing for your health because we're stuck in a room for 12, 14 hours a day frequently, and sitting for that long is just not good for you.

The other thing is that people who work in... at jobs that have a strong time component such as orchestra conductors or cooks or surgeons, they all stand to do what they do. And I think one among the many reasons for this is that by standing, you're able to feel the flow of time better. Your kinesthetic posture, so to speak, is more responsive to the flow of time when you're standing. Dancers typically stand when they dance. You don't dance sitting down. And editing, a way of thinking of editing, is that it is a kind of dance that leaves a frozen impression on the finished film as a choreography. You can think of editing in choreographic terms. So I... it's not that I stand all the time because when I'm doing paperwork and editing... being an editor is full of memos and other stuff. Then I sit, and when I'm reviewing something that I have already done, then I will also tend to sit. But if I actually have to dance, I get up out of the chair and I stand at the editing desk and it's just impossible for me to think of now, of doing it in a different way, and when I go to other editor's rooms and they're sitting and I sit with them, I feel suddenly like I'm back in kindergarten sitting on those little chairs that we used to have, so I am a proselytiser for standing. And if you search online there are many, many, many articles now that say: don't sit, stand.
And there's also a fascinating recent discovery, it's astonishing really, that somebody could discover this now. But it's always been believed that there was a very secure blood-brain-barrier between the circulatory system below your neck and your brain, but blood went there, but nothing else. This is why drugs... it's hard to administer drugs to the brain and other things. But as recent as, I think it was in June, there was a discovery at the University of Virginia of a tube that was hidden from everyone – anatomists – so over the last 400 years: oh look, here's a tube that connects the lymphatic system with the brain. And it's very craftily hidden behind a blood vessel. And suddenly people began to notice it in mice first and then they started looking in human beings, and look, there it is. So throw away all those anatomy textbooks, and they have to redraw the map. And what this means is that the brain is connected to the lymphatic system which was believed that it wasn't. And we have two circulatory systems: the blood system and the lymphatic system. The blood system is critical because if you don't get oxygen to your extremities, you die rather quickly. The lymphatic system is equally important: it's basically cleaning out all the junk that accumulates in between the cells. You can survive longer if the lymphatic system goes down. Eventually, you will die, but it's in a matter of days or weeks rather than seconds. So the lymphatic system does not have to have a heart. The heart is there to ensure proper delivery of oxygen. The lymphatic system has a heart, or it has a muscle, but it is the large muscles of your body, your legs principally. The flexing of your legs pumps lymphatic through your body and now we know, we believe, into your head, your brain. And standing is something that allows the legs are working even though you are standing, there are these flexions of the legs and so your lymphatic system is working when you're standing in a way that it's not working when you're sitting down. So, another reason to add to all of the other ones about why it's healthy for you to stand I think in general, but specifically when we're talking about film editing.

The uniquely powerful thing about film at the moment, and speculating about the future, is that it has the ability to address these three ways of thinking about the world and reacting to the world. Roughly speaking: instinct, emotion and logic, let's say language is a form of logic. And these roughly correspond to the three different operating systems that we have up here. Which is the instinctual let's call it the reptilian brain, although that may be doing a disservice to reptiles, and then the emotional brain which is an invention, let us say, of the mammalian world, and then the superstructure, the big superstructure of the neo-cortex which is the ability to think logically and linguistically and mathematically and analytically about the world, does this make sense in some geometric way.
And all art forms I think that are powerful do this, talk to each of these areas, but film, because of its unique abilities of viscerally talking about motion and colour and sound are able to make people react instinctively. Clearly films are able, if you're lucky and talented as a film-maker to make the audience respond emotionally, and then does the story that you're telling hang together? Does it make sense? Because, we've all seen films that rely on instinct, the so-called startle reflex, and films that with the right music make you feel sad or happy or anxious, but who are unable to hang together as a film, and we realise then that we've just been manipulated by these two, let's say, lower orders.
So a good film, and a really good film, has to, I think, and does co-ordinate these three elements, and it's a peculiarity of our life and I think a peculiarity of human beings, the dilemma of humans, and this sort of harks back to the concept of original sin, whatever that means, is that these three operating systems can, have a loose alliance with each other. One of them is not always in command. There are times, necessarily, when instinct takes over and you simply run out of the burning building or you jump out of the car to rescue the child and you don't think about what's in your best interests. And then emotion, clearly the emotion of the mother for the child, the father for the child, love the emotional power of love, as opposed to the instinctual sexual power which is also operating. And then, this superstructure of: does it make sense? And there are times we feel, my emotions carried me away, or, I didn't think about it, I just acted instinctively, or, I just got swept up in the numbers and I didn't realise what the implications of it all were. So, in each of those cases, one of the brains has overruled the other two. And, film when it works, can have a way of dealing with each of these and yet integrating them into a whole. And so there's a kind of synergy that results when it works. And it's easy to find examples of films where it doesn't work. And I think one of the distressing things is when you watch a bad film and you react against it, what you're reacting to is the wasted opportunity, that we instinctively understand what films are capable of when they're good, and we forget or we choose not to know how difficult they are to make, and we concentrate on... people frequently say, I wish I could get those two hours of my life back. What do they mean? That... what else were you going to do? Play a video game? Or watch TV, or hang out? So there's a feeling of betrayal. You took 2 hours of my life. But really what they're saying is: you took an opportunity that you had and you squandered it. It didn't work. And films can go wrong for all kinds of reasons. Everyone... nobody sets out to make a bad film, or a vanishingly small percentage of people do. Most people think: this is a great idea, let's do it. But things can go wrong because it's very complicated.

And the other thing that film can do and does do, is a - when it's good - a very tight synergy between image and sound. Because film, despite things like, smell-a-vision, or earthquake films where the theatre rocks, basically you're presenting an image of the world which depend on two senses, and we're ignoring the other three or four senses so that there is... we're not talking about smell, taste or touch, or balance. But, if you arrange these two senses together they frequently can evoke the... at least a whiff of some of the other senses. So in The English Patient, there's a moment early on in the film where the patient in the monastery, the character Almásy played by Ralph Fiennes, Hana brings him a plum and he eats the plum and there's a close-up image of the plum, and right on that shot, right around that time, we introduce in the distance a bell of a distant monastery or church. So you hear for the first time, really, a soft sound. The film up until this time has been engines and explosions and the sounds of war, human machine sounds. Now, there's this distant sound. And, in a way, if you're open to it, the synergy of the image of this juicy plum and the distant sound of this soft bell make you, or encourage you to remember what do plums taste like. So two senses are sort of the base of the triangle, reaching out for the apex which is this other sense, this vanished sense. And so we can invoke feelings of sensuality, of what something feels like to touch it, that sense, we can invoke taste which is a form of touch in a way, smell which is another form of taste, by the judicious juxtaposition. There are no rules for this. There's no book that has been written. I don't know, even though I've done it, I don't really know how it happens. You sort of have these things as goals. But the fundamental thing is acknowledging that this film has this power because of these two different, very different synergistic qualities, that it can synergise the three levels of cognition, instinctual/emotion and logic, and by synergising vision, image and sound in an artful way, you can get at other things that are not being directly addressed because film just has no way of directly addressing smell or taste. It has to get it by indirection.
And, I think we talked earlier about the fact that certain colours, notably red, exist in the same way. That red is something that we conjure up out of a deficit. That there is no cone in the eye that responds to the wavelength of red. When a so-called red object is presented to us, we get no signal from the blue cone, we get no signal from the green cone, and we get a diminishing signal from the yellow cone. And as a result, we conjure up something which is... we interpret as red. But, it isn't as if there is a button there that when this wavelength hits it, it goes: red! It's conjured up out of a synergy of three other things. And so, much of film, when film is good, it's doing this in a very artful, powerful way.

My wife and I were in France 31 years ago for a showing of Return to Oz at the Deauville Film Festival. And her mother was living just outside of London and we thought, well, on the way back to San Francisco let's stop in London, visit her and then go back, which we did. But I had been working on a film, the Michael Jackson music video film, Captain EO, and the producer of that film had a flat in London, and he said, well, if you're going to stay in London, stay at my flat. I'll arrange to have the keys... So we flew into Heathrow, we collapsed into a taxi, we said go to this address, I didn't know where it was, and fell asleep, woke up with the screech of the black cab's brakes. Here you are! Great. We walked out and sure enough there was somebody at the door who gave us keys and we opened the door, went into the flat and collapsed on the bed and woke up 12 hours later thinking: where are we? What happened? Oh yeah, it's Rusty's flat in London. And then we thought, 'Well, let's go and visit your mother in the afternoon, let's have lunch. Why don't we have lunch with Michael Herr (who just died a few weeks ago) – he wrote the narration for Apocalypse Now and wrote Despatches, a seminal book on the Vietnam War that was the foundation for many of the scenes in Apocalypse Now.' And I worked closely with Michael Herr for a year in the construction of Apocalype Now; he went through many iterations of the draft of the narration of that film, six or seven at least over the course of a year. So we bonded and I phoned him up and he said let's have lunch. Great, where are you? I didn't know. Wait a minute, I went fishing around in my trousers for the piece of paper, I found it, walked back to the phone, picked up the phone and as I was going to tell him where I was, I looked out the window, across the street and saw, standing in a window, a man on a telephone. And, on an instinctual guess, I said, 'Michael, turn 90 degrees and wave at the person who is waving at you from the window across the street.' And sure enough, this figure, in the other window, turned 90 degrees and waved at me who was waving and it was Michael! And, how amazing?
But it puts these experiences, of which I've had a number, put you in a different frame of mind about what coincidence is and what reality is, and I don't know what the upshot of this is, but I think a way of looking at the world that is probably truer than not is that, instead of coincidences being rare, in fact, coincidences are happening all the time, but to protect ourselves from this, we have a filter, a sort of hidden eyelid that allows us to ignore or choose not to see. If we really knew who that homeless person was asking us for money, we would find that there's probably one or two degrees of separation and, being moral people, we would have to pick him up, take him home with us, feed him, get him back on his feet, call... you know. Our lives would get very complicated very fast if we really knew how interconnected we all are. And there's a rule of thumb observation, coincidences come in threes. And I think what's a way of looking at this is what's happening is that that invisible eyelid has opened up and now we see the coincidences, we're aware of the coincidences that are happening all the time, and then after the third one, some little journeyman neuron in the brain says: 'shut down, close that eyelid', because it's dangerous for our self-preservation somehow to really be aware of how many coincidences that there are happening all the time.
And film – I think many areas of life are like this and depend on this – film, I think, particularly because it's so dependent on contingencies: what is the weather that particular day? What did the gaffer have for breakfast that morning? What did you suddenly forget to do? Did that thread break? All of these things can wreck a film or push it in a direction that may be good or may be catastrophic, but you're hyperaware when you're making a film of how contingent everything is and how dependent on the little pebbles in the shoes are. And many of these things are simply coincidences. So I think, film-makers in general, that eyelid is more open than not, that we are more aware of coincidences than people who have different jobs because we're so keyed into the contingencies of what it is that we do.

There's a family chemical identity between soot and a diamond, and you can almost not think of two things that are more different. Soot which is black and it's soft and dirty and you want to get rid of it, a diamond which is transparent and brilliant and hard and valuable and beautiful and you want to keep it. In fact, chemically these things are identical, or so identical that it almost makes no difference. Because all a diamond is, is soot, which is to say carbon that has been pressured under great forces to allow its molecules to collapse and condense themselves in a way that turns something that is black and opaque into something that is transparent and clear. White, let's say. And rare. This rarely happens which is why diamonds are such a valuable commodity, but under the right circumstances, this is what happens, and we have learned over the last 100, 200 years that we can make diamonds artificially just by taking carbon and putting it under huge pressure, something that usually happens down 5 miles down under the surface of the Earth. And holding that image in your mind, there is a family resemblance in the construction of a film. Because what we take is frequently, 100 times the matter. When you shoot a film you can have easily, 50, 100, 200 hours. The film I'm working on now, we just passed the 200 hour mark. And somehow this 200 hours has to be compressed down to something in the neighbourhood of 2 hours, so 100 times compression. And we are working... in the editing, there are these equivalents of great heat and great pressure trying to get these things to nest together in ways that render something that is kind of dark and opaque into something that is transparent and hard and durable. Not soft, but hard. And beautiful.

One of the other things that makes diamonds beautiful is the artistry of the humans who take that diamond and cut it in ways that enhance the reflectivity of it so that a ray of light, a stream of photons coming into it hits one of the facets of a diamond, goes into the diamond and then bounces around inside the diamond from facet to facet shedding a certain percentage of its energy as it does until it finally leaves out some other door than the one that it came in. And that's the sparkliness of diamonds. When we hold diamonds that's what we're seeing.
And film is a collaborative art, and one of the things that I believe makes film as beautiful and as powerful as it can potentially be is that each of the various departments that work on a film, the acting, the camera, the script mainly, the costume, the make-up, the editing, the sound, the... all of these things, each – let's say that there is one person in charge of each of these areas which is not the case, but for the simplicity of what I'm going to say, let's say – and each person brings a certain perspective to the work: they've read the screenplay and they have made certain ideas and assumptions about it and they bring that attitude toward the work. And if you're lucky enough to have a certain kind of director, and I would say Francis Coppola and Anthony Minghella are good examples of that, who enjoy the collaborative process of film, they actually want you to contribute your own facet to the cutting of the diamond so that the work that you're working on is the rough diamond and now, each department is putting their own analysis of what this thing is, which is slightly different than what the director may think. But if the director is a collaborative director, what I also call a snowflake director, they encourage this. Yes, I don't... I don't agree with you 100%, but that's a good way of looking at it. And so, as a result, this medium which is a mass medium, you want millions of people to look at the film and those millions of people are all very different. As a result, when they see the work, there is this kind of spectral reflection, interaction of all of the minds that came together to make the work and then all of the minds that are now looking at the work, and these two things interact in a very dynamic and interesting pattern. Different than, let's say, the Hitchcock approach. I'm just using him, I think, unfairly, as an example, because of what he has said. He has the whole thing is in his head and he just needs the various departments. If he could get rid of them and do it himself he would do it, but he can't so he needs them, but they need to give him exactly what is in his head. And he makes wonderful films, it's not that you can't make a wonderful film this way, but the other way of making a film, which has this diamond aspect to it, is a way of making films that I think is more fundamentally profound or has the ability to be more fundamentally profound to the kind of media that it is, which is a work of art, made by the collaboration of hundreds of people, and then something that will be viewed by millions, tens of millions, maybe hundreds of millions, maybe billions of people.

Looking at it as analytically as possible, something that is very hard to analyse, I came up with six criteria. And what... if you could say what is a perfect cut, which is dangerous territory, it would look at each of the criteria and say: yes, it did that, and yes it did that, and it did that, and it did that. And those six criteria were at the top the most difficult to quantify, which is that, that transition from one shot to the next made you feel a certain way, it had an emotion with it, there was an emotional value to it, and that emotion was the correct one for that place in the film.
The next one, one step down in the ladder was: story. Did that cut help you to understand the story, why... what was being done and why was it being done? So this in a way gets back to our... the three levels of the brain, because the third one is rhythm: did it happen at the right place rhythmically. And basically, the music of the cut. If you think of editing as visual music, did that new shot come in at the right moment in the same way that the clarinet comes in at the right, exactly the right moment in that clarinet concerto, not a millisecond before or after, but right there. And, so these three levels of emotion and story, which is to say logic, and rhythm, which is a kind of instinctual thing, echo these three different layers of the brain.
The fourth level was: where is the eye of the audience likely to be looking? And if you divide the frame up into as simple as possible, quadrants, upper left, upper right, lower left, lower right, and then maybe the centre. So five things. Are they looking there or there or there or there? Because as a general rule, at the moment you cut, it's good to take into account, what is there in the new shot because that's where their eye will land. I'm looking there which is the point of the gun. At the moment of the cut, what do I see there? Sometimes you want something definitely to be there, other times you want it just to be blank so that the eye then looks for what the other focus of interest was. It all depends, but you have to take into consideration what, where the focus of the eye is because people are not looking at the whole frame, they are choosing to look in various areas, particularly in cinema as opposed to television. Historically, television people were further from the screen and the screen was smaller. In cinema, the screen was bigger and you're kind of looking around; it's more of a mural. Anyway, take into consideration where's the audience looking and how is their focus of attention carried across the moment of the cut.
The fifth thing was questions of the transposition of three dimensions into two. This is the so-called 180 degree rule, which is: are people, are we convinced that person A is looking at person B, and vice versa if they're having a conversation? And if you're cutting from one angle to another, the eye line of these two people having a conversation that is edited needs to intersect in a way that convinces us that they are in fact looking at each other even though they may have been two shots shot three months apart, and that the other actor wasn't actually there at the time of shooting, but it works, it's part of the chemistry of film montage that it works. So, does the cut take this into consideration the two-dimensional reality of the screen?
And then, the last one is the three-dimensional reality of the physical space that's being talked about. So, if the person gets out of the car to go into the house do they open the door to the car and walk up the path, open the door, and go into the house? If you did that, then the continuity of that space is maintained, and back in the early days of film, 1910, 1920, 1930, this was, people tried to follow this rule, because they were afraid that if they didn't follow the rule the audience would become upset, or confused: wait a minute, how did he get there, we didn't see him do that.
So, these are six things that you try to make an effort, and in shooting the film, the crew shooting the film, also it has to have these things in mind when they're doing it. Exactly how it's going to work out, nobody is 100% sure, but you are thinking about these things at the time of shooting.

The practical aspect of this rule of six, is that frequently, you can't do all of these six things at the same time and many times you don't want to do all six. So, these six were in some kind of ideal world that doesn't always reflect the reality of the world we live in. But because of this or because of that, we can't do these things. We can't do all six. So what do you as a film editor do? And my suggestion is that you look at these six things and start jettisoning things overboard. It's like you're on a balloon and you're potentially going to crash, so what do you do, you start throwing stuff overboard to give you more lift. Throw things off from the bottom up. So the first thing to throw overboard is three-dimensional continuity. Don't worry about it. Just get rid of it. If the other five things are taken care of, nobody... not only will nobody care, they will be happy that you didn't burden the film by making somebody walk up the path to the door. Just open the door to the car and cut to the inside door as the door opens and we all understand that he, whoever it was, went from the car into the house. We don't need to see him walking 15 steps, so that's gone.
Next thing is two-dimensional space. If you have to sacrifice it, it will be momentarily awkward perhaps, but better that than something else. And then up to focus of attention, and then what's sometimes called eye trace – where is the eye looking? – and then rhythm. Cut at a slightly awkward place rhythmically, but if the emotion is right and the story is right and that's the only way you can get these two things is by jettisoning those four other things, do it. And finally, if you have to, if the only way to get the right emotion and get it powerfully is to make the audience momentarily confused about the story, then do that. It's dangerous to stay in that zone for a while, it's like diving underwater: you can do it if you have to do it, but you can't stay there for very long, because then after a while the confusion starts to eat away at your basic premise. But it is frequently, as it is in swimming, we often have to go below the surface, so if the only way to get the audience to feel this emotion is to make them momentarily confused then, do that.

So the advantage of thinking this way about these six things is both as a kind of theoretical idea which has a certain value, but then, I think, more importantly it has a practical value which is, you know, you're in the balloon with all of your stuff – what do you throw overboard first? The last thing you want to throw overboard is emotion. And this is a mistake, I think, primarily that film-makers early on make. They concentrate from the bottom up, so to speak. They think they have to maintain three-dimensional continuity and, you know, 180 degree rule and eye trace and rhythm and then logic, and last, they think: oh the emotion will kind of take care of itself. But that's, you know, that's the worst way to put a bullet in your film is to work that way. I think the reason this happens is that the importance of each of these six things is in inverse proportion to its quantifiability which is to say its teachability. It's easy when you teach editing to teach three-dimensional continuity because he took 10 steps across the room, now we're cutting to the close-up, cut to the close-up at the point that he has taken the 10th step and then go on from there, or something equivalent to that. And the 180 degree rule is very easy to quantify: are they looking right or left? Are they looking wide left or tight left? And you act accordingly. And then eye trace, it's slightly less easy to quantify, because there's a wild card in that: where is the audience looking? You have to have a feel for that, in the same way that a magician has to have a feel for where is the audience looking so that you can hide the card where they aren't looking. And we frequently have to do that. Rhythm is again, more debatable still. And story, well, did I understand it or... And then emotion is the least quantifiable thing because it's so subjective. So that there's a trade-off of objective and subjective works in the opposite direction in the list. So it's... when you're trying to learn how to make films, you work upwards, but really in the end, when you're making a film, you have to find a way to work down. And its value, I think, is again as a way of thinking about it, what actually works when you get there, is much more complicated than six, but frequently the way we talk about these things is we try to break it down into quadrants that can help us know who are the teams that are playing in the match? And where do they come from - okay, I think I've got the idea. And once you have that idea then you can get into the subtleties of everything else.

I worked on the film Tomorrowland, from the start of shooting in June of 2013, until November of 2014, at which point I was fired from the film. So, whatever that, I think fifteen months or so, the film eventually came out in June of 2015, and unfortunately did not do as well commercially or critically as everyone's hopes were at the beginning of the film. It's the first time that I had been fired, as editor from a film. And, other editors who have been working in the business for a long time, would put their arm around me and say, 'You got off easy, working that long without ever getting fired, it's just part of the experience, and you now have another notch in your belt of experience to add to all of the other interesting notches.'
But, I had been fired before, ironically, or whatever, by the same studio, Disney, fired me when I was shooting Return to Oz. So, as a director, I had been fired as a director, and now I had been fired as an editor. On Return to Oz, I had been fired during the shooting because they felt that it was going too slow, and they didn't like what they were seeing. On Tomorrowland, I was fired because the studio ominously felt that there was a better film in the material than what they were seeing. And, I started hearing this observation in August of that year. And, I told the producers and Brad Bird, the director, that those words are a forecast of the editor being fired, if the studio is saying that it is likely that they are going to want to fire the editor. And I was reassured that, 'No, no, don't worry.' And eventually, the pressure increased, over the next three months, and the studio was so unhappy with what they were looking at that somebody should go, and the, for many reasons, the easiest person to push down the gang plank at that point is the editor, and this, in the best sense, from the studio's point of view, this would achieve three things. Maybe, in fact, this particular editor was hiding many good things in the film that were not being shown. Either through blindness, or some deviousness, the good stuff was not on screen. So, get rid of that editor, and get another editor in, who will open up the hidden box and say, 'Look!' But, that was not the case. My job is, and has always been, to find all of the good stuff, and make sure it's seen in the best possible light, as far as I and the director deem it possible.
The other thing, is simply to shake up the process. We've just heard England go through the Brexit vote, and many of the people voting for leaving the European Union were motivated by this same impulse: I just want things to change, let's give this a kick. But, even though it's risky, it's better to kick at things right now and be disruptive than to allow things to continue the way they are. So without knowing really how it was going to work out, let's just change things, and again, the easiest thing to change, at this point, is to get rid of the editor and get somebody else.
And, then, the third strategy, and there may be others that I don't know about, is there's a Chinese phrase from Chinese politics and warfare called: shoot the chicken to scare the monkey. Shoot the chicken to scare the monkey. So, if you have a monkey, who's being problematical, and not behaving the way you want it to behave, you get a chicken and you shoot the chicken and now the monkey knows you mean business. So, in this case, I was the chicken, and Brad Bird, the director, was the monkey. And so, the studio says, 'We've been saying these things about the film, now, we really mean it.' And, in essence, saying to Brad, 'That bullet came awfully close to you, didn't it?' Meaning, you might be next. And, you know, I'm sure it had that consequence.

The finished film, when it came out, was not significantly different. It was ten minutes shorter, but Brad and I already had the list of things that we were going to cut out that was going to make it ten minutes shorter. So, the exact moment that I was fired was right after the studio had seen the film after a series of re-shoots had been incorporated into the material. So, this was our first opportunity to see everything together with the new material. So, whenever that happens, now, okay, now here's all the new stuff, let's now turn this collection of carbon into a diamond. Let's condense it.
But, I was prevented from doing that. And, you know what, it took an emotional toll, it's, you know, you're deeply involved in, well, I am, in every film. It's like you're playing the piano and it's as if somebody comes over and slams the whatever it's called, the lid, down on your fingers in the middle of playing, and it hurts. So it takes a while to process that and to act, not only on you, but also, what does this mean in the larger sense. So, it's... but it's something that increasingly... it's always been part of the equation. Luckily, I escaped this happening to me until two years ago. But, I think it's happening with increased frequency in the last ten or fifteen years. It's a part of the job description so to speak. The strategy. And, over the years, I have... benefited is not the right word, but I have come in as an editor to films where the editor has been let go. So, from a certain moralistic point of view, I am now getting my just desserts, I am getting to feel what it's like on the other side of the equation. I have not willingly tried to take advantage of those other situations, it's just situations have arisen, usually with friends, or people that I know where the films are in trouble and I come in to help out, and it's not a part of the business I'd like, both on the receiving, or the giving end of it, so to speak.
[Q] I can imagine that one of the most precious things you have as an editor, is confidence. 
Yes.
[Q] So, what does something like this do to your confidence? 
Well, yes, you are bruised by it certainly. I mean, that, the form [fall] board or something, the piano on your fingers, you know, it's like... that hurts. And what hurts is the feeling of: I was trying to help! And nobody liked what I was doing to help. And, you know, you're worried about your reputation, from a certain point of view. You know, I'm now seventy two, and you certainly can't be fired from three or four films in a row. That would be... or even two in a row would be dangerous. You'd have to do a lot of explaining to that. Now, I don't like to explain the situation. So, yes, it does affect your confidence. It depends on what point you're at in your career. If you're fired from the very first film you work on, that hurts, maybe I'm not cut out to do this. If you're fired somewhere in the middle of your career, that means something else. Or, in my case, fired towards the end of your career it has another meaning, and you have to kind of, metabolise that meaning as best you can.
But, you know, I'm sustained by family and friends and... And, even Disney... my agent phoned Disney, and even I talked to the head of postproduction at Disney as this was happening, and Disney's explanation was, 'No, no, we love Walter, this has nothing to do with him', is what they said. What that really means, underneath that, is obviously, a great deal of this is a political game that's being played. And, in fact, that may be the truth. That I was the chicken, and they just killed me in order to... that the person they were getting at was Brad and I was the vehicle, by taking me out of the equation, they were able to get at Brad in a different way. I don't know, this is all pure speculation, because I never really heard what the real answer was behind it. Maybe it was because I wasn't doing a good enough job. I don't think so. But... Maybe in the long view, everything will be revealed.

I directed Return to Oz, at the age of forty. We began when I was forty, and ended fifteen months later. And, after working in feature films for fifteen years as an editor and screen writer, and sound designer. So, I had pretty developed consciousness of how films were made. But I had never directed a film. Let alone, a film of that scope, because it was an expensive film, and it also was treading in the footsteps of a film that was more than a film, that, certainly in the United States, is a kind of cultural Mount Rushmore of cinema, that has implications and metaphors about what it means to be an American, or what it means to be a child, or to have a... Anyway, there are many reference points for the Wizard of Oz, that a film called Return to Oz is in dangerous territory.
We knew all this going in, and, every film is a risk, even in an existential risk at some element. But, it meant that I was going into this process with more than the usual kind of consciousness. Usually, people start directing films, at least small ones, when they're in their early twenties, or mid twenties, when you just have a different view of things in the world because nothing has been fully formed. The analogy is when you are born, when you go through the birth canal in real life, you don't have much of a memory of that process as traumatic as it can be, and as existentially challenging as it can be. Luckily, we don't remember all of the details of how we got born, but in this case, it was like being a child being born, fully conscious. Not, well, I'm exaggerating, but I was slightly more aware, probably too aware, of everything that is going on. To be an effective director, sometimes you have to be wilfully blind to certain things. And, I was not that.
I had certain things occur to me in this process as a result of all of this. One of which was: the moment that you arrive on set, on a new set, so you're into the process of making the film, and now we're going to shoot the throne room scene, and you've seen the drawings, you've done the storyboards, you've talked to the actors, you have even walked on the set and talked to the director of photography about this. But now, here it is, and this is the day we're going to do it. And now, everyone's in costume, and this is it, and the lights are in the position that they're really going to be in, and you are feeling kind of queasy and seasick as a result. It's like: oh, here we go! And the image that I came up with was that the moment that the metaphorical door opens up and, here we are at that moment, it's as if on the other side of that door, there are five clowns, people in clown costume, each of them has a basket, each basket is full of ping pong balls of a certain colour, blue, yellow, red, green and orange. 'Surprise!', they say, and they throw these ping pong balls at you, and your job as director is to catch all these balls before they hit the ground, and put them into the appropriate basket. And, looks like it's easy.

What these balls symbolise in my tormented mind, was some of the balls, let's say, the green balls are things that you are now looking at in terms of staging and performance that are exactly the way you thought they would be, even your hidden assumptions now say: yes, I never realised it, but that is exactly how I wanted it to be. So green is good, in the sense that it conforms exactly to what you thought it should be. So, they all go in the green basket.
The blue ball is things that are not the way you thought, but they're just different. And, you don't know why they're different, and you don't yet know whether it makes any difference that they're different. Just imagining something out of the blue, I always thought the t-shirt would be orange, but it's blue. Does that make any difference? I don't know. I have to think about it. And that's the important thing, is that you now have to spend time thinking. Those things that are slightly different, are they good, or bad, or nothing. So... You, you decide that these blue ping pong balls are things that are just different, but trivial. It doesn't matter that they're different. In the end, it may even be good that they're different.
Next is the orange ping pong balls. And, these are things that are different and not so good. You know immediately, that's not good. But they're not so not-good, that alarm bells, that, you get dry in your mouth bad. If you had all the time in the world, you would fix them. I wanted six people around the table, and this table can only seat five. How did that mistake happen? I don't know, but I have to solve that problem. Is it critical? No, but it's, I'm already, I'm slightly annoyed at this. So they go in the orange basket.
And then there are the red ping pong balls, vibrant. And, these are bad, and poisonously bad. I don't know how this happened but, if, I don't know, if that line reading gets into the film, it will sink the film. It's, you just cannot say that line this way. It's a little bit like Francis with the actor moving his arms. You know, it's a personal thing with him, I just don't want that, I can't have that, I have to fix it somehow. So this, there's a little police siren that goes off when you see these red ping pong balls. The kicker with these is more frequently than you would think. People around you are saying, 'Isn't it great that he's moving his hands so much, just like a real Italian', and so much of you wants the process to be easy, that you are tempted to go along with them, and think, 'Maybe I was wrong, maybe it's good that they are all moving their arms.' Another part of you, the real part, thinks: 'We can't, we have to... I know you think it's good, but I know something you don't know about the whole film, and we can't have that.' Even, 'Yes I know, I know it looks good to you right now, whatever it is, Mr Cameraman, Mr Costume Designer, but trust me, I'm the director, we have to change it.' 'But, it's going to take two hours!' 'I know, I'm sorry, but we have to change it.' 'Okay.' Director changes his mind. 'But I didn't want that in the first place!' 'Director changed his mind.' Oh.
And then, over at the other end of the scale are these golden ping pong balls, things that are so much better than you ever thought they would be, that you're just open-mouthed in astonishment. Where did this come from, how did that happen, this is fantastic!
As a result, in the time you have on the day that you are shooting, your attention is mesmerised, and almost completely consumed by the gold and the red ping pong balls. You have to fix these poison pills because if the film swallows these things, trust me, it will die. As director. On the other hand, these things, I never anticipated that it would be that good, I now have to take advantage of it, which means changing these other things. Maybe if I do that, I can get rid of this other thing, this table that seated six, I don't need that anymore because this is so much better. But then you have to do a lot of thinking on your feet to now re-conceive how you thought of things to take advantage of this golden opportunity which very easily slips away, because, again, frequently, that thing that you are now seeing, other people, either don't see it, or think, well that's not right. But you, secretly know, that's exactly what I wanted all along, but I could never articulate it, and now it's happening right in front of me, and so your mental and physical energies are consumed taking care of these red and gold ping pong balls, and in the end, you wind up just letting the other colours, the green, orange and blue, so that they have to take care of themselves, and bounce the way they will bounce, and hopefully you have minimised the damage, or eliminated the damage from the reds, and taken as full advantage as you could every take of these golden opportunities.

What you frequently encounter as you move through from one project to the next is a kind of, cliff, at the end of a project, which you rocket off of, at high speed, and then fall seemingly through outer space. A very funny emotional period, because to work on a film, you have to dedicate very large percentage of your total resources, and the hours are very long, and the schedule is very intense, and it gets more intense the closer you reach to the deadline. And then, suddenly, it's over.
And, this is the goal that you have been working towards: let's finish. And you achieve it, and there's a momentary sense of exhilaration. And then, shortly after that, something else sets in, which is... a dilute cousin of post-traumatic stress disorder. Clearly, you have not been in a life threatening situation, maybe? Working on a film. But, there's the question of how do you get back into normal life from the place that you have been. And it takes a certain amount of time for this to happen, to metabolise all of this, and re-integrate yourself into a more normal living situation. In my case, it takes about six weeks, I think, sometimes more, sometimes less, but that's my rough rule of thumb. And, it's very dangerous to make big decisions during that six week period, because you're standards of analysis are compromised.
And, nobody every explained this to me, or us film students as we were going into this realm. So, when it first happened, it was disorienting, of course, I was younger then, and your resources are different. But, you know, after ten years or so, it began to hit. And I just, I kept wondering, what is this? This... thing?

I remembered things that I used to observe when I was very young about five years old, six, or seven years old, and my parents would take me to parades, say, the Macy's Day Parade in New York, which was a big thing in around, around Thanksgiving time, sort of, the lead up to Christmas shopping. To whip people into a frenzy for shopping. With big balloons, and a spectacular parade. So I would rush to the front of the line, and wiggle through people's legs and sit as close as I could to these huge balloons that were going by, and for an hour, I would watch the balloons go by, and at the end, when the last balloon had gone by, the last parade sweeper-upper had swept up, I would look down at the asphalt pavement and be delighted to discover that the asphalt was oozing in the opposite direction to the way the balloons were going. So if the balloons had been going left to right, I'd look at the asphalt and the asphalt would be oozing right to left. And the first time I saw this, my eyes were popping out, and I tried to look to where to the oozing was coming from, and, as you might expect, that was also oozing in the same direction. And then: where was it going? And that was oozing in the same direction. And then, after fifteen, twenty seconds, thirty seconds or so, it would disappear and the asphalt was solid. So, it was clear to me, even as a five year old, that this was an illusion, that the asphalt was not really oozing but it was some trick that was being played on me somehow.
And, thinking about it, I began to piece together the idea that if the balloons were going that way, it would go in the other direction. And, of course, later on, I discovered that this is a well-known psychological effect. It's official name is 'the waterfall effect', because you can produce the same thing if you hike somewhere and then look at a waterfall, and look at it for a minute, and then switch your gaze to the canyon wall, here, it will seem to be flowing in the opposite direction to the waterfall. So, it's something to do with the way the eye and the mind perceive motion. And then, here, it's a reaction against that.

And the link between the Macy's Day Parade effect, what I call 'the parade effect', and the experience of things after the film, is that, when you work on a film, and an editor, usually for a feature film, works a year, sometimes less, sometimes much more. But you are exposed every day to the experience of having things come into your world from the periphery, so to speak, the shoot, and: okay, here's the new dailies. And it appears before you, and your job is to put it somewhere and make it coherent with everything else in the film. So every day it comes in and you make it coherent. 'And now, here's another one, cohere it', and day after day after day.
It's a factor, I think, in the way the mind works, that if a situation is maintained as normal for a certain period of time, even though that may be abnormal, the mind says, 'Oh, this is the new normal', and you adjust to it. But, the... a classic example is those prismatic glasses, that they fit you with glasses that turn the world upside down, and for a day, you are completely disoriented, and feel sick, because you reach for the cup by doing that, instead of that, and... and, the miracle is, that after two days, your mind re-scrambles itself, and turns the world right-side up again. So upside down becomes right-side up. Parenthetically, what's interesting is that that's what we do even normally. That our retina is receiving an upside down image of the world and we turn it right-side up. So, in a weird way, these glasses are letting us see what we're really seeing.
Anyway, if you are working on a film, and every day, as you climb the mountain of the film, you are taking things and making them coherent, fitting them into a puzzle, this now becomes the norm. And, when that's suddenly taken away from you, the waterfall flows upstream, and things go from coherence to dis-coherence. And, so if I'm at home, kind of staring at the wall, thinking about the world, the world feels to me, upsettingly, as if it's coming apart, that things are fragmenting and going away from each other, which is mildly depressing. And, if you read the news, of course, the news media specialise in these events, they are much more sensational than: another normal day happened! So, you read the news and that feeds into that, and it is just a... a period of time, maybe three or four weeks, that this hump. Which is akin to seasickness, because what's upsetting you is that you're perceiving the world one way, but you're feeling about it another. There's a dis-coherence. And that's what they say, that's what seasickness. Your eyes are telling you one thing, but your eustachian tubes are telling you something else. And, the mismatch between the balance – eustachian tubes and your eyes – says: something is wrong. And, that's interpreted by the body as: there's a poison in your system, and therefore you must throw up to get rid of this poison, which is imaginary, but it's produced by this mismatch of signals.
And so, in a way, this post-traumatic stress disorder phenomenon, is a similar mismatch between the normality of what you're looking at and what's going on inside your head which is this waterfall, or parade effect, of things going backwards, or impossible things like asphalt flowing. And the good news about it is that it goes away. As the asphalt eventually became solid, so after six weeks, or something, it does settle down and now you're in a better position to figure out what you're going to do next, and to make more important life decisions about anything that is confronting you with your personal life. But it's a dangerous period because it is as disorienting as being seasick. And I've been seasick and I know people who are really seasick, and the reaction is: I think I'll kill myself, because I can't stand this, and I don't know when it's going to end. So, it's a weird phase, and I wish somebody had told me about it, so I'm telling everyone about it now. It's just... it's part of the territory, and there are things that you can do to help it, but the main thing is knowing what it is, that it's a peculiarity of the way the mind perceives the world, and where you have been for the year prior, and the suddenness of demobilisation so to speak.

I gave an interview after The English Patient which was one of those intense films for all kinds of reasons. And, long, it was a fifteen-month film, not a year. And, I gave an interview to a, strangely, a poetry magazine, that was doing a special issue on film, and they were just talking to me about some of the things that we've been talking about here. And I made an analogy that I thought was appropriate for a literary journal, which is that the process of making a film specifically of the editing end of it, is that we are... what we do is akin to translation. Literary translation, which, in that case, is translating from one language to another. In our case, of course, it's not language, per se, but it is translating from the language of text, which is the screenplay, to another language, which is the language of images and sounds in time. And, just as we observe with languages, there are things that some languages are efficient at saying, and other languages are not efficient and vice versa. And one of the many things that a translator has to do is navigate those efficiencies.
When you, when you're working on a film, you have to navigate the efficiencies of the image relative to the text, just as you do when you're translating. You have to navigate the efficiencies of one language vis-à-vis the other language. So, in French for example, there is no word in French for shallow. You would say peu profonde, which means: not deep. But, maybe the French don't like to think of things as being shallow, they like to think of depth, so for whatever reason there is no equivalent in a single word for shallow. So if you come across in English, the word shallow and you have to translate it into French, as per the dictionary you would say peu profonde, but that's not a word, that's an analogy, and it makes you think of depth rather than shallowness, and shallow has all kinds of overtones that not deep does not have, so you as a translator would need to say, 'Well, maybe that's the correct thing in this case, but maybe there's another word that I could use that gets at the same thing, but in a more interesting way.' So, in this particular case, which is trivial, French is inefficient at talking about shallowness, because they have to talk around it. And, if you use that as a wedge, you can see that that opens up larger and larger areas of consideration, where shallowness and depth and all of those repercussions of inefficiency and efficiency work. In German the verb is always at the end of the sentence, that is the rule, but in English, we can put the verb almost anywhere we want, and that means that if you're translating from English into German, you have to be very careful to achieve the same effect, but you have to do it in a different way.
I mean, that's a small trivial example, but languages are full of these sand traps. And, similarly in film, a picture is worth a thousand words. Yes, but also, sometimes, a word is worth a thousand pictures. That to get a particular abstract concept, that language is very efficient at, and represent it on screen is very difficult. So how do you do it? Well, of course, this is the problem of the screenwriter. It is also the problem of the director. And then, of course, it also becomes the problem of the editor. We're all trying to solve this problem of how best to navigate it.

I was in this seasick period, so I thought, 'I don't know, maybe I'm wrong. Let me find out.' And I'd never done any translating, literary translating, and so I thought, I'll try it. And, I will try it using the Italian writer Malaparte, who I had discovered ten years previously, and loved his writing. So, I took some Italian... some books of his that had never been translated into English, and started translating. And I discovered, thankfully, as far as I could tell, I was right. That the mental space that I got into when I was translating, is for all practical purposes identical to the mental space that I'm in when I'm editing. Should I use this or that? Well, if I use that, that's accurate, but it's not particularly pungent. Maybe I can forego literally doing that and do something that achieves the same thing, but in a more poetic way? Yes? But, if I do that, then I have to compensate by doing this and...
There's this... when you're editing there's this chatter that's going on in your head all the time, irrespective of what your hands are doing, there's this... I could do this, but that... What should I do? And looking at everything that is laid out in front of you and trying to find the best way of translating from text to image, given the material that you have. And, this was... I was thankful to discover this, because in a sense it gave me a sort of therapeutic occupation, basket-weaving in a sense, to come down off of the high that I was on... on the film. And do something that was do-able, that filled the same need and allowed it to... allowed the fever to subside more gradually than just this cold turkey. And, you know, the analogy is imprecise, but it's close. You are on some kind of drug when you're working on a film, and if you just yank the needle out, you have problems. And so, this is a kind of methadone to get you, or me, from one state back to another one, without any expense and nobody else is involved, it's just me doing it, and by stages I can gradually taper off and get back to... get back to normal. So, I would recommend it for those of you who have multiple languages, it's a very good thing to do. And, the inclination to do it – and maybe somebody else can figure out something else that you could do similarly – but for me, anyway, this is the path that I... I use to sort of, calm down after a film.

When you're working on a film, and I'm clearly saying when I'm working on a film, there are things that are good to have in your mind, which may not be immediately applicable to what you're doing. But they're concepts that permit you to come to terms with certain peculiarities of the way we make things creatively, and I think this applies not only to film, but to probably all of the arts as well.
But, the... the interior of a church is called a nave, and this is just what it's called. But, the question is: why is it called the nave? Because nave means ship. Naval obviously, the navy. So, the interior of the church, the cathedral, the Gothic cathedral is called: the ship. And the reason for this is that when you are building a Gothic cathedral, you have to, in fact, build a ship on the location of where the church is going to be, out of wood. It's not a real ship, but it looks like a ship, it looks like an upside down boat, made out of wood, and once you have this structure in place, then you can begin to put the stones of the cathedral on the outside of it. And this is particularly useful when it starts to come up to the apex of the roof, because otherwise these stones, when you think about it, how are you going to get them in place, you have to hold them up there, somewhere.
So, until you've put the keystone into place at the centre of the arch, these stones in a sense are just floating in air. But, in construction, they're supported by this wooden structure, so you're placing them, and then when they meet at the middle, you put a keystone in the middle of them, and then, on the outside of the nave, you put buttresses that lean against the stones to keep them from falling out this way. And then, when you've done all of that, if you're lucky, you now remove all of the wood, you pull it out, beam by beam, and the stones lock into place, they want to fall down, but they can't because they're prevented by the keystone and the buttresses, and so their gravity is forcing them into an even tighter thing. But, that cannot be done, simply by throwing stones up into the air, you have to place them in on a structure. And, if you happen to wander through Salisbury, or any of the cities where there is a cathedral as it's being built, at a certain point you would see an upturned ship made out of wood, standing there in the middle of the town, and you'd say, 'Look at that, there's the ship, there's the nave.'
And over the subsequent years and decades of construction, this nave would eventually be clothed in stone, and at the right point, it would be removed, and now, you have this miraculous thing that still affects us viscerally when we walk into one of these buildings, which is: how is it standing up there? How can this be? And, it is there because at a certain point in its evolution it had this internal structure, that allowed these impossible things to be put into place, and then we remove it, and now we're left with no visual evidence of what was in the middle.
And, in fact, a certain poetic way of looking at all this, is you look at Europe, and you wonder: Europe used to be a heavily forested continent, and now the forests are gone. Where did they go? Well, there are many reasons for that, but one of them is that the forests were transubstantiated into the empty spaces in the middle of all of these churches and cathedrals, so they are there, but they're there, kind of, with a dotted line around them. The wood itself is long gone, but in a poetic way, these forests are preserved in the miracle of the architecture of cathedrals.

We do things in film, that in the initial putting together look awkward, in the same way that that ship made out of wood upside down must have looked awkward, but it's an essential part of getting to the final thing, once you have it removed.
As I sit here, thinking, the closest example I can think of is in The English Patient, the, the removal of a scene where Kip was terrorising everyone with a loaded gun because of Hiroshima, the atom blast – and this was an essential structural element in Michael Ondaatje's mind when he was writing the book, and it appeared to be important in the writing and the screenplay, because it was included. It was important that it was shot. This was a full scene in which everyone participated. And it went together perfectly well as a scene, but it did not work as a scene. Because it asked us to sympathise with a hundred thousand people which are the dead people in Hiroshima at a point long past where we... we were never asked to think about them before, and suddenly, a very dramatic scene was insisting that we along with Kip care about this. Otherwise Kip would just look like a madman. But we didn't want that, we didn't want him to appear as a madman, so it had to go.
And removing that scene was like removing the [scaffolding of the] nave. And now, what's going to hold things up? Well, it's a little more dramatic even than the cathedral, because at least in the cathedral they knew what they were doing, this was planned in advance. We are going to build this structure, and then put the stones on the outside, and then at a crucial moment we are going to remove the wood and hope that it stays up. So this... when we removed it – what, it will just collapse now. Because, there were certain things in Kip's behaviour that didn't make sense unless that scene was there. Luckily, thanks to Edie Ichioka, my assistant, replacing in an emotional sense, replacing Hiroshima with the booby trap that killed Hardy, that this was enough that could explain Kip's behaviour, and this in turn led to the removal of another scene, another piece of wood structure that came out, which was the articulate break-up of Hana and Kip, a fully written scene in which two lovers are coming to the end of their relationship. We never even dealt with that, so we were able to utilise Hana's shots in that scene, as if she were listening to the confession of the patient, and Caravaggio. Luckily, through a hole in the floor that allowed her to see them by implication talking to each other.
So, the point is that the kind of like the carbon atoms crunching into a new configuration giving you a diamond, these scenes... once the removal of the Hiroshima scene, once that was removed, the scenes around it collapsed under great pressure into this new configuration which actually wound up reflecting and casting a better light than was the case with those two other scenes in there. In retrospect, those two other scenes were like scaffolding, but for an end that could not have been visualised in advance until you got there. But they soaked up light; they took light away at a point in the film where you wanted more reflections, more... more photons so to speak. And, it's really what I'm talking about is an emotional realisation of the importance of what you might call scaffolding in constructing. That you have to do things that look momentarily awkward, sometimes on purpose, and other times, like The English Patient, inadvertently, in order to achieve this, the miracle. And I think that's what we respond to both in architecture, and in film, and probably in many other things, is this: how did that happen? And frequently it happens because of something that was seen to be essential, but was taken away and only exists as this phantom echo. And you don't see it, you see the miracle, but you don't see the thing that allowed the miracle to be achieved.

Parenthetically, I read that there's a biologist, I think his name is Cairns-Smith, up in Edinburgh, who believes that life originated along this same principle. That using the superstructure of certain primordial clay, interesting biblical term, but certain very fine grained clays of which there is an abundance in the early earth as there is today, that certain organic molecules could use this clay structure as a way to, sort of, form themselves into a sphere, that then the clay washes out, and you're left with something that is the primitive beginnings of a cell. And I'm sure I'm getting elements of this wrong, but it's... the basic principle is the... what he talks about is the principle of the arch. And he made this analogy that the biologist directly in terms of life, that... what he was talking about was not cathedrals, but these arches in the desert, these miraculous rock arches that you see. How did they get there? Well, they got there by the middle of the arch being a softer rock, that eventually washed out leaving the harder rock as an arch. But that it never could have gotten there without the presence of this other clay like substance.
So, it's a very useful way of thinking of creativity, both, maybe in terms of the origin of life itself, but certainly in the process of making what we're making. Where we want to aspire to these things that somehow seem to miraculously support themselves in thin air, rather than, I think it's more helpful if you think of the opposite, which is a film that is so clearly self-supporting with posts and beams, it's just it's obvious what it's doing and why it's doing it, it's like looking at a frame structure, and it's clear why it is there. We understand structurally what's going on, even if we don't know consciously that. But subconsciously, we realise, 'Oh, well that's obvious.' Yet, that doesn't make the heart leap when you see it. I think that's one of those meta-goals that we all try to achieve, which is some kind of miraculous something that seems to be self-supporting in a way that is not easily understandable at first glance.

Am I an artist? To quote Bill Clinton, it depends what the meaning of is is? Is I an artist? Historically, editors have been very wary of that self-description, because we exist in the shadow of the director. And, if we start getting an inflated idea of our abilities and our power, we lose, nobody will hire us. You know?
So, I think the short answer is, yes. What we do is certainly the equivalent is... certainly the equivalent of what other people who are called artists do, but we are not the ultimate controller of the film. There are people who can override our decisions. The director, and there are sometimes people who can override the director, which is to say, the producer, or the studio. So, the editor is several orders of magnitude down from that. And, I think generally speaking, we – we as a culture – we recognise that unless you have some degree of ultimate authority, you're not a real artist. So, in that sense, editors are not artists, because we are working with a given structure that is not ours. But, we inhabit that structure so thoroughly, that I think sometimes we achieve in moments things that can stand on their own alongside other forms of art, and things that are uniquely achievable by the craft/art of montage, which is the construction of images that move in time accompanied by sound. So, it's a complex question, and it deserves a complex answer because there's no... there's no short answer to it.          

I woke up one night at three o'clock in the morning, startled awake by the realisation that I must get dressed and take my Nagra, which is the sound recorder, and I must go to the Coalinga Pass, in Los Angeles, we were living in Los Angeles at the time, and I must record something there. And so, I got out of bed, I started getting dressed, and Aggie said, 'What are you doing?' I said, 'I'm going out to record something, I'll be back in an hour.' And she knew enough about the crazy film business to say, 'Be careful, have a nice time.'
So, I jumped on the motorcycle, strapped the Nagra to the back of the motorcycle, and went off to the Coalinga Pass, which is the mountain pass between the San Fernando Valley and Los Angeles proper. And Route 101, the main North South route in California, crosses the Coalinga Pass. And, there's a bridge in the middle of the pass, which I knew about. And I positioned myself on the bridge, took out the Nagra, turned the Nagra on, and I heard the sound that without knowing what I wanted to hear, as soon as I heard I thought, 'This is exactly correct.' And there was virtually no traffic at that time of day. But coming from behind me, was a tractor trailer, a semi, I think in the States an eighteen-wheel truck, empty. And it was going somewhere, and it was going somewhere very fast, and it zoomed underneath me. I was on the bridge and the road was below, and it zoomed underneath me and rocketed down the other side of the valley, way off into the distance. And because there was no other traffic at the time, and because I was recording it, I heard it until it disappeared off into the far horizon, it was the only sound. And, it was making a sound that was perfect for what I wanted, which was a kind of a singing sound. Because it was empty, because it had eighteen wheels, the wheels were making a musical sound, and they were bouncing because of the emptiness of it, and so it was sounding... Way off into the distance. And, I got to the end, finally I couldn't hear it anymore and I turned the Nagra off. Got on the motorcycle drove home and crawled back into bed at four o'clock in the morning. And she said, 'Did you get it?' 'Yes I got it.' 'That's nice, dear.'

What I was looking for is: I was working on a film called The Rain People, which is the first feature film that I had worked on. And, there was a scene in the film of Robert Duvall and Shirley Knight having a love affair, they had recently met, he was playing a policeman and she was a wife on the run from her husband. And, they were in bed together, and he was telling about his life and how he came and his wife died in a fire, and that's how he came to be where he was. And, what I wanted was something... and there was no music for this scene, but I wanted something that conveyed the gigantic space around them, because he was living in a trailer park somewhere in Nebraska in the middle of the Mid-West, these vast plains of America. And, it was something that they shot at night, really, and they may have shot it, I wasn't there during the shooting, but they may have shot it inside a sound stage, or something. They dragged the trailer into an enclosed space. But what we were looking at, in the film, was a trailer in a trailer park in the middle of the Mid-West, at night. And I wanted some sound that gave you the feeling of this distant world out there. And it was a very sad story that he was telling, and somehow, this sound, which was long and prolonged got at the yearning quality of what was in his story, and also spoke eloquently about the vast dark space that surrounded this lonely trailer in the middle of Nebraska in 1968.
And this sound acquired a name, it was called 'the singing semi'. And it has subsequently appeared in a number of films, some of which I have worked on, and others that it just gets used in films where you want to somehow convey that element. You're not supposed to do this, but I reused that sound in The Godfather, and it's the sound you hear in the background of the funeral of Don Corleone. When they're at the cemetery in New York, which is on Long Island, in the distance, you see a traffic expressway, that elevated expressway, and you see cars in the distance. I've travelled that road myself, because I grew up in New York, and I would be riding and I'd look down at the cemetery. So, here we are in the film, in the cemetery, looking up at these cars. And as an atmosphere for the funeral, I laid in this sound of the... [nnnnn] sound. And that's almost the only sound in the whole scene. There's almost no dialogue in the scene. There's a little bit of what we call 'Foley', which is footsteps and clothes rustle, and a few doors closing of the cars as people get in and out. But, otherwise, it's a very sparse sound for the funeral. No music. And seemed to be the right choice for that, which is a different kind of scene than the scene with Duvall and Shirley Knight in The Rain People. But... so these sounds can be clearly repurposed. You shouldn't do it too much, otherwise people start to know what to expect. But, there is a degree of flexibility in the kind of use of these sounds.

I was mixing American Graffiti the year after we had mixed The Godfather. And I had been working with Richard Portman, who was the lead mixer on that film; I was the sound effects supervisor. I didn't do any mixing myself. I did some pre-mixing on the film, but none of the final mixing. And, Richard had acquired the habit of voice labelling all of the recordings that he was making. And this is a habit; he picked it up from his father, Clem Portman, who had been one of the people who in their late twenties had started working on film sounds right from the beginning. I think Clem worked on King Kong and other seminal sound films from that era. And Clem was still alive when we were mixing The Godfather, he came over and visited and we talked together, so I've had the privilege of meeting somebody who was present and working back in the late twenties at the beginning of film sound.
In those [King Kong] days, all sound was done optically and photographically. So that you made your sounds, and the recordings were done by changing the amount of light hitting a slit on the side of a film. There was no way to play that back immediately, because it was photographic, so you had to develop it, so the next day you could hear what you had done. And because of this developing and printing, you could not write on the film and expect that writing to physically be printed, so you had to use a voice label. So Clem would say, this is King Kong, reel one, music one. And, to do that quickly, he would say King Kong, R one, M one. Reel one, music one. Because you had to say this between the start and the pop and that was however many seconds apart, and you couldn't go any further than that so you had to say it very quickly. And, it's difficult to do that, strangely. Somebody... frequently, somebody... we all used to say – when we had laid down the voice label and the pop – we would say, 'Well, that's the hard part done.' And, it was strangely hard to get it do it right.
Anyway, Richard did it, even though we were recording magnetically, and there was no reason that he had to do it, but he did it for some reason. And, I picked it up, and there was no reason for me to do it, but when I was mixing American Graffiti, I did that. And, so when I was mixing the second dialogue pre-mix of reel two of American Graffiti, I pressed record and then turned the microphone on, and I said very quickly, 'This is American Graffiti, R two, D two.' Pop. And George Lucas, who was at the mix, although he was asleep, or so I thought, suddenly said, 'What did you say?' And I said, 'I didn't say anything.' Meaning, I wasn't talking to you. And he said, 'No, no, you said something just now.' 'Oh yes, I was voice labelling the film. And I said: this is American Graffiti, R two D two.' And George said, 'What a great name.' And he took out his little notebook, a little spiral notebook, and wrote, 'R2-D2, great name.' Because at that time, not only was he mixing American Graffiti, but he was writing the first draft of Star Wars, and he was looking out for names of robots and R2-D2 appeared to him correctly, as it turned out, to be a great name by a robot. Of course, that inspired knock on names like C3-PO. But, it all comes down to this quirky thing which in a kind of, poetic flow, comes from the mixing of American Graffiti, the mixing of Godfather, and ultimately the mixing of King Kong, back at the very beginning of film sound.

We were recording wild lines for THX 1138, this was the year before American Graffiti, and the idea of THX is that it's a science, it's a world in the future, and as it turns out a subterranean world, and to populate this subterranean world, because we didn't have a lot of money, we couldn't afford a lot of extras, so we compensated with a lot of voice chatter from, theoretically, people linked with some version of what now we would call the internet. Radio communication between people who were piloting jet cars, and traffic controllers, and other supervisors, and whatever.
And, this was one of the sonic elements of the film, was, at any one moment you would start to hear this kind of, low level chatter, like listening in to flight controllers today at Heathrow or some big airport. And, the way we do this was to get an improvisational theatre group in San Francisco at the time called The Committee, which George Lucas and I at the time were both fans of, and we asked them to come in, and sit around a table, like this, with a Nagra recorder, and we had probably six different people, each of whom had an identity which we gave them. You're the flight controller, you're the pilot, you're the supervisor of the controller, you're the spy from the government who's spying on everybody else, you are another pilot who is always making mistakes, you are another pilot who's a hot pilot who always wants to go dangerously fast, whatever. And they understood this, and we just said, 'Okay, go.' And they just started chatting amongst themselves using these identities. And it was great stuff. George and I had to restrain ourselves in order not to laugh because that would have spoiled it. But it was exactly what we wanted, and better than we had hoped.
One of the people was a... an actor, who was also a disc jockey at a radio station in San Francisco, called Terry McGovern, and he had come to the session driven there by a friend of his, and he thought it would be funny to use the friend's name in this improvisation, and so, at a certain point in his improvisation, he said, 'I think I ran over something back there, I think I ran over a Wookie.' And his friend's name was Ralph Wookie. Which, probably came from Wookey Hole here in England, the cave, spelled exactly the same way [sic - Wookey]. And George and I heard this, and we both looked at each other, like: that's very good. In THX, we attached this name to people who in the screenplay were called 'shell-dwellers'. In the world of this film, something had happened on the surface of the earth that was very bad. Global warming, we didn't know about that then, but maybe it was that, maybe it was a nuclear war, but the safe place was well below the surface of the earth. If you got close to the surface of the earth, you were radiated by something, and you grew monstrous deformities. And, for various reasons, George chose a dwarf, dwarves to represent these shell-dwellers.
But, after we heard Terry McGovern, we decided that these shell-dwellers should be called Wookiees. And Wookiees had a role in the film, one of the Wookiees is imprisoned in the white prison along with everyone else. My challenge was to give this Wookiee a voice, because they didn't speak English or... So, I chose the sound of a bear, so when this dwarf, who was playing a Wookiee in the film, when he opened his mouth he sounded like a bear sounds, because I put a bear voice in his throat. And, so that was how, in THX, Wookiees made the sounds of bears. Well, like R2-D2 metamorphosed from American Graffiti mix into a robot in Star Wars, the dwarf like Wookiees, hairy dwarves in THX became seven foot tall bears, so to speak, or yetis, abominable snowmen, who were called Wookiees, who when they opened their mouths also went like bears do. I think, every time you find one of these things like R2-D2 you can actually frequently trace it back to something that happened way over here in some other world. And, in this case, the birth of the Wookiee and the birth of the bear sound that they make, came about because of something that Terry McGovern said, almost by accident, in the recording of wild lines for THX 1138.

One of the questions that you eventually wind up asking yourself, that I eventually wind up asking, if you work in film, is: why do we see the illusion of movement in motion pictures, when in fact, it's just a series of still frames? Well, there's a phrase for this, which is 'persistence of vision', or 'the phi effect'. For most people, up to a time, for me certainly up to a certain point, it was like, 'Okay, that's the explanation, that's why it works', and you don't think too hard about it.
And, basically, it's the idea that you see a frame and that frame impresses itself on your retina, kind of like a sealing wax, and then there's a period of darkness when the shutter is closed, and now here's another frame slightly different, and somehow the first frame is still on your retina, this is the vague thinking, fading slowly, and then this new image comes along, and it combines with the first one, and somehow you extract motion out of this. Sometimes the analogy is made with, you know, look at a lightbulb, turn the lightbulb off, look at it, turn it on very quickly and close your eyes, you still see the lightbulb. Somehow this is like something that's going on.

I read an article [in Scientific American] a number of years ago, many years ago, that made me question this too easy interpretation, and this in turn led me down a pathway that I am still exploring in various forms. Which is a speculation about a theoretical cache in the brain, somewhere that retains what you have seen in great detail, not a retinal blurry image that fades, but everything in great detail?
And, this article was written by a scientist in Australia back in the mid '70s, John Ross, I think his name was. And, he was able to present a series of random dots to the left eye, and a series of other random dots to the right eye, and keep these separate, as you would in a stereopticon. You know, those old, nineteenth century viewers. And, if nothing else changed, the person who was experiencing this, if asked would say, well I just see a bunch of random dots happening. What he then would do… would introduce for a few milliseconds, a tiny amount of time, in one of the eyes, he would introduce a pattern. And, the pattern would be apparently, as if a hole was dug in these random dots, an offset of the dots that you would imagine it's like you were looking into a box within the pattern, like we'd punched a hole and made some of the dots further back. If you just looked at it with one eye, you would not have seen any of this, because to see depth you need two eyes, stereovision. So, if he introduced this pattern for a few milliseconds and then asked the person, 'What did you see?' They would say, 'Nothing, just the same.' Then, if he introduced the corresponding dimensional pattern in the right eye, just for a few milliseconds, 'what did you see?' 'Well, yes, interesting, for a tiny brief moment, I saw, it was as if there was a hole in the pattern, like a box hole, square, cut in the pattern.' 'Oh, that's very interesting, because that's correct.'
Then, he was able to slide the time frame of one of the eyes, and delay it by a number of milliseconds. And, the person would now be asked: hit this button when you see the box. And, so the experiment would run, the person would see the box and hit it. The interesting thing was that he or she would see the illusion when the second box was displayed, not when the first happened. That you would see the first, but be unaware of it, you would only see the illusion when the corresponding illusion happened in the other eye. So, out of these hundreds of thousands of random dots, the information was somehow stored in great detail somewhere, enough so that by the time the corresponding shoe, this other, the right information appeared later, you saw the illusion. And, he was able then to extend it further, and sure enough, the illusion happened further. And, then there became a part where the illusion was no longer seen. The delay was so great that the mind gave up, and he was then able to work out, what was the length of this delay, because if they were presented at the same time, if you delayed one, the illusion would not be seen until this was seen, even though this had long gone, it was still stored somewhere. And, delay it further and yes, I still see it. I still see it, and now I don't see it. So he was able to quantify where this cliff happened. And it turned out to be around fifty milliseconds, but he was able to quantify it. And, it varied slightly from person to person, some people the delay was shorter, others it was slightly longer, but the article hypothesised that there was not a vague impression of a frame, but the frame itself is stored in great perfect detail for a limited period of time, and that's how in his experiment we would see three dimensions at the point where both images were able to be compared.

He limited himself to this particular analysis, and it's a very interesting article if you read it, it appeared in 1976 in Scientific American. But it made me think that perhaps this was also responsible for 'the phi effect' or 'the persistence of vision', the illusion in that we show you a frame, a still frame, and then we replace it with another, the first one, when you, the instant you see it, it is stored in this cache of some kind, this RAM memory, in great detail, waiting for anything that might happen within the next fifty milliseconds that it would be good to compare this information with, and sure enough if something comes along to compare it with, the brain synthesises something out of the information that's in this tube, this fifty millisecond long tube. There are two things in that tube and it's good to compare them and extract some meaning from that. Well, it turns out that these two things are slightly different, because in the second one, there is motion displacement, and as a result the mind constructs something that doesn't exist in either of these things, but is the mysterious sum of them, on another conceptual level, which is motion.
In very much the same way that we construct three dimensions out of the differences between the left eye and the right eye. As I look at you with my left eye I see some image and the window behind you is some displacement. If I look with my other eye, the window behind you is slightly differently displaced. So the two images, which are perfectly flat, are compared by the mind, and some other meaning is extracted from them, which is the world in three dimensions.
In some strange way, it's similar to the synthesis of red, the colour red, from the different signals from the three cones in our retina. And, there are, you can take this idea and run with it, as I have over the years, the, our hearing, human hearing kicks in at twenty cycles per second, which is a very low note, but we still perceive it as a note, as music. Below that, we no longer hear music; we hear the individual pulses out of which the sound is made. But started at about twenty, we hear, I'm not able to do it, but a note several octaves below that. Up until we run out of hearing at twenty thousand cycles per second. Well, the question is: why does hearing kick in at twenty cycles per second? Well, I'm suggesting because twenty cycles per second is fifty milliseconds. So the distance between the peaks of the waves is fifty milliseconds. If it's lower than twenty cycles, then the peak of one wave is already out of this [cache] tunnel or tube before the next one comes in, so we can't synthesise the two things and extract meaning out of them, and instead we hear each individual wave of sound. In the same way that if film is slowed down below the threshold of motion, we see individual frames, we start to see flicker, which is the equivalent of hearing the thumps of the frame.

I think it's a general principle that is very interesting to think about for the electromechanical senses, which are vision and sight and touch. Those are the three electromechanical senses.  Taste and smell are chemical senses. There, actual physical molecules are intersecting with receptors and sending out a chemical signal based on how they fit, very different than hearing, sight and touch, which are all about actual contact of things, not chemical. Waves of motion. And, in fact, again, if you put a vibrating pulse on your hand, you can't do it yourself, but a vibrator of some kind that's variable. If you set that at ten cycles per second you will feel individual pulses. If you set it at twenty five pulses per second, you just feel a constant pressure. You no longer feel the individual pulses any more. So, just as motion in image kicks in at twenty frames per second, let's say. So, also, tonality, music, kicks in at twenty cycles per second, and the sense of touch becomes continuous at more than twenty cycles per second. And, I think it has to do with the ability of this cache to contain information. And, it's been agreed upon by some Research and Development department, that to store high informational information in this cache, it should be limited to a certain value, otherwise there's inefficiencies that enter the system.
With one exception, I think. I mean, this is all highly speculative and interesting, people who are in near-death situations frequently talk about the world slowing down. I... the car was heading for a crash, and I saw everything in slow motion, I saw the glass come out of the window and I was able to duck before the metal object hit my head, and my life was saved, or not as the case may be. And, one way of thinking: what is this? Is that... there is the equivalent of a fire alarm behind a pane of glass. In case of fire, break glass. And when we are in life threatening situations, some threshold is broken, we know we are going to die very soon unless we can save ourselves. One of the ways we can save ourselves is by mobilising large areas of the brain to do this processing that I've been talking about in this fifty millisecond tube, and extending it over long periods of time, so that you're able to compare many, many frames of references, and the result of that is as if we are seeing things in slow motion, which allows us to duck the thing that might be heading our way, or to grab the rope that might save our life, otherwise that might be a blur. But we see it very quickly.
Certain cricketers, and baseball players, have trained themselves somehow, they say, to be able to see the stitching on the ball as it heads toward them. You have to take them at their word, and it may be part of their ability to somehow, either through DNA or some training that they do, metaphysical, to extend the length of this tube so that many, many multiple frames are being compared simultaneously, and the emotional effect of this is that the world is in slow motion, and you can hit that ball that to the ordinary person standing on the cricket pitch is just a white blur if they see it at all. But these people actually see it, in real time, but as if in slow motion, and they can hit it, in ways that other people who aren't able to do this would find completely impossible.

We were talking earlier about the funeral scene in [The] Godfather? And, also, the scene in The Rain People, after the love affair between Robert Duvall and Shirley Knight, and both of these scenes had no music, and instead they had a sounds, which was played as a realistic sound, it's something that plausibly is in the environment, and enough of us have heard that sound when we see these huge tractor trailers, we kind of know what that sound is. Even if we don't it has an emotional component to it, that works. But there is an explanation for it within the scene. Another director, and even Francis [Ford Coppola] working on a different film, would have had lots of music in those scenes. This is the funeral of the Godfather! Of course it's going to have music. Or, this is the scene, the tender scene after the love making; of course it will have music. Well, he decided, correctly I think, not to have music.
There's an earlier place where we talked about the scene leading up to the assassination of Sollozzo and McCluskey in The Godfather, which also in another director's hands would have had music, some kind of tension music, and it doesn't, it has a sound effect in it. So it was the approach of those films, and the collaboration between me and Francis, how this all worked out. So the question is: where do we use music? Why do we use music? And it's a contentious area that has close analogies in medicine, even sports medicine, which is to say: when do we use drugs to both heal you, and give you extra performance? And frequently in films we come up with those same problems, a film is damaged somehow, there's a problem somehow because a film that's meant to be emotional is not being read as emotional by an audience. So, hold still for a minute, we inject the steroid, so to speak, of music into that scene, and it suddenly becomes emotional because the effect of music is undisputedly emotional, or it can be emotional. You have to be very careful about it, the music has to be the right kind of music, but it's as reliable as the administering of a certain kind of drug is. Again, you have to be careful with drugs and administer the right amount for the right condition.

So the analogy is both illuminating and cautionary, in that I think, just as steroids are administered to athletes to give them an edge in performance, so music is frequently added to films to give them an edge in performance. And again, without question, certain films benefit from lots of music. They inevitably force the audience to appreciate the film on an emotional level, but they have no alternative. That music is telling them how to feel. If you want to go with the film, you accept what the music is telling you and you start to feel those emotions. Other people, in the same audience, will sometimes kick against this, by, 'I know what you're trying to do, music, and I don't accept that.' And I think there are arguments to be made on both sides. If you compare The Godfather, for instance, with Star Wars, you see two very different approaches to music. Star Wars is wall to wall music virtually, as is American Graffiti, but Godfather, and THX [1138] films made very close together have, relatively speaking, not very much music in them and it's judiciously placed.
So the takeaway, I think, is to approach music in films the way you would approach administering drugs. And as soon as I say it, it has a negative connotation to it, and I don't mean that, because the body produces its own drugs. We produce endorphins and other things – adrenalin is a drug that allows us to escape from predators. So we self-administer drugs as a result of our own biological functioning in the world, even if we don't take any drugs. But sometimes we need help, because of a disease that we have or something in the DNA that is wrong, and therefore we need external drugs, and there are films that need this external help in the same way, and who is to deny them that? The danger I think, and it's a long-term danger, clearly Star Wars was not hurt economically by certainly... by having so much music, nor was American Graffiti. But, I think, we as filmmakers have to be aware of the medium- and long-term dangers of so much music. Because, in the end, it's not great for the film. I mean, it may serve the purposes of the film, and if that makes the film make more money, then yes. But, in the long term, is that good... in the same sense that is that good for the sport of bicycling that everyone is on drugs when they do it, and is it good for them as individuals to do that. We now know the answer is: no, that it's not good if you take too many steroids. Your body, external steroids, your body is not equipped to deal with that as you get older. So, it's a cautionary note, I think, about both the danger, but also acknowledging the power of music.

The source of music's power is also very mysterious. There's no question that film, cinema and music fit together like yin and yang, and I think in very similar ways, that yin and yang, the dark and the light, the positive and the negative, the yielding and the unyielding, the masculine and the feminine, cleave together in a very well observed pattern because in film, film is a temporal art, meaning it exists in time and it is highly modular, which is to say, tropes within the film are repeated frequently. You think of a dialogue scene cutting over the shoulder to over the shoulder to over the shoulder. Him, her, him, her. Basically, we're seeing the same thing visually, they're saying different things and the expression may be different, but there's a similar pattern there. And music is also the same, there is a modularity to music. And, that's part of the nature of music and part of its appeal is this repetition with variation. And film is also full of that. So it's temporal, and modular, but film is highly specific. This is Al Pacino, the actor, playing Michael, the character in the movie. It's not some other actor, it's Michael and it's Al Pacino on a cloudy Tuesday, with the shadows coming from left to right, etc, etc, wearing these clothes and so on. So what you're looking at is highly specific.
There's a danger to this, which is that the film can drown in its own specificity, and what you want for a work of art, such as cinema is, is something that elevates it out of its well of specificity, and music is a very effective tool to do that, because unlike film, music is temporal and modular, but it is highly abstract. There's that line, I forget from whom, that music is the art that all others aspire to. And, this is because of its level of abstraction. All of the other arts are more specific and more tied to the world, and music is something else. And so music, in its abstraction, relieves film of its specificity, and the result is an elevation of both of them. That music gains from the specificity of film, it acquires more heft, so to speak, but film also acquires something fantastic from music, which is this level of universality, so that this is no longer just Al Pacino the person, playing a character called Michael, but it is every aspiring youngest son who longs, like a Prince, to get away from the control of the benevolent but tyrannical King, which is the Godfather and the kingdom in which he lives. So it acquires the element of the tale and the myth, not exclusively, but largely through music, certainly with a great degree of help from the music.

How do we use it correctly to... and I think what you can see in The Godfather is a good example of a certain way of correctly using music, which is to allow the emotion to build in the scenes without music, and then when the music does come in, it comes in at the right moment and allows the audience to interpret and metabolise that emotion. In electrical terms it is now earthed. When you're feeling the emotion, it's like a build- up of static electricity that can be dangerous if it goes too far. So, there's an increase in this electric potential, and then the music comes in to harness that energy and bring it back down to a more enhanced, but neutral level so that in the next scene you can build it up again.
And there are many films who avoid the use of any music at all, particularly films that want to inspire a feeling of dread, of impending disaster sustained over a long period of time. M, Fritz Lang's film, is a good example. The only music in that film is Peter Lorre's whistling of The Hall of the Mountain King, which is the moment at which some child is going to die. And Wages of Fear, the Clouzot film that has no music, I mean, people play radios and they dance to bands, but there's no thematic music in the film. No Country for Old Men, the Coen brothers' film, has no music in it. There's a brief moment where there's a shimmering of some strings which sounds a little bit like distant crickets, so you would be excused for thinking there's no music at all in the film. Otherwise, there really is no music until the very end. The end titles have music; it comes in finally. And the film Amour, the recent film about the death of two old people moving toward their death, which again has people play music in the film, and piano and you hear music on a CD that somebody is playing, but there's no thematic music. Shockingly in that film there's no music even over the end credits. At the end, you're poised to hear something come in, but there's nothing, they play in silence. And ominously, all these films really deal terrifyingly with impending doom and death. As a film-maker, if that's the area you want to go in, I would suggest thinking not to have any music at all. Because, even when music is trying to frighten you, you know scary music, you know somewhere in your heart that it's the film-makers that are doing this to you, so in a sense they're there with you holding your hand, even though they want you to be scared, they're doing it in a way that they're kind of telling you a scary story. So, you feel their presence. Whereas, when there's no music, it's like you're on your own here. It's dangerous. And there's a build-up of tension that is unrelieved by this earthing, bringing the music to earth, that I was suggesting was how it's used in The Godfather.
