aaron.klug

Born in Lithuania, Aaron Klug (1926-2018) was a British chemist and biophysicist. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1982 for developments in electron microscopy and his work on complexes of nucleic acids and proteins. He studied crystallography at the University of Cape Town before moving to England, completing his doctorate in 1953 at Trinity College, Cambridge. In 1981, he was awarded the Louisa Gross Horwitz Prize from Columbia University. His long and influential career led to a knighthood in 1988. He was also elected President of the Royal Society, and served there from 1995-2000.

I was born in Lithuania, one of the Baltic States, but my parents emigrated to South Africa when I was a... when I was... my father went ahead as was the custom in those days and the family followed; and, I was two years old so I remember nothing of this. I had an elder brother who was a couple of years older than me and he doesn't remember much either. But, we came to Durban where members of my mother's family had settled actually around about 1900, after the Boer War. And, so, my mother... belonged to a family called the Gevissers who are quite well known in Durban, and so that's why we chose Durban. My father was trained as a saddler, he... he was actually apprenticed in those days so he knew a great deal about leather. And, he... his father had a farm... a farm is not the right word, they didn't farm but they... they fattened cattle – he was a cattle dealer. And, of course, they had horses and things and my father used to take the cattle long distances to market in the big cities. They would gather them from the small farmers and the small cattle holders. So... so when he came to Durban he worked for the family firm of Gevissers, because of his experience with leather he was involved in hides. They were involved in what were called primary products in those days; they owned wattle farms, which were used as mine props, making... making boxes. They also had leather and hides and so on; my father, because he knew about hides and skins was involved, he was really a hide merchant, that's what it came down to.

My brother and I went to the local primary school which was quite interesting. And we lived on the edge of the bush – the Stella bush – and it was very nice to grow up there because the... there were monkeys in the trees – vervet monkeys – and we lived there... we moved house several times but we always lived on the edge, near the bush. And so, when we grew older, we would go on bikes and up these trails and it was a very colourful place because there were Indian market gardeners up beyond the bush, up the hills. And, of course, we had black servants and it was very colourful. And my... I would sometimes go with my mother to the Indian Market when I was a boy to help to carry the things; we went by tram in those days. So, the early years were quite, quite exciting, there were snakes in the... in the grass you learnt, whenever we went there we'd carry potassium permanganate with us. And, the school I went to was a mixed school, which was a bit unusual at the time. But then I went to high school and high school, of course, was a boys' school – Durban Boys' High School – which was run like an English Grammar School, or... or like a minor public school in some ways as well.  They called themselves a public school. They were public in some sense, but they were... you had to pay a small fee, it was partly subsidised... like a... best analogy would be a Grammar School in this country. And the... it was run on very English lines, the... you had no choice, Latin was the main subject, if you were at all bright you went into the Latin class. There were three classes and you were... there were... it was decided early on the bright boys did Latin, the not so bright did science and the... unless you really were very interested. The difference being that if you did Latin you did mixed science, that is chemistry and physics; and if you did science you did chemistry and physics separately and you dropped Latin. And then the third subject was geography, which came a poor third.
[Q] Which did you do?
I did Latin, well, I had no choice.
[Q] And mixed science? 
Mixed science, yes. So... but it was... it was an interesting... we had good masters some of whom had... one of whom had been invalided out of the First World War and came to South Africa because he had something... he had... I think he'd been gassed. So it was his lungs.  So you got a sense of the... well, you got a sense of belonging to the wider world because of the British Empire; I don't think people who grew up in this country can understand the romance of the Empire. I remember being very impressed when my elder brother in 1935, appeared in oil skins at the parade to mark the access... accession of George... the... the 25th Anniversary of George the 5th.  He was dressed in oil skins because he was a Newfoundland fisherman. So, you... well, you learnt about the wider world, you see.
[Q] Yes.
And then in Durban Bay was one of the headquarters of the South East India Squadron [sic], which would come in every now and again... the flotilla would come in and Rear Admiral Evans of the Broke commanding – he was the one who'd been with Scott at the Pole – not Seaman Evans who died, but Lieutenant Evans, he was now Vice Admiral. And, so it was a very, very English town, you were brought up... and quite a lot of the parents of the boys I went to school with called England home. But we did learn Afrikaans, this was... it was compulsory and I actually was pretty fluent in Afrikaans, I was pretty good at languages. And, so the school was... I guess, the standards were about a year behind A levels, so the South African matric, I think we graduate with about a year behind A levels. Since then I think... I think it's gone down but... but, so that the brighter boys in the class would be hived off, there was time to do these things. There was sport, of course... was the main subjects in the afternoons. That was where, and, I think, Ken understands this, the... the playing fields was where you... kept you out of mischief. And, on the fifth day of the week when you didn't have a sport of some kind, you had cadets, you see, so – the cadet force – so it was run like that. The... there was a good library at the school, but it was... it was kept locked. You had to apply for a key, so although there was a... certainly quite a high academic standards it was not regarded as the primary objective. The Captain of the school was the person who mattered. It turned out later that I was Dux at the school but I didn't know it because they'd abandoned the Dux. When I went back to Durban many years later I got a medal, it was about 30 years, no, 40 years later, I got a medal as the Dux of that year because they more or less abandoned it. Because if you applied for a key you got marked as a... as a swot, you see, which was a damnation. But I... my elder brother was in the same class as I was because he was a good sportsman, a good cricketer and he ran fast. So he was... so we were... so, I had protection in that way, but I... I was always two years younger than everybody else because I started school... in those days there was no... you simply went into the class which they thought your ability was, no understanding of the social side of it. And I didn't... I don't think I suffered in any way because, as I say, having my elder brother with whom I got on pretty well. He later became an engineer.

I read a lot, they had a good library, a good public library and the school had a library, as I said. The... but I mostly it was outdoors, we were at the beach. We would go down to the beach for swimming and there was the bush, we did a lot of tracking in the bush, it was quite a thing, I said so. You have to take potassium permanganate with you in case you're bitten by a snake and things like that. So it was... hobbies was mostly playing after school. When we came back from school we’d played cricket on the local park and things like that. It was all no, I had no... oh yes, I made model aeroplanes of glue and paper and things like that.
[Q] What sort of books did you read, were they science books or fiction or everything?
I read a lot of fiction, Biggles, and we read The Boys' Own Paper, we read The Gem and The Magnet which were kind of things based upon Billie Bunter in English school, and it was... the whole thing was... the predominant culture was English and we had English comics and we had English newspapers. We didn't have them in the home but later on when the War had started they used to get them. So... but I read very widely and I, at one point, when I was in – close to matric, which is the last year, I actually thought I might become an Egyptologist because I... because I... I'd been... my brother and I'd been learning Hebrew on not a very in-depth level but, you know. I discovered that the... the West Semitic Hebrew Phoenician Alphabet came from the Phoenician... came from the Egyptian. So I actually began to try and teach myself Hieroglyphics, which wasn't... I did learn, I learnt to read the cartouche of Cleopatra and things like that but it wasn't very advanced. But, then I... really, I had a... there was transformation, I came across a book by Paul De Kruif called Microbe Hunters, and I discovered since then that many people have been influenced by this book, it's been reprinted. And it told the exciting story of people like Pasteur and Koch and things like that. So I decided that I would become a microbiologist and the only way to do that would be to take medicine, do medicine; there was no medical school in Durban so I went to the Witwatersrand. I should say, before we leave this topic, I read very, very widely, I read quite a lot of history. I remember reading the history of the Popes, which I can't remember why, by Ranke. I didn't know that Ranke was the greatest German historian but that was the kind of thing. And, we had a... on the stairwell of the Durban Public Library there was a painting of TS Eliot, I didn't know who TS Eliot was but the... and the painting was by Wyndham Lewis. And I discovered many years later who they were. So there was this culture diffused throughout.

It was a very relatively peaceful time because there was no... you never were touched by the apartheid, which everybody took it for granted, the order of boarding a bus was very simple in Durban if you were to catch a bus. The whites went first, then the coloureds and Indians of whom there'd be a certain rivalry; and then when the... everybody took it for granted, you never found any opposition. And, of course, we had African servants and I actually could speak 'Kitchen Zulu', which is a kind of... my Father spoke good Zulu because he was involved with cattle and hides he learnt Zulu; so it was a very colourful existence. And then anyway I got a scholarship to go to Witwatersrand, I did very well in the... in my matric exam and I was 15 at the time, but... so... but that was... no, they didn't worry about that. And so I started doing first year medicine. The subjects were: botany, zoology, chemistry and physics which were the standard sort of course. And then in second year I went into Medical School, which was separate from the main university campus, you had to walk up the hill. And I started doing anatomy, histology, physiological chemistry, which was what biochemistry was called at the time, and physiology and anatomy. And I did several months of dissecting anatomy. I quite enjoyed it in a way, it was quite marvellous to see the way that the nerves and the muscles went through the armpit and things like that. But there was... anatomy was taught purely mechanically, there was no dissection of function and I began to get bored with it, although I didn't mind dissecting. The... however, I found physiology and biochemistry pretty interesting, particularly biochemistry and the... so I decided that I think I really wanted to know a bit more science, particularly chemistry. Because we used to hear these things, I remember learning about the urea cycle and things like that and testing for urea in experiments, where there was sort of practical, physiological chemistry. So I decided to change and I decided to go to do chemistry and... and I thought I should do some maths as well; I'd been good at maths at school. And the... so I went to see the Dean of Science, because I thought,'Could I do anything?' So he actually arranged a special course, there was no way in which you could take a mixture of set subjects, so he got the Senator to pass a resolution or something to allow me take a special course, a BSc in... I think Sue Lawley said, 'You designed your own course.' I didn't design any course, I simply did what I thought I would like to do. And having an enlightened Dean... Professor of Zoology...
[Q] You selected your own lectures to go to or did you read...?
No, no, I... I had to, no; I had to write an exam.
[Q] Yes.
I... no... so, what I did was... so, at the end... so, I switched to, there was a... see, in Medical School you start the course early in the year, six weeks before. So, what I did was to move to chemistry, start doing the chemistry and... and the maths to try to catch up. In the end that took me four years rather than the three year course which is the standard science course. And I graduated... in biochem, well, my final subjects were chemistry and physics and maths which I graduated with. And we were supposed to take two major subjects but it wasn't very taxing, I did three. But the... and the biochemistry or physiochemistry and physiology were taught in the Medical School. So in the morning I spent on the main campus, in the afternoon I walked up the hill to the Medical School and did physiology and chemistry and practical physiology, physiological chemistry and physiology and histology. I enjoyed histology, I had a few altercations with the demonstrators who said, ‘Draw what you see’. And, of course, I didn't draw what I saw; I drew what I was expected to see. But I didn't see enough, you see, mitochondria for example and things like that and the Golgi Apparatus, and I quite liked that. So... so in the end after three... after four years at Wits I found myself most interested in physics. And... and at Cape Town University they were offering... now,  I didn't learn much physics there because it was very old fashioned physics. The professor and the... two professors... taught courses that hadn't changed for 20 or 30 years, which is pretty moribund. Later, when they retired, the thing got revitalised. The standards were quite high but these were very old-fashioned subjects so I learnt a great deal about geometrical optics and, you know, highly detailed geometrical optics, how to correct things, aberrations, which later on have actually stood me in good stead. But you never know what you need to know for later life, this was a... in a sense it was helpful, but I didn't know it at the time. But because I... I also, because I had to mark time to get the subjects in, I also took courses, I mean, real courses in astronomy and experimental psychology and I read quite a bit. It was quite an interesting time. So... but, it was... so I... as, so, I made my own syllabus basically and I got good results.

I got the scholarship to Cape Town where there was a professor of physics there, RW James, and I was taken on to do an MSc in Physics. It was because there was £20 a month. It was a lot of money in those days, in return for doing the MSc and also demonstrating in physics classes. But because I hadn't learnt much physics at Wits, notwithstanding I had a degree, I went to all the second and third year lectures, things like system mechanics is really quite, quite advanced. James had been... RW James, very lucky to find him, I didn't know who he was, but he was the professor of physics and he'd been a colleague of Bragg... Lawrence Bragg, who created X-ray crystallography. And he'd come out to Cape Town in 1937, I think in those days people would go to... Cape Town or Melbourne and so on. It's all part of the cycle of... you might go to Cape Town, that was as far away as you might take Professorship in Nottingham or something like that, it was all part of the... what with the Commonwealth. It wasn't called the Commonwealth then it was called the... it was called the Dominion, basically it was the Commonwealth arrangement. So... so from James, who was an excellent lecturer, excellent, and I... he taught a great deal of optics and I learnt a good deal of optics which again later stood me in good stead. But there was a lot of things like birefringence ellipsoids and things of that sort; and, they were good experiments which I enjoyed.
[Q] Did the MSc involve research?
Yes, it involved research. It was supposed to be a... it was either a two-year course, mostly they did it in two, I did it in one year so my research was in X-ray crystallography. James had set up some... and he... they were working on structures of organic compounds but the main line was to work on molecular complexes. And there were some interesting problems there but they were really the people really involved in that. Where you get two molecular... two molecules... which don't interact but they crystallise together and there's quite a lot of... often they're quite incommensurate. So you get extra spots in the diffraction patterns, some quite interesting bits of geometry how they line up. But I was given the problem of para-chlorobromobenzene [sic], a very simple molecule, which somebody had crystallised and had reported rather strange things because it looked as though, the space lattice was indeterminate. So I was given that as my MSc thesis; it was great fun because the X-ray sets were pretty primitive; there was a... there were... X-ray tubes were bought but the voltage, 40,000 volts were homemade. And I... what you had to do was to set the voltage you had two spheres and you moved them together until you got a spark. And you measure the rate of humidity and from that... from the tables you could work the voltage. And it was... there was no such thing as safety devices but the windows were always kept shut and I said, why? Because one of my predecessors had touched one of the spheres and was thrown across the room and nearly... broke the window and would have fallen out, which is on the second floor, so it was there. But I... so I did that for my MSc... and solved the structure of... and it turned out to be a structure in which the molecules... para-chlorobromochlorine at one end of a benzene ring and bromine at the other and so they sat. They could sit in random rot... random orientation and so I... it was a bit of a surprise in those days, but, it got published in Nature in 1947, it was my first publication.
[Q] James gave lectures in crystallography? 
No, that was... you learnt at the MSc course. The MSc course was mostly electromagnetism, relativity, wave mechanics not much quantum mechanics. But, during that year I attended... later on I attended lectures in applied maths where there was... that's where there was some Hamiltonian dynamics and a bit of quantum theory and so on. So, I always went to lectures, I always attended lectures. The... and, then I... and then they were introducing PhDs in Cape Town at the time and, so James said, 'Why don't you stay on and do a PhD?' So I did a PhD, rather I started it and I worked on the structure of a molecule called triphenylene, an organic, rather. Its four benzene rings fused together, one in the middle and three on alternate sides of the middle benzene ring. I don't know what the interest was, but it was the... I should say the parachlorobromobenzene was pretty tricky to handle because it evaporated all the time and I... I had put it... I actually discovered how to keep it I... They didn't have glass capillaries at the time and what I did was to get hold of a... capsules that you get pills in, plastic capsules; you had to have something which would keep the vapour pressure. And so I mounted them in these things and James thought it was very ingenuous, you know, because I could get X-ray pictures. So, that was... I forgot the point of it all, people weren't able to get decent pictures of para-chlorobromobenzene so I... I managed to do it. So it proved.
[Q] It didn't evaporate?
Well, under vapour pressure, so it proved I could actually do something experimental although I'm often regarded as a theoretician. So then... going back to tryphenyline doing this PhD, I had a grant, a small grant and the... I actually introduced a new method of trying to solve the crystal structures which was to calculate... what are called molecular structure factors and Fourier transforms. And by... by calculating the Fourier transforms, all done by hand, of course, on Beevers-Lipson strips, I calculated the Fourier transform of one molecule and then I worked out the possible positions in the lattice and that changes the interference function. It changes the sampling of the molecular transform and that was new, nobody had done that before. And actually I didn't get the structure right, it was out by... it was so powerful, but I got the orientation absolutely right which accounted for most things. But I had a... undergraduate student who was... they were the undergraduate project and he was assigned to me, and, he was measuring the intensities. I had developed a method of measuring intensities by... by the people used to read them off a strip, but I discovered that the astronomers – there was an observatory in Cape Town – measured their stars' charge with a densitometer, which we didn't have in the Physics Department. So I adapted a densitometer to make measurements, measurements of X-ray diffraction that wasn't... it's hardly ever been done at the time. I know that Bragg himself at the Cavendish was making ways of densitometers. This worked very well, in fact, it was so... I got such accurate intensities, collected on the Weissenberg camera that you could see the hydrogen atoms. So the... so this all impressed James, and James thought I should go to Cambridge.

[RW] James was an interesting man, he had been with [Ernest] Shackleton to the South Pole; he had been one of those who'd been marooned, left behind when Shackleton... when The Endeavour [sic] broke up. And Shackleton made that great journey on the boat to South Georgia so it was all...in fact, one time I applied, at the time I had certain wanderlust and I applied to join the South African Antarctic survey but they wouldn't take me because of my glasses. But James... is an interesting story when Shackleton interviewed him, you know, Shackleton was a great, great man, quite different from Scott. Scott is the British hero, but Shackleton whom they called the Boss, was most interesting. He had a lot of Irish Blarney and they said he could charm anybody into supporting him. But he... and so when he was interviewed... Shackleton interviewed James and one of the things they asked him, 'Can you sing?', the idea being if you had to go through an Antarctic winter you had to be able to sing.

Cape Town was pretty interesting because in Cape Town was an old city, very different from Durban or Johannesburg, and there one met artists and writers and so on and I was interested in all these things.
[Q] Where did you meet Liebe?
And there I met my wife, my future wife, and she... she was then... she had... she was at the College of Music attached to the university but she had decided that she wanted to become a modern dancer. And there was a woman who'd started a group for a kind of contemporary dance group and Liebe joined her, so I met her there. And, in fact, on the basis of the scholarship I got to Cambridge. We got married very young and we came to England together. And I'd to go to Cambridge and she thought she was going to go to the... the Joos-Leeder, which was a German dance school. She had been... left Germany in the Hitler period and... and during the war and been evacuated to Cambridge and they lived in the... worked in the House of the Roughtons, very interesting figure in Cambridge. And Mrs Roughton was a kind of patron of all sorts of unusual things and so she housed them. But when we arrived there the Joos-Leeder School had moved to London, so it was...
[Q] James connection with Bragg that sort of pointed you towards...
Yes, James, James, that's right, yes, that's right.
[Q] You didn't write up your PhD?
I never wrote it up, and the... it was because I got involved in other things and I didn't have to at the time. I did start, I have a half... I have a half-written thesis. But I published the two papers on triphenylene and acta crystallographica so I had some real publications by then.

When I came to Cambridge...
[Q] Who did you contact?
[Lawrence] Bragg was the... Bragg was the connection with [RW] James, you see, from the old days. So Bragg... I... I thought... I wanted to do something in the structure of matter but something unusual not straightforward crystallography and one of the things I thought of joining was the MRC Unit, which I'd heard of because there was correspondence between Bragg and James, which was something they told me about; the wonderful things they're doing at the MRC, what they might be able to do at the MRC. And I remember a letter in which Bragg wrote to James and he said, 'When I have Kendrew... Kendrew has now got good crystals of myoglobin', so this was a stable companion to the haemoglobin which Perutz was working on which was proving difficult. And so, Bragg said, 'We probably have a good choice here, being able to compare the two structures', I remember very clearly. So I asked Bragg, Bragg said the unit was full, now to this day I don't know whether that's true or not. I have a feeling it's not, I think they, either I wasn't regarded as reliable or there'd been somebody from Cape Town several years before me who turned out to be a dud and maybe they thought that James's recommendation was faulty. So Bragg wanted me to work, I said I'd be happy to work on alloys, order-disorder phenomenon in alloys, uphill diffusion and so on, but Bragg said they were shutting that down, a man called Hargreaves was on... And what he wanted me to do, he was trying to direct me to work on silicates, order-disorder in silicates and I didn't... I didn't find that interesting. I think I would now, but, I didn't have enough... didn't know enough to know that was a fascinating problem, but just as well.
And so, I spent six weeks when I first was in Cambridge... letters would take two weeks because the boat... there was no airmail and the... the ship took two weeks from Southampton to Cape Town, and there were no... no telephones, so for six weeks I was hanging around wondering what to do, but, James had said, 'Go and see my old Manchester colleagues', they were the whole Manchester mafia in Cambridge. There was [John] Lennard-Jones, Professor of Chemistry, theoretical chemistry; there was [Douglas] Hartree, Professor of Mathematical Physics and I went to see them both. And I'd actually done some work on quantum chemistry, I actually calculated the bond lengths it's quite... if you know some quantum mechanics you can teach yourself, the molecular orbitals and valence bond theory and I'd calculated it. So I was... he offered me a PhD and it would support in the chemistry. But Hartree was the one whom I decided to work with because he had a problem, which he thought he wanted a crystallographer, it was problem in the phase transitions in steel, during the curing of steel, a problem left over from the war. I think I'd better not talk too much about it but it was a... it would take too long... it was a... led nowhere but I learnt a great deal. First of all I learnt to compute originally by hand with a Brunswig and later I used EDSAC, I was one of the first users of EDSAC, which was the first process control with a store unit, it was really the first of its kind. And I do remember on one night, because you could compute at night when there was less pressure on it, and meeting John Kendrew, or rather John Kendrew's wife bringing him some... thermos flask and sandwiches to last the night. Yes. It was quite a romance, you see, I wasn't a nerd, like there were these guys, these computer guys whom we now call nerds, they weren't called that in those days but they would hang around all night and sleep during the day, John Kendrew wasn't. But, that was the... it was quite fun; we had... it was all done with paper tapes and so on and I learnt a great deal. But, I was solving partial differential equations together with chemical change.
[Q] And there was no time chain with either one of you was using the machine or the other.
No, no, you could use... no, on EDSAC?
[Q] Yes.
Oh, no, no time... you had to wait, your tapes had to... you had to get into a queue and then you had to run your tapes. And you also had... in those days you had what we call post-mortem tapes, so, if something went wrong you could interrogate the contents of the store, so it was all quite interesting.

I also went up to Sheffield where there were some experiments on the fast cooling of steel and the austentite-pearlite transformation, which... which I interpreted, they were doing rods. It turned out that [Douglas] Hartree had done a great... major contribution to the war effort because he discovered in trying to account for this phase transformation by a very primitive method using a heat... a temperature dependent diffusion coefficient. He had found that the cooling of steel ingots in Sheffield they used to take their steel, the hot ingots, quench them and leave them for nine hours overnight to make sure transformation of steel was complete. He was... he worked out it was complete in four hours, so they actually doubled the production, rate of production.
[Q] Yeah.
Just sort of... so, it was really a reflection on British industry. No attempt at all to try to do anything scientific, a way to find out, they could have at least. So Hartree got them to make small ingots, little cylindrical bars and measure temperatures inside and out and follow the process. So what he wanted to know was what was going on, so I developed a model, I made a kind of armed raid on metallurgy and there was quite a lot known about steel, austentite-pearlite transformation... transition. And so I developed a model, which the new phase nucleated, and I could... that's the function of the under-cooling past the transition temperature and the dissipation of the heat. So I developed a nucleation and growth model, that's what I called it. And I was able to account very well for the... for the characteristics of the cooling; people used that in some other phase transformations later.
[Q] Phase changes were followed by X-rays weren't they?
No, no, purely measuring temperature because as you went through the... as you went through the transition the temperature stayed pretty constant, pretty flat because you were dissipating the latent heat.
[Q] Yes.
And so and now the point I mention is that later when I came to work on the assembly of Tobacco Mosaic Virus, I realised it had to be divided into nucleation and growth. And the nucleating... the... well, I'll come to that, but the... it was that, I must have had it in my mind although I don't remember doing it consciously. But when I came to the assembly of Tobacco Mosaic Virus it was a disc of... a disc of Tobacco Mosaic Virus would act as the nucleating agent for the assembly. And that's what led to those classic experiments where we could now grow Tobacco Mosaic Virus in six minutes rather than 24 hours.
[Q] Yes.
So... so it shows you that... you never need to know what you need to know because it's... it's chance, it's these things are very... it's all... chance, I guess I would have done something else.

I began to see there wasn't much future in this subject. Many people carry on what they start in their PhD, they then go on because particularly as the world was opening up in those days, there was new opportunities. So I left Cambridge in '52, '53.
[Q] There was still... you did some work on haemoglobin?
Yes, because I had to wait, I was going to go to America to work with David Sayre in 1952 after my PhD but I couldn't get a visa to America because the South African authorities had given me a black mark. They wouldn't give me a certificate to say that I hadn't been... I hadn't... I was not guilty, that's the word they use, no... no... I can't remember the phrasing it all was but that there was nothing, moral turpitude in my career. It was a... it was a way that... it was during the McCarthy era you see and I'd been a... a member of the Student Liberal Association when I was a student and that was regarded by the then apartheid authorities as being a sort of Communist, I was against them. I had thought myself as a socialist in those days but only in a theoretical way and I was certainly anti-Communist, this I knew very well about Stalin's dictatorship and so on; I read a good deal of political books and I read a lot of history, contemporary history and so on, it was very political, South Africa, at the time. And so... so, of course I couldn't go to America, so I spent a year in the College Science Department because [FJW] Roughton, Professor of College Science who worked on the interaction of oxygen with haemoglobin wanted somebody to try to understand how oxygen diffused into a red blood cell. Because it was then diffusing and at the same time interacting with... interacting with haemoglobin. And so the technique I'd worked – partial differentiation with a chemical change – I was easily able to adapt my programmes, the EDSAC programme to do all this. And then later on I came to work on... and I became interested in haemoglobin and worked out the... some, published... in fact, I published very little on this but I did work out the consequences of the Adair equation where you have four stages in haemoglobin oxygen uptake. And... and... it was... I managed to estimate the rate constants for the uptake of the four oxygens, which were 4,3,2 and 80. So 4,3,2 is statical: 4321. But the 80 showed the phase change and that showed that the phase change was in the last uptake of the last oxygen. So this gave me an interest in biology.
[Q] So did you come into contact with Max at all?
No... no... that was in the College Science Department but I used to go... I was around when I saw the DNA and I...I used to see Cochran and Crick quite a bit, not Crick, Cochran and Wolfson; I actually published a few papers on... one main paper on the determining phase in X-ray crystallography. It's a rather lengthy abstract paper, which had some influence later on, probability distributions, X-ray intensities was from which you could do phasing. It influenced Gerard Bricogne later. I could have... I... I could do this kind of applicable mathematics but I... One of the things I learned later, you have to deny yourself not to do some things in order to do others, you see, you can't just... you know, do anything that comes to your mind, there's a kind of lesson there.

I wanted to get into biological crystallography by this time and there was a... a... and there was an advert for... for a Nuffield Fellowship at Birkbeck College in London in Bernal's Department. And of course, I knew about [JD] Bernal; Bernal, of course, is the real founder of molecular biology, structural molecular biology. He was a man who... he was the spirit behind it all, it's what person... he was the man who, Max Perutz had worked with when he came to Cambridge, he was the one who'd got the first protein X-ray diffraction picture with Dorothy Hodgkin and also the first haemoglobin pictures which Max Perutz took to Bragg. But Bernal by this time had gone off to Birkbeck College in London; in 1938 there was a great change of chairs in... in a... Rutherford died and Bragg became... Bragg became Professor at the Cavendish; Bernal went to Birkbeck and so on. So I... I got this Fellowship, it was pretty... it was a good... it was rather more money than I'd ever had before. We were very poorly financed, we lived very simply; we were married, of course, by this time, we'd both come to England and...
[Q] Was it specifically to join Harry Carlisle or...?
It was to join Bernal's Department and there were various other things but I'd... to join a man called Harry Carlisle who was working on the X-ray crystallography of ribonuclease. To set the picture, at the time, no protein structure had been solved. It was just the first projection of haemoglobin had been solved by Perutz by isomorphous replacement. Yes. And Harry Carlisle had worked with Dorothy Hodgkin in Oxford; And Dorothy Hodgkin, she was a wizard in that kind of... she... she... people thought of her as a mathematician, but she wasn't. She just had a kind of insight and so she could solve... and she solved... she was solving the structure of... well, later on she did Vitamin B12. But earlier on she solved cholesterol and she had to disentangle the right hand and the left handed forms from the... And so Harry Carlisle had been her PhD student and Post Doc. And it wasn't a good place for him to be because he's no magician. So he was actually trying to solve ribonuclease and doing some strange manipulations; starting off with a structure and lopping off the peaks and the negative troughs. And then trying to... what's the word? Refine them, and it was nonsense. Well, I knew I could write down mathematically what he was doing and showed that what he was doing was doing an exponential form of Sayre's equation; he didn't understand that. Anyway, I... he said, well, there... in my map there were... the resolution map there must be alpha helices, so I wrote a programme which was seeking... image seeking programme to calculate the Patterson function of an alpha helix. And very laboriously and many, many sheets of pictures with transparent things looking for the alpha helices and I couldn't find any. So I told Harry Carlisle that... and he thought it was... he thought, well, obviously I was wrong, you see, so I was banished, literally banished upstairs.
[Q] Was there no attempt to push the heavy atom?
No... no... well, they did later.
[Q] Yes.
But, the... I knew, I already knew about Perutz because Perutz, in '53 and '54 there was a meeting of the X-ray... X-ray nurses... X-ray crystallography in Paris to which I went. And Harry... I said, this is not the way to do it, and I saw Bernal, who's the Head of the Department, you know, the leading figure. Bernal was so involved in politics, he was a well-known Communist fellow traveller, I'm not too sure if he was a member of the Communist party or not. But was on 50 committees and he was... he would... he was, well, you'll remember him. He... he would... he did have some idea of working with what we called constellation, looking at the strongest reflections. And Harry had started off trying to get guess phases for those, but, otherwise he never played any role. He was the... he was the man that got the money in the Department. The Department was an interesting place because it had all sorts of things going on there. There was flower, the structures of... of starches, flower molecules, carbons which Rosalind Franklin was on working unbeknown to me. Yes. And so... I got a Nuffield... I had that so I was banished upstairs to a small room, in an attic room. And in the attic room there were... some cards, punched cards which were crystallographic structure data. And Bernal... there was a lady, a young woman who came in sometimes, it was Olga Kennard, that was the beginning of the crystallographic data collection from which she actually built up into a... you know, very valuable resource.
[Q] Yes.
But Bernal foresaw... Bernal foresaw everything, but he never... he never carried anything out, you see. He paid no attention to detail, he never... when he hired people he paid no attention to their records. He believed that once you had a plan you could just hire people and they'd execute it. It was really a real lack... lack of understanding, but in the end it's the quality of the people that matters. And... I... I mean, he must have understood that, in some sense, he was no fool. But later on, I think this was interesting, later on when I once went to a meeting, it was many years later, and Bernal had already had his stroke. He said to me, 'I went to see him; I've been defeated by the Rockefeller principle'. I said, 'What's the Rockefeller principle? '. He said, 'Oh, the Rockefeller people don't give money to projects they give them to people'. And you see, he believed that if you... you know, being a Marxist and a planner, you could plan all these things. And if you had the right plans and you had the right ideas and the right equipment then you could hire someone to do it. Because, I remember, apropos Bernal, when Rosalind was trying to hire somebody before you two appeared on the scene, he wanted her to appoint some Australian, who'd just applied. He had no... he was an interesting fellow, but he had no real credentials. And Rosalind... Rosalind said, 'Bernal wants me to'. I said, 'Well, if you don't believe he's going to be any good, don't do it'; but, that's the kind of man Bernal was. So it was quite an experience, you learned a lot of things from just watching the people; what not to do from people like that.

So I was banished upstairs and in the next-door room there was Rosalind Franklin, this was in the... this was now... I'd come in the September 1953, this would have been early February or something, January or February 1954, March. And I didn't know she was at Birkbeck at all. She had, of course, left after her work on DNA at Kings; she'd left Kings and gone to Birkbeck. But now they'd given her a home, she had her own Turner and all fellowships so she... of course, I had my own Fellowship too and I had the Nuffield Foundation Fellowship.
[Q] You knew of her work?
No... no... I knew of her work on DNA because I read all the DNA papers. Yes. And I was in Cambridge when the double helix was unveiled. Yeah. And I met Jim Watson there, only briefly, socially, so... you can't say you met Jim Watson socially because he's so... he's asocial, but, he... he... And of course, I saw the model. So I'd read all the papers, and so I knew who Rosalind was but, you see, she never came to tea in the department; there was tea across the road in the main building, in the Faculty Club or in the Staff Room.
[Q] Yes.
And downstairs in the basement of Torrington Square where we all worked, where Bernal's Research Department was, she never came, so I didn't know she existed actually. So, of course, once I met her and she showed me her pictures of... of Tobacco Mosaic Virus, and... after that it's history, you see, so... And I was very lucky to do this, all these things happened by chance. I sometimes wonder what I would have done if I hadn't had all these chance meetings and...
[Q] Yeah.
But I hope I would have done something.

She introduced me to the study of viruses and I admired the great skill with which she... got the specimens. And she wanted me to calculate, she knew I... she thought I... she knew actually I knew some mathematics, that came later. But she showed me a picture of the layer lines, which looked curved layer lines. And these were curved in a way that wasn't just due to misorientation of the specimen. So I worked out... I figured it out and we published the paper in '54, or was it '55 on the splitting of layer lines in Tobacco Mosaic Virus because I realised this was because the screw of the helix of Tobacco Mosaic Virus wasn't three turns and 69 angstroms; but 3.02.
[Q] Yes.
And you could then calculate and you could explain all that.
[Q] It was split rather than curved.
Yes, they were split but then they... again, they were the Bessel functions on the... originally if it had been exact rational number; so I realised it was a non-integral number. And I think, you see, Bernal, still belonged to the old tradition where it had to be... you had to have integers. It's what threw... It's what threw... you know, the very famous fiasco... it's a related subject, where Perutz, Kendrew and Bragg tried to build chains of polypeptides.
[Q] Yes.
And they only used integer helices.
[Q] Yes.
Because that's what you had in the crystal, and that's interesting; that came from Bernal. Bernal, I used... Bernal used to come and ask me...
[Q] Yes.
And you may remember this... 'Why isn't it a three-fold screw axis?' And I used to tell him laboriously, 'Because if you look on the meridian you see there's a dip in the middle.' And you could see that on the... in the early pictures, but the old generation. So anyway, so I interpreted this; so, after that I began working with Rosalind... Franklin. And that was about then, so by that time, and we were publishing papers and she had done... And so she got some money from various people. Her work was being financed by the British Coal Producers' Association because she worked on graphite. But the X-ray tubes were all paid for, and on the side she was doing the Tobacco Mosaic Virus work. You see, Bernal's lab was full of people doing all sorts of odd things, you might call applied crystallography, and he spent time getting money from all of these things. Once the apparatus was in the lab we could use it on other projects. So in the early days Rosalind's work was...
[Q] She had a grant from the Agricultural...
Then she got a grant from the Agricultural Research Council to work on Tobacco Mosaic Virus. And when she got that grant she could hire assistance or PhD students, and so two people turned up John Finch and Kenneth Holmes.

So I then began working on Tobacco Mosaic Virus. And as you know, we published the map, at 10 angstroms by 1971, by which time Ken Holmes had left to go to Germany. But...
[Q] But, there was a row, wasn't there, over the... over TMV?
Oh, yes, yes, what happened was that we used to get our supplies... we used to get our supplies of Tobacco Mosaic Virus... from [Norman W] Pirie who was virologist at Rothamstead. And Rosalind [Franklin] once published a paper to say that Tobacco Mosaic Virus was a long rod of 6,000 angstroms long. And which was... had been seen by Robley Williams and it contained... a number of nucleo... a number of bases it contained in the RNA. But the... he... so Pirie took exception to this and he stopped sending us material. He said, as far as he's concerned, Tobacco Mosaic Virus is a collection of rods of different sizes and all the preparation is infectious. You don't have to have the infectious particle; it isn't necessary, the 6,000 angstroms, the long, unbroken rod. And he was a... Pirie was an interesting man, very clever man, one of these clever people who are... so clever they drag themselves into false conclusions. I remember, at the time in 1950s, going back a bit to when I was at Cavendish, he wrote an article in Penguin Science News, which most of the sort of budding scientists read at the time. This was NW Pirie, who'd been lecturing at Cambridge, very influential, very clever man, very influential and sort of charismatic. And very keen with that sort of... he went to Rothamstead; he was also sort of a... very left wing like Bernal. But the... he... he wrote an article and he said... just imagine the protein, you see, nobody had worked out the structure of a protein. And he... first of all he questioned whether a protein had the structure, a definite structure. He pointed out: if you had a three dimensional structure of a protein and you replace a valine by an isoleucine it wouldn't make any difference. Indeed, that's... that's true generally, these are just silent mutations or silent changes, polymorphisms as they're called. But, of course, he didn't know about sickle cell haemoglobin; if you change a valine into a glutamine the whole thing is... it's disease... it's a disease gene which is sickle cell anaemia.
[Q] But he wasn't persuaded by Bernal's photographs going out to, two angstroms or whatever.
No, no, that wasn't... no, he wasn't. He was, you know, he was... as I've said, he was a... one of these guys who was a bit too... too clever is not the right word, too firm in his opinion... he never thought he could be wrong, which is one of the things you have to learn.
[Q] With serious... consequences on the financial situation from that.
Well... well...
[Q] He was on the ARC.
ARC.
[Q] Yeah.
So... but he... but... so in the end the ARC grant began to... looks as though it was going to end.
[Q] Yes.
And Rosalind went to see Sir William Slater who was the Head of the Agricultural Research Council and he patronised her. He said, 'Oh, well, we have an X-ray set in Sheffield; you have to move to Sheffield, we'll fix you up there'. And no understanding at all, and I think, partly because she was a woman he... in those days there were people who didn't take women scientists very seriously, it was very different. Dorothy Hodgkin could charm her way through anybody but Rosalind wasn't like that, she was quite fierce as you know.
[Q] Yes. 
But, she phoned me up almost in tears to say to me, no renewal of the grant; so we didn't know what to do. I had my own... I had my own fellowship but this was going to run out and... so to the rescue came Robley Williams from Berkeley. He was a distinguished electron microscopist, he came from Berkeley, the famous virus lab. And he was visiting Cambridge, working in Kenneth Smith's lab for a year, and he suggested we apply for a grant to the American, the US National Institutes of Health.
[Q] Yes.
And I... none of us knew if we could get a grant from the American body, and he said, 'Well, you can if you're working on something which nobody in the States is doing.' So we applied to the NIH, and by this time, I can't remember whether we already started to work on spherical viruses, I think we had; but the main thing was NIH.
[Q] Yes.
And Robley Williams... so we applied and Rosalind was the principal investigator and I was the co-investigator. And it was very business-like, Robley Williams came again on a visit and he was made a... I didn't know what a site visit was... he made a site visit. He said to... he said to us, 'If you get a centrifuge' – because we didn't have a centrifuge – 'to prepare the virus, where will you put it.' And he went out, and who will you do this and how will you do that? It was all very business-like; of course, we answered him and we got the grant. Now, the grant was for £10,000 a year for three years, that's £30,000. Now, nobody had ever got any grant of this size at Birkbeck before, not even Bernal or anything. So the... Andrew Booth, who was on the Council told us later that he misunderstood, he thought it was £10,000 for the whole three years and if he had heard... if he had realised it was £10,000 a year he would have voted against it because he thought this would give an undue advantage to certain people. And we, in the College, his idea was, you know, as that sort of British defeatist, that you have to share your misery, and it was quite a... And then, of course, we had to... our salaries had to come from the grant as well, so Sir John Lockwood, who was the Master of Birkbeck, beat us down, Rosalind and myself to the lowest possible level. I remember what he said; 'You have to... you have to work for the love of the subject... the love of the subject.' We were living in a... at the top of an attic... flat in... in Chalk Farm and so on, we had one small child by this time.
[Q] Yes.
So... anyway, but it did... that grant did save us and enabled you... enabled to transfer the... and we were able to... we bought another X-ray set, I can't remember. So that was a great change.

Don Caspar came... And Don Caspar was an American working in... he was the only American working on the viruses. And X-ray analysis, and he had moved into Tobacco Mosaic Virus around about '56 he'd published the one-dimensional map of Tobacco Mosaic Virus. And Rosalind [Franklin]... he never would publish it, but Rosalind wrote his paper totally from beginning to end. So she could publish her own paper on the nucleic acid free virus.
[Q] Yes.
So the... but what we had done, I have to go forward a bit, or back a bit, we had started working on spherical viruses. This was because the... Bernal had started this again as usual in the late 1930s and it showed you could crystallise various plant viruses. Again, Boardman and Perie had done this, this is the same Perie. And these were, of course, very large crystals, very large unit cell crystals, the unit cell of Turnip Yellow Mosaic Virus was 700 angstroms. And Rosalind thought that I ought to move on to another subject for me to be distinct from her. So she suggested that I take up spherical viruses and that's when... And so that's when, you, John Finch, came to work with me on spherical virus. And Ken... Ken Holmes worked on TMV, but I've forgotten what year that was; it must have been about '56 or '57... you arrived in '55, yes, '55 you arrived...
[Q] Yeah.
So the... and so with spherical viruses, of course, Don Caspar had got some... Tomato Bushy Stunt Virus, I've forgotten where he got it from but he published the first paper showing the evidence of icosahedral five-fold symmetry in... in Tomato Bushy Stunt Virus. And I went on with John and I remember we had a much larger unit cell. I remember we had to redesign the collimators and all that... it was quite a feat to get a decent picture. And we got pictures of TMV which showed that they also had lots of icosahedral symmetry; and so this was the beginning. In '56, yes, Jim and Francis, Jim Watson and Francis Crick published a paper in 1956 at a symposium, the CIBA Symposium on the nature of viruses. And this was a... this... what they were arguing was that the spherical viruses had to be built out of a lot of different sub-units on the model of Tobacco Mosaic Virus then the packing might have to adopt to give you a sphere, it would have to follow one of the point group patterns, either to have tetrahedral, octahedral, or icosahedral symmetry. So they expected, but they didn't say anymore beyond that. Well, it turns out that these viruses, all had icosahedral symmetry and then later when we did polio, that was in 1959, the polio virus also had icosahedral symmetry and built on the same principles. That was... the polio work was quite psychologically important because people used to think that... the virologists thought that all animal viruses were DNA and all plant viruses were RNA. And here was the polio virus, which is an RNA virus, an animal virus, and moreover has the same kind of construction, architecture as a plant virus. And people began to see that these were false distinctions. So we had, so the work was of some general importance, apart from the interest in the structures, sort of educating the virologists.

The reason they published these things on viruses was for quite a different motive. They were interested in protein synthesis, you see, the early days and there were these ribosomal particles lying around. Now, they pretty well were sure that... although they... And by then they'd formulated the seat of the so-called central dogma. The DNA, as Watson put it, DNA makes RNA, makes protein. So these... they knew that these ribosomal particles where proteins were made contained RNA, lots of RNA. So they assumed that all the messenger RNAs as they were later called, the coding for the proteins was in these particles and they thought... they thought that you couldn't... you couldn't get hold of these ribosomal particles, so they thought they were studies... viruses react as a model. The viruses were known or rather expected to be protein shells with RNA on the inside. So that's how they came along, so they showed great interest in all this. And, of course, that's... it's through Rosalind that we met. Jim Watson used to come down from time to time. And, of course, Rosalind, by this time got friendly with the Cricks. In 1956, we all went to a meeting in Madrid with the National Union of Crystallography. Rosalind went off to Toledo with the Cricks after the meetings and so on, so we got to know Crick and Watson.

We now know what Rosalind didn't know – that they had seen the MRC report in 1952. But to this day I don't know whether she... how much she knew of what they... she must have suspected that Crick and Watson must have known a good deal about her work but none of it was published other than the MRC report. But I don't know that she knew that they had read this report, it was supposed to be... well, it wasn't confidential it was... it was meant to be only for MRC units. So I don't want to go into the whole story, I've written about this, as you know, on the 50th anniversary. But I think the... the degree of confidentiality is in dispute but there's no question that apart from Maurice Wilkins showing Jim Watson, Rosalind Franklin's photograph, which made his eyes open, and which he hadn't seen before, there was also the MRC report circulated by MRC units which gave the critical dimensions which they could deduce the diameter of the helices and gave all the... so between that they had all the information to build the model. But... so, Watson's book, this only came out when Jim Watson published his book, The Double Helix. You know the original was going to be called Honest Jim, he's telling the truth, but that's a play on Lucky Jim Kingsley Amis, one of the novels at the time. So the... he... well, what should have happened though, when they wrote their paper in 1954 on the... how they arrived at the double helix, with the base paring, of course, Watson got the base paring, there's no question about that. But the fact is that the framework the... the double helix structure was based by Crick understanding, the implications of the space group symmetry that Franklin described. There's no... now, what they should have done, they should have, when they wrote the paper, is to acknowledge this, it wouldn't have diminished their achievement to do it. And I discussed this with both Crick and Watson; Jim, Jim Watson says, 'Ah, I didn't say... describe the C2 monoclinic symmetry because I didn't use it, and that's true.' He didn't use it explicitly but the fact is that Francis did when he built the double; he built the two chain double helix with the chains in opposite directions. And he did that, and it was that that enabled Watson to put his base pairs into the double helix. So there's no question that Rosalind should have been cited and should have been cited. And I... so, I've discussed this with both of them. Francis thought that it was in the paper, and he thought that they had mentioned it. He says he didn't deliberately not mention it, but Jim wrote part of that paper, it's hard to say who wrote what. I can detect, I know their styles, I can detect bits of both but, then, of course, they both worked and re-wrote it. But this long controversy is, well... we talk about Rosalind and DNA, what she told me, and I've described this in my papers, she said, 'I could have kicked myself', those were her exact words to me. 'I could have kicked myself not... for not realising that the two fold symmetry applied to... to the... to the A form as well as to the B form, to the B form as well as the A form.' And so, you see, the irony of it all is that Franklin, Wilkins and Stokes, all the three people at Kings had all been to lectures in Cambridge, they were all Cambridge graduates, and they'd all been to the Bernal's lectures in crystallography. And they actually were lectured on space groups, but, of course, this was all very abstract. The only person who understood the implication of the C2 monoclinic symmetry was Francis Crick, who hadn't done any form of crystallography but he had taught himself on the job, so to speak, and he became a Research student of Perutz. But Rosalind never complained, never, I never heard her complain, or whinge or anything about it, I think she regarded herself as... as, in fact, she admired them enormously, both of them.

The NIH [National Institutes of Health] grant kept us going; we were able to recruit a few new people. There was a man who... Arthur Page and Reuben Leberman, but there's a chemist that joined the group. But Rosalind [Franklin]... the key thing was that Rosalind fell ill in 1956, it was ovarian cancer, we found out later. But she went on and she was... had... well, she must have... she had chemotherapy or radiation therapy, she kept... she didn't tell us about it but she used to disappear to University College. And she got better, but in the early 1958 it recurred and she was in the Royal Marsden and then she died in March 1958. And now, so what happened was that by then we began worrying about the future of our... of our group, and of course I inherited the group from her. The... now, at that time the developments in Cambridge, where the MRC Unit was going to move out of the Cavendish Laboratory as Perutz's Unit and move to a new site, a new place, and that was being planned. And I think, I think they would have, it's hard to say, I think they... it was mentioned to both Rosalind and myself that we might move to Cambridge, but nothing was very definite. And when Rosalind died in '58 nothing had been planned, nothing had been decided. But by '59, which was the year... I've forgotten exactly which year, '58 was when the Kendrew structure of myoglobin came out.
[Q] Yes.
And then that was sort of clinched and the MRC realised with X-ray crystallography it would solve protein structures, which was a real landmark in the subject, you see; at last you had the structure of a protein. And the Council of the MRC approved the creation of a new lab rather than a unit; there was some discussion about this because I know that one of the men on the Council was the... oh... what's his name, the man who worked on insulin, Ernst Chain. He voted for it, he thought that structural biology as it was beginning to be called, wouldn't contribute to the structural medicine. He didn't think it would last more than 25 years but they did agree to set up a new lab in Cambridge. And this was really masterminded by Himsworth, Sir Harold Himsworth, the Secretary of the MRC, who were going to build a new lab in Cambridge, outside of the Cavendish laboratory. At one time they looked for a home in one of the other departments but there was never enough space. By this time the MRC unit had been joined by Sydney Brenner who came in '57... and a few others. And so I... so after Rosalind died I was invited to join... join the new MRC, it was going to change its name from MRC Unit for the Structure of Biological... Structure... Study of the Structure Biological Systems, that was its old name to the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology. It was the first time the name surfaced really without it being suggested by Astbury some time before. And so at that time I wasn't sure about the future myself because we didn't know what was going to happen, so about '59 and '60 I had an offer to go to Johns Hopkins and start up a new Department of Biophysics. I was quite impressed, we went over on the Queen Mary, and we had our son with us. And it was quite interesting going across on an ocean liner, because I'd been on ocean liners before from Cape Town to Southampton. And I was quite attracted to the idea, in fact, the... the Dean of the Johns Hopkins showed me... they showed me a hole in the ground where the new lab was going to be built. They also showed me, ‘This is going to be your parking place’; I didn't have a car at the time. I don't think I could drive, so... and... but it looked like a good opportunity. And we were visiting friends in New York, staying with friends in New York and Francis Crick appeared and he... he came to see me and Liebe, Liebe was my wife, and he wanted to persuade us not to go to Johns Hopkins, you see, I wasn't clear what the future would be.
[Q] But he managed to persuade you...
He managed to persuade me. What he said was... well, you know we've got a lot of things that we can do and we should be in position to skim the cream off a lot of different subjects, that's the way he put it. Yes. And in the end, well, I couldn't... I couldn't get used to America, I'd been, I'd also visited, I'd spent some weeks visiting, spending time in Alex Rich's lab. I remember David Blow was there at the time, and... And I remember David Blow saying, when we stopped to fill up with gas... he said, gas, he said, 'I'll never get used to this country'; he'd already been there for two years. And I remember that and I wondered, will I ever be able to get used to it, you know, because we were... I mean South Africa became a Republic in '61, I had to make a choice between South African Citizenship and UK Citizenship, so I became a UK Citizen. And being part of the Commonwealth, you automatically had rights in Britain, but this time you had to make a choice. And so I felt, well, Francis was pretty persuasive and so I... so I... and I said... they said, 'I could bring a group with me. ' By that time the group consisted of the two of you, John Finch, Ken Holmes, Reuben Leberman, a biochemist. And we were then developing methods of making Tobacco Mosaic Virus in large quantities really by... by using polymer precipitation coacervates, they would be called. So I decided we would move and Ken Holmes and John Finch moved in '61, as I remember, and I... I stayed on another year because we couldn't find a house. And I used to commute quite a lot and I remember being very well read at the time, the trains were much slower in those days. And eventually we moved in 1962, I moved in '62, and the new lab was ready, was opened by the Queen in July '62.

Don Caspar – we've mentioned before that he had the first X-ray picture of Tomato Bushy Stunt Virus which showed icosahedral symmetry. And so we discussed why icosahedral symmetry, and one of the reasons is sort of obvious, which we suggested in our first paper on polio, the one that you and I wrote in '59. That if you want to... economical use of genes, then you make many copies of products of a gene. And icosahedral symmetry symmetry uses 60 identical sub-units... which is more than you can use for the others, so it's much more economical to build a shell out of icosahedral symmetry. But then, later, during that time when we... after we published the polio picture... the polio paper, I had a letter from... an acolyte or a pupil of Buckminster Fuller, the inventor of geodesic domes. And he read the polio paper and he sent me a book called The Dymaxion World of Buckminster Fuller. And I knew a bit, I'd seen geodesic domes and I looked through it. And I came... I saw that he had... his language was most arcane; you had to translate it into English. He'd talk about omni-dimension, multi something or other. But then you actually look at the structures he made in the geodisic domes, he maintained that they had identical units and he was building great big domes, one of them had 270 units in it. Now, with perfect geometry you can only build 60 units absolutely identical... identically situated in a dome. And I could see from his pictures that they were... this one had 270; and he said, 'They were all identical.' But if I looked very carefully... I looked carefully at the diagrams and the 270 actually were 240 plus 30. The 30 were on two-fold axes of symmetry so really two half rods and the 240 were four groups of 60. And they were connected by a system of strings; they were what you call tensegrity domes. And the strings had little turn buckles that you use in sailing, fixing ropes; I didn't know, I thought they were little wheels so I misread the picture. And I came to the conclusion how clever the strings, which are tied to the ends of the rods and the rods are moved by strings, because I knew you couldn't have more than 60 identical. I thought, 'These... these were little rollers which adjusted the length of the strings to build', and I realised that this was a way of building something with more than 60 units. By which time... we knew by this time the Turnip Yellow Mosaic Virus which we'd been working, had at least 150 sub-units and so it had to be. So I began to think, I know there were controversies, Roy Markham said there were 32 times five, there were five, which wasn't correct for that; and I realised that I invented the term quasi-equivalence. And now Don Caspar, in the States, had also been wondering about this problem and he'd built models in which he was building... allowing... he had cardboard models which were really like ice cream cones with flat faces and he was showing you could put them in... into ways with more than 60 units. So we both had the idea independently but we arrived at it in different ways. So we wrote a paper in 1962 and it was written and we gave it at the Cold Spring Harbour Meeting in '62, it was called Physical principles and the design of virus shells and protein shells of viruses [sic].

This was a landmark paper and we there postulated that the... that why there was a virus which had 60 units for example, and polio starts out with 60 units but later on the proteins get cut up into smaller pieces after assembly, and there are others like that. So we postulated that there were... had to be multiples of 60 and Caspar and I enumerated all the possible ways, putting together multiples of 60 units together to build different shells. And it turns out not every multiple of 60 is possible, so we developed the rules for that. And...  but the... since then, all the spherical virus structures and indeed all cage structures do obey one of these principles; but, it turns out that the way they are realised is different, it's their exceptions. And Don Caspar and I parted company later on about... later on when he began to say there were no rules. I won't go into that but it turns out really that... So this spherical virus... this structure... structure of the spherical viruses was quite a triumph in its own way, it impressed Francis Crick absolutely no end, you see. He seized upon it immediately because he had postulated symmetry and could see that he could generalise the mathematical concept of symmetry. This was a physical principle because various structures aren't built, they don't know about these laws of abstract mathematics and symmetry; they are built to minimise the energy and you can do this provided you can close a structure. And I made all sorts of models and so did Caspar showing how you could build in curvature and there was... this raised quite a lot of attention. And I remember appearing on the Horizon programme, having to jump out of a Buckminster Fuller dome these TV producers' tricks, breaking a plastic cover. And we built some geodesic domes and I also... Buckminster Fuller came to visit us, and as Buckminster Fuller, who, of course, is a... a totally unlettered, he... the... the architects thought him a great mathematician, the mathematicians thought him a crank, you see. He totally, you know... he used... Euler's theorem which relates to the number of vertices... the number of vertices, faces and lines on the polyhedron it's called Euler theorem, it's V plus E minus F equals two, it's known to Euler. And Buckminster Fuller interpreted the two in term of yin and yang a whole lot of balderdash.
But you see these architects; I don't know if you ever read Frank Lloyd Wright, they require all these things to... to stimulate them. So it doesn't matter... how they got there, what they get there is okay. So I was quite impressed by Buckminster Fuller, and I treated him seriously and translated his work, so I... so we made a couple of films together in which he came to Cambridge. And he described it later that he gave Caspar and Klug the mathematics. He didn't understand any mathematics but he... I... these films, I wonder where they are, they're in the archives somewhere because somebody told me they'd seen them at Open University. But the producer of these films died and so I've not been able to trace them, it was quite interesting the time with Buckminster Fuller. He... he was... he lived in a geodesic dome, I was invited, I didn't go to visit his house. I got onto his visiting list and so he would send out, you got a list every month of where he was going to be, which part of the world, including dentist's appointment, you know, anniversaries. But he was a... what he was, was a Yankee inventor in the line of Edison, unlettered but he just, you know, so you have to... I really admire and respect him, but, not as a mathematician or an architect. So that was the beginning, so that was an important paper.

One of the attractions of Cambridge was that... that there was... would be electron microscopy there. And one of the attractions, apart from people like Crick and Perutz, Kendrew, was Hugh Huxley. Hugh Huxley was at that time the... I think, the best electron microscopist in the world, in fact it's still a mystery to me he hasn't got a Nobel Prize for the work on muscle; but he was the man, the best electron microscopist, technically superb. Of course, with a very good mind, a very good, brilliant mind, in fact. And so one of the attractions was that we knew what the virus shell should look like so we should really be using electron microscopy because was X-ray diffraction takes a long time, many... many years to solve the structure by X-ray crystallography. Electron microscopy should be able to see something, so Hugh Huxley gave a two-day course, I think you went to a two-day course, I mean, it was a private course. Yes.
Now, the summer before, in '61, I went to South Africa with the family for three months. And they had... I was in the Physics Department, the old department, James had... James had retired by them. And... but they had some... I did some... I actually published a paper on X-ray diffraction of gums, I interpreted the X-ray fibre diffraction pattern. But there was also a microscope there and I remember explaining to them how to do negative staining, which had been invented by Hugh Huxley and given the name by Sydney Brenner. And I began to do... I had to go into the unit every day, so I began playing around with a technician, a man called Chick Fowle. Fowle was his name, F-o-w-l-e, he was called Chick, a very good, very capable technician, and he showed me how to use an RSEA electron microscope they had in the building. And... and I remember being very struck by it that I began taking pictures, so I learnt how to manipulate the microscope and so on. And I was also struck by something which I noticed then, which later stood me in good stead. These were negatively stained Tobacco Mosaic Virus particles, which is the old war horses we always used to look at. And it was negatively stained, which meant that the heavy metal stain was down that central hole. And the central hole appeared where it should be, well, it depends what we're talking about, the film or the print. It should appear dark as no light should go through. And I noticed I was twiddling with it, focussing it and it went white. And I... I didn't know what this was and I realised I must be changing the focus of the electron microscope. And that, I believe, was the origins. Later on, some years later when Erickson came, of phase contrast in focussing to be able to image electron microscopy transparent, as they called phase objects. So that was a pretty... again, one of these chance educational events because I wouldn't have... I didn't... it wasn't done by working out a theory which people had worked out. Later on, of course, I followed the theory.

So then we began looking at electron microscope pictures of various virus particles... plant viruses. Now, we knew what we were looking for but we didn't know... we didn't understand what we were looking at. And I came to realise, what we were looking at was the... was the image projected in... projected in, from three dimensions to two dimensions. Now, people never talked about this. And I remember a man in Oxford, the reader in something or other, a well-known biologist saying to... you know, that they couldn't understand complicated electron micrographs. And I suggested that we actually tilt the specimens... and that came about, tilting the specimen, it was originally, I don't know if you remember, John, I got hold of a... of a... metallurgist stage in electron, which allowed you to tilt the specimens because I thought we should be able to take stereos. And because I can't see with the one eye, I asked people to see what they could see. And nobody could see any stereographic images. And I realised we... there wasn't a stereographic image because that depends upon surface features. And what we were doing was, they were projection, and some way or other the penny dropped and realised that we were looking at a projection. And so the...
[Q] And not just a... a footprint.
Not just a footprint like X-ray. And so it was quite easy to work out the theory of that. And in fact, taking a series of tilts at different angles is a parallel like collecting X-ray data in a series of two dimensional projections using a camera. I don't think that was explicit in my mind, but really, it was... but before we did this we had been already building models of viruses to explain the pictures purely because we had the theory of how the shells were built and we could explain, for example, as shown there, shown on the slide how you could get very different appearances, very different appearances if you put, say, 180 units into 60 triangles, shown at the top left. And depending on how you cluster the units, we get them clustering in groups of... three, groups of three... that would look like the top right. If you cluster them in groups of six and five they look like that and then you would have on the bottom right clusters of groups of two.

So you see, so before I actually developed the theory of three dimensional imagery construction we already had understood that what you saw on the electron microscope was a projection of the structure by making models of the kind that I've just illustrated on the... on the board.
[Q] This also has been seen with TMV with the optical diffraction.
Oh, yes, yes, I've forgotten about that. I also introduced optical diffraction where you took an electron micrograph of a periodic object and you sent a parallel beam of light onto it. And it gave you basically a diffraction pattern, which you could deduce the repeating features. That was done optically and it was the first time and sort of rather obvious. I think I actually arose, got to that because I was, this time I was a teaching fellow of Peterhouse, my college in Cambridge and I was teaching optics among other things as well. And so I must have... must have had a... jump from the optical diffraction... By this time, this was now by the 19... middle '60s, '65, '68, and so looking back on it, it's hard to disentangle the different strands which fed this. It was interplay of the project to understand virus structure... and the... trying to learn how to use the electron microscope to understand what the pictures were. And the real point was that the electron microscope had a large depth of field, people say depth of focus, but the correct word is depth of field; so everything in the line of view is projected like an X-ray image. And that was the first-time people mentioned that and the way to do that was take a series of pictures until we had been taking... what had been done was, when we were building models we interpreted the different views as particles lying in different rotations, different orientations. And so, why rely upon them, why not take a specimen and tilt them in different orientations. And we put this to great effect, and I think we were the only lab in the world that was... well, we were the only lab in the world that was doing all this. And we were able to interpret not only virus pictures but others as well and other things as well. And there we met with a lot of opposition from the electron microscopists certain professional electron microscopists. There was a meeting in 1960... '50, I think it was Turkey in 1969, and we published a paper, DeRosier and myself, who came to work with me on this image reconstruction as we called it. In 1969 there was a meeting of the electron Microscopy Society of America where a man called [Lorenzo] Sturkey called the whole thing a load of crap, that's what he said publicly, I wasn't there. But David DeRosier, who was my visiting post-doc was there, and because at that time they thought that you couldn't solve the structure by electron microscopy because of multiple scattering. Because these are fairly strongly scattering objects, but we showed very clearly that it was single scattering that was basically dominating all this. This took many years to establish, so in the end, we did establish three-dimensional electron microscopy which I would like to have called it. But that could be misinterpreted because the people called three-dimensional electron microscopy the way that you could build up a structure in a series of sections. People cut sections of tissues or particles and built them up place by place, and that was called three-dimensional electron microscopy.

We spent several years on all this, on spherical viruses. Mostly Don [Caspar] and myself and then we were joined by Tony Crowther... who was a... trained in.... he had a... he had a degree in mathematics from Cambridge but he'd built a scanner, working with David Blow, he joined us and he put everything on a sound basis. Of course, the way that we used... we used Fourier transform theory to build up a three-dimensional image. We sometimes had more projections than we needed, so he introduced what was called the squares analysis to try to put this altogether on a regular basis. So we created a new subject which was image reconstruction in electron microscopy. Now, I've gone on quite far ahead because it all was intertwined and it's hard, now, to go back again and see how the progress came about. But you can sum it up; the reason we were able to do this was we were working on concrete problems and that, I think, is pretty important. It's not by... I could have sat down in one afternoon and written out a theory if I'd actually thought that it was going to do it. It was not very... if you know some Fourier transform theory and some X-ray crystallography, you can write down this theory in one afternoon, but it didn't work like that. It took many years to realise what it was that we were doing and how we were doing it. So I do think that the moral there in science, that these more general principles arise out of particular cases. And I think that there are other instances of this as well, we've studied one concrete example or several concrete examples to arrive at the generalisation, that's the... that's the way that I think our minds work.

The image that was being produced in electron microscopy was mostly by what's called amplitude scattering, that is by scattering of the atoms of the molecule... of the object, scatter the electrons. But the... it was always an el... but we'd heard from Hugh Huxley, who was the... as I said the leading electron microscopist. Well, that to get a better picture, to get a better picture you should de-focus a bit and that seemed very odd to de-focus a bit. And it would be what's called under focussing rather that over focussing. And this seemed a bit of a mystery. And I... I knew the theory and I could work out the theory, the theory had been worked out by lots of people, the very complicated electron scattering theory. But it wasn't that that led to it, it was the... I decided that what we should do is to try to work out the difference between how much was amplitude contrast and how much was phase contrast. Phase contrast depends upon simply a shift in the position of the diffracted wave relative to some standard which you don't get in... in some scattering events. It's really too complicated to explain, but... so people... now, I wondered at this time how phase contrast arose, [Frits] Zernike in 1934 had given... was given the Nobel Prize for inventing the phase contrast micro... microscope. Now, that... that was the... what he did was to put a what's called a quarter way filter in the path of the... incident beam, which changes the phase relationship between the incident beam, which gets diffracted, and the diffracted rays. And this leads you to be able to see transparent objects. And I... I knew this, I began to wonder how it was that people could use the microscope to see transparent objects in the 1890s, 1900. And it turned out that old microscopes, you could see much better these, you could see... you could see transparent objects or detail very much better than you could in the more advanced microscopes, which corrected all the aberrations, the so called famous Cooke triplet. I read quite a lot about optics, history optics and realised that what was happening was that there was a mixture of phase contrast and amplitude contrast. And Harold Erikson was a Post Doc who came to the lab who was an expert electron microscopist, and we decided to study catalase, which is a simple two-dimension crystal to see if we could disentangle these two. And he did a series, a through-focal series on catalase and we discovered, I can't go into the whole details, the relative contribution of amplitude contrast and phase contrast. And the... it turned out that the, that Hugh Huxley's... Hugh Huxley's recipe for getting the best pictures was that he focussed by a very little bit. And John Finch discovered that... that a little bit had to be what's called 5,000 angstrom defocussing. If you defocus by anything more you got very, so called, sharp pictures but they were false detail. The pictures of Robert Horn, as one of the leading lights, turned out to be... looked very striking but they were... it was full of false detail; we analysed this by optical diffraction, in fact. So... so Harold's work led us to believe that you could recreate an image ... a transparent object by a series of taking defocussed pictures. You see, theoretically, a perfect phase object, perfect transparent object you can't image at all. However, if you actually defocus, any kind of variations then the then the density of the transparent material begin to show up. And so that at least you can get a picture, and by this time we'd introduced computer processing of images which replaced optical processing, which I'd introduced, and you could then correct the defocussed image in such a way to retrieve the original variation in density, giving rise to the phase variations. And so we suggested this, and it was the beginning of phase contrast and defocussing which is now in totally common use throughout. There are other things as well in electron microscopy, which is secondary scattering and so on but this was the biggest factor.

We used to call ourselves people that worked on biological assemblies. In fact, Hugh Huxley and I had a division in the laboratory when we... because he was working on problems with muscle, and we changed the name to a... sub-division of structural studies called molecular assemblies, was that its name?
[Q] Yes.
That's right, and to distinguish ourselves from X-ray crystallographers. Yes. But, in fact, it was very interesting, we really... I think, we were the first people to really do combined X-ray work, electron microscope work, and that was the beginning of the basis of structural molecular biology. And that's what the... what it became, it's sometimes called structural biology; we actually created a new field without actually saying so or knowing that we were doing it, you know, these things get given names after the event. Because, he was working on muscle and my group was working on viruses and we used similar techniques although the overall technique were the details the way you do the things in both cases were very, very different. And... so... so by this time... this is now... Erickson would be in the 1970, 71... Yes. And we... we announced all this at various meetings, the Royal Society Meeting and the meeting in Germany, which Walter Hoppy had organised on the subject, it was in 1971. And this has become the standard method; so... so the main ingredients in modern electron microscopy are three-dimension image reconstruction taking a series of tilts. Phase contrast defocussing and the other element which had made modern electron microscopy is putting the specimens into... freezing the specimens so fast that it doesn't form ice, which would break up the... that was introduced by somebody called [Jacques] Dubochet. But before that, you see, and the reason this phase contrast was important was because Nigel Unwin had shown that if you use negative stain with a heavy metal base they stalked the object. Now, he'd been trying to build a phase contract microscope in electron microscopy which was a... and he... then he actually used electric fields. I won't go into the origin of that, that came about to try to... the analogue of [Frits] Zernike phase plate. I'm afraid this is getting all very technical but, in fact, it is the technical stuff which makes for progress in this field. And so they had... so in order to reserve a specimen, he'd introduced, Unwin had introduced glucose. He simply dried down the specimens in glucose and glucose is a substitute for water. And that gave good high resolution... and Nigel luckily had been brought up as a metallurgist and he didn't know that glucose was a closed ring. He looked up an old textbook of my chemistry and it showed that the linear structure of glucose full of... it's got full of OHs, and he thought that was a pretty good substitute for water.
[Q] Yes.
And so... And so it's a very good mis-reading. So some of the first experiments and the first structure by electron microscopy to seven angstroms was by Unwin and Henderson. Originally, they started out in catalase, which was a boring molecule and they applied it to bacterial rhodopsin. This was published in 1974, so that's where they reached the peak of... of electron microscopy in the MRC unit. I think it was the... it was followed, copied worldwide.

						Once we developed three dimensional image reconstruction there was a clear parallel with an X-ray, X-ray photograph.

Yes.

And, so, I-

An ordinary medical photograph-

Ordinary medical photography, medical X-ray, medical X-radiology, but, you see, what they do is they take an X-ray picture and there are two ways of doing it. One is simply, you just, put up an X-ray film behind you, taken an X-ray picture and you get a picture of everything superimposed in the- in line. So, I- the other way was, a more sophisticated way, was called X-ray tomography. If you wanted a better view you had the- the, say the chest specimen, you wanted to see the different sections in greater detail. So, they had- so, what they do in medical tomography X-ray, tomography, was to have a moving source and a moving plate behind the back. And, the two things are moved at such a relative speed that only one plane in the line of sight is - not in focus, that's the wrong word, but is, you can see without blurring. All the rest is blown out-

Yes.

And, that's called X-ray tomography, which is not, which is used for special cases. The ordinary so-called X-rays just everything in the line of view. So, I- I did speak to a professor of radiology at Middlesex Hospital, a man called Windeyer, I knew- I got to know him because I knew his- one of his people in his department, an old South African friend of ours, so he told me about it. And, he said- oh, we don't need any of this fancy stuff or words to that effect. We know exactly what we're looking at, we don't need any of this. In any case, he said, if you're going to tilt the specimens, I'm not sure if he said it or one of the other consultants I spoke to. And, Uli Arndt, in fact, at Cambridge went to see the radiologist at Addenbrooks Hospital and he came with the same thing, we don't need any of this fancy stuff, we know exactly what we're looking at; which is true. They know the anatomy of the body and they know how to interpret the many- 1897 was the first X-ray, 60 years, 70 years of experience. So, and, what they said to me was, anyway if you're going to tilt the specimen you're going to take a lot of X-ray pictures and, the- you're going to expose the body to a lot of X-ray radiation and that can be very harmful. I was able to answer that, because I said, well, when you do an X-ray tomogram you're getting a lot of blurred detail and that means you're also exposing the specimen to unnecessarily- unnecessary radiation. But, I couldn't calculate at the time, somebody did that later, about the information gain you might get; it was quite a clever theoretical paper later on by- by having a series of tilts.  But, what was unexpected was the fact that the- anyway, let me finish, but, still somebody read up, a man read up, it was a man called Godfrey Hounsfield, who was working for EMI. My paper with David Rowley  was published in January 1968, in August 1968 Hounsfield took out a patent. He worked at EMI, Electronic Musical Instruments, but they also had a wide range of- they build electron microscopes for example. And, he took out at patent to build a device to collect data from 60, it had 60 detectors and you, you, the idea was you would take a series of X-ray pictures and then you would assemble them by three dimensional image reconstruction. Now, what he patented was not the idea, he patented the instrument. Now, the idea he told me that he'd read all our papers, one, only two at the time, he'd read the papers and he'd followed them. And, in fact, in 1975 we had an exhibition at the Royal Society, a soiree, which Tony Crowther and I and I think you as well, John, I might remember, illustrated three dimensional image reconstruction in electron microscopy. And, he illustrated three dimensional image reconstruction in medical radiography. So, he was the- he got the Nobel Prize together with a man called Allan Cormack in 1979. I was a bit put out by it because I don't think there's any doubt that he followed what I did, in fact, he more than followed what I did because when he, well, some people think I should have shared it but it didn't matter in the end because I got a Nobel Prize three years later in Chemistry
					
[Godfrey] Hounsfield got a Nobel Prize with Allan Cormack; Allan Cormack's the South African who preceded me. In my last year in Cape Town, my grant had run out, I was a Junior Lecturer in Physics in Cape Town for one year, the years '48 and '49; I came to Cambridge in the autumn of '49. Cormack lectured in medical physics as did I. Now, medical physics meant... really there was a course for nurses and various medical technicians. And you had to teach various things like lighting and simple things like that. I remember having to teach negative numbers and so on, all very... all very elementary. And... but Cormack, because he was lecturing and we had to do medical radiology, we had to explain about X-rays and penetrating and what you did when you took an X-ray, and where X-rays came from; it was all very elementary. And Cormack, in those days began thinking about... thinking about couldn't you do any better in the ordinary X-ray picture; he already knew about tomography, he was in touch with people in Sweden about it.
[Q] Yes.
Friends in Sweden... so he tried to develop a method of doing imagery construction in which he introduced some mathematics which involved what Tony and I called, peeling the onion. He tried to use Chebyshev's polynomials a bit of mathematics where you're trying to produce the mathematics describing the... not by three-dimensional lattice but by a series of shells, concentric shells. And you can do a... a kind of math... but, the mathematics wasn't correct Chebyshev's polynomials. But he did work hard and he did try to push the idea of three-dimension reconstruction. So he got the Nobel Prize together with... together with Hounsfield. I think it may have been partly his friends in Sweden, but, he certainly had... tried and he tried to do this on the map, he was quite well in with the Swedes... got to the School of... X-ray Analysis ... sorry, of X-ray Radiography. Now, the thing about Cormack is that, when I was in Cape Town I used to be a rock climber, weekends on Table Mountain, we used to go up on the rock, it was marvellous. Let's say we could ride on a bicycle to the foot of Table Mountain, the Bridal Path, it's 2,000... it's 3,000 feet high, but, you start at about 1,000 feet. And so I was... I wasn't a very serious rock climber, I would do what they would call B&C climbs. But an A climb was on ropes and Cormack was a pretty skilled mountain climber, I was friendly with him. He was ahead of me, he's older than me and so we went up Africa Face, which is one of the... and I came off the... he was ahead of me, he belayed me and I... I went out into outer space. And he held me, thank goodness, and he saved my life. But then, of course, you could argue the fact, if I hadn't have gone up with him I wouldn't have been in danger. In any case, that's Allan Cormack, he later... he had been... he'd been to Cambridge ahead of me but he worked with Frisch, a Physicist, and he came back to Cape Town. And that's where he went on doing the... he did this work in Cape Town.
[Q] Yes.
He did, he produced phantoms. The mathematics he developed did work up to a point, so he was able to produce the reconstructions, image reconstructions of things like cylinders of different density.

In the period between '68 and the... their Nobel Prize in '79, I was pretty much involved with a series of people who were interested in three-dimensional image reconstruction in various fields, things like PET scanning, and nuclear imaging, which uses gamma rays. We used to go to meetings about this and also the man who used to attend them was Paul Lauterbur who got the Nobel Prize two years ago for MRI, because that's also three-dimensional image reconstruction, I remember. And these meetings took place at various parts of the world and I remember, very clearly, Lauterbur; and I always thought he should have a Nobel Prize, he realised that with MRI you had to have another signal from the depth at which you... did what's called plane echoing, which is a man called [Peter] Mansfield, who shared the prize with him had invented. So the... these meetings were... but in the early days before we started these meetings the Hounsfield scanner, the MI scanner was being used. Now, the first thing he did on the MI scanner because he couldn't understand Fourier analysis, an engineer; he said, very simply, 'We will just expand the density in the three-dimensional object in the cartesian... in three-dimensional array, the series of numbers. And then in the two-dimensional images, we also have a two dimension...we relate two things by a series of linear equations.' And so he tried to solve them, now, what he didn't understand was very elementary, that if you don't have... if you have too many points in your three-dimensional grid and then you... and you haven't got enough data points, you'll get ill-conditioned equations. And that means that you won't be able to solve them, and they're subject to the slightest error or amplified noise. So the first things they produced on the MI scanner were total garbage.
[Q] Yes.
And they were done... a man called, Ross... what was his name? Ross... who was his name... Ross Stevens, was in Basel at the time, so he ripped open the... he ripped open... they had an EMI scanner and found what the programme was and discovered they were using this linear... linear equation, totally wrong, hopeless programme. So they later introduced Fourier methods or the equivalent of Fourier methods. There's a... Peter Gilbert developed an R-back weighted projection, a convolution method by Ramachandran but they're all equivalent methods, it's a question of how you best do the computation. So that was an interesting episode... where you... the thing about the Fourier method is, it tells you not only how to... it tells you exactly how many views you need to solve an object to a certain degree of resolution without amplifying noise. Tony Crowther showed how a very crude criteria was also the criteria for not amplifying noise. Anyway, this was a great time and I was... I remember when the first EMI scanners were being used. By a consultant in Manchester, they were imaging the brain and I said to them, 'Why do... why don't you...' to Hounsfield, 'Why don't you image something simple?' He said, 'What?', I said, 'A screwdriver or a pen', because then you can see, what, you know, that in mathematics, you say it's the point response function. But if you did elementary optics at school you have a pin and you actually follow what happens to the pin.
[Q] Yes.
The tail of the pin, and so they actually did, in the end, image a... not a screw driver, but a steel rod and of course, you could see the diffraction ripples and so on. But they didn't know and they... they weren’t... well, Hounsfield didn't understand optics and certainly the consultant at the Manchester didn't understand it either. So it wasn't much use what they were doing but you could calculate the point response function. And we published some papers in 1972 on this, on the point response function together with Linda Amos and Tony Crowther, so it was great. It was quite interesting because I could actually use mathematics which I always... but, I said earlier, I'm not really a mathematician, I'm doing what people in Cambridge would rather call... look down on it, applicable mathematics. The mathematics which you put to an end, you see, you might call it mathematical physics or whatever... so that was it. So that was my... but, this... this went on for a few years until we... until we got established. But the simple criteria of how you proved these things, the question of noise, whether you put in Wiener filtering and things of that sort, all that. But I... but, I... so this occupied me from 1968 to about 1974.

Ken Holmes was working to solve the structure of the whole virus.
[Q] Yes.
And I wondered if it was going to be possible to get to a high resolution. So as a companion I thought that we would be trying to crystallise some of the substructures that are found when you try to extract TMV protein, that is the sub-unit protein on its own. And I thought that might be possible to crystallise what was thought to be a trimer... this is a trimer of the TMV protein, the so called 'A protein'. The... so I... Reuben Leberman was with us and he was preparing large quantities of virus for... for the X-ray work on the intact virus. But the... I... I found... I... I read all the original papers of Schramm that started off the early work on viruses in Tübingen in Germany and saw that under certain conditions you'd got quite a large proportion of so-called A protein, which was thought to be a trimer, in fact its aggregate with something between two and five or two and five units. And I thought that that might crystallise, so... I asked Reuben... Reuben Lieberman to... to make large quantities of this and set up a crystallisation. And he produced the... indeed it did form crystals, but, the crystals had very large unit cells, several hundred angstroms. And before, we knew what it was; it was clearly some large aggregate. Now, Don Caspar, who we mentioned before, had talked a great deal about... sub... he'd written a paper about sub-assemblies of TMV which is rather an exercise theoretical physical chemistry. There wasn't much data in what he analysed but it was... he had some idea that the sub-assemblies may be important in the assembly of TMV. So what happened was that the crystal structure was... we found, in the early '60s, I've forgotten when it was, that the fact that this... this was a crystal not of the... not of the trimer of the TMV protein but the crystal of a ring-shaped unit. And you could see from the X-ray diffraction pictures which were obtained by yourself, John, and also by Chang, who was visiting... from China, that they had 17-fold symmetry. And these... these clearly consisted... so the crystals, the unit cell was huge... it contained... rings of protein, 17 units in the ring and two rings stacked together which we called the disc, the two-layered disc. Now, this was... something like this had been described by Norman Simmons and other people working with the chemistry of the TMV proteins, quite a lot of people were working... TMV was used by many different people for different objects and TMV was a hard source of protein. So you'd do physical chemistry and Lauffer for example was measuring the specific volume and finding out the hydration of protein. TMV was a work horse in many different parts that we now call structural molecular biology, including the genetic code as far as the TMV RNA is concerned.

Norman Simmons and others had described in infected plants, sometimes saw ring like objects. You couldn't see the exact structure of this but if you took a leaf of an infected plant and simply put it into a negative stain you could see these ring-like structures. And although I don't think you could see that there were 17 units in this ring... which you could deduce from the X-ray work, it was clearly something very similar. Now, people dismissed this or... said that the... this is an example of a sticky protein and this could be... but Don Caspar, who had held the view that they might be intermediates in the assembly. I took it seriously and I thought that, maybe it's... maybe it's... relevant, it is relevant, and Don Caspar was right, that's relevant to the assembly. And then I remembered the model of Tobacco Mosaic Virus we built in 1958 for the World's Fair, Ken, the two of you were involved in that. And if you remember, what we did was to get some units made of polystyrene. Rosalind Franklin had been invited to exhibit in the World's Fair and we exhibited a model of Tobacco Mosaic Virus and a model of a spherical virus; that was the... which had icosahedral symmetry. So we made things out of polystyrene, I got a sculptor friend of mine, an impoverished sculptor friend to make these things out of polystyrene... and get the right shapes. And in the case of Tobacco Mosaic Virus, we made the shapes, and if you remember, the shapes didn't quite fit, so when they were being assembled into helical structure, it built out like a flower instead of building up a rod. Yes. And then you and... I think we sat up all night before it was assembled, in Brussels, filing away the surfaces so they would all fit perfectly; it was a great rushed job. But the... now the point about that, in order to get that started I realised it was very hard because we had... the idea was: this is Tobacco Mosaic Virus, this is before the discovery of the disc, we had to start... we had to start the assembly, so I got Ernie, Ernest as his name was, to build a little helical ramp on which we could put the sub-units in... into a turn of a helix to start off the assembly. And then we... the TMV RNA was in the form of a plastic pipe, a red plastic pipe; the model is still on the stairs... here in the lab. And the... And we built a complete, almost a complete turn to start off and then we started adding the units in to assemble it. So we build a... a nucleation site, a little scaffold to start the assembly. And then, somehow or other, the penny dropped and I don't know at which point it happened but remember I referred to the phase change in steel. I'd done my PhD on nucleation and growth and I suddenly realised that in order to get such a complicated object built you needed to nucleate it. And maybe this two layer disc was the... the equivalent of this helix with which you would start putting the RNA down onto the surface of this two-dimensional disc. So it wasn't a... it wasn't just a... an adventitious object which happened to... probably a sticky probe but maybe it had a biological role. And there were lots of them. Now, I didn't at the time think that we were going to get involved with physical chemistry, but I did go to speak to a meeting at which Don Caspar was there. Robley Williams out of the TMV people, Norman Simmons and I proposed that this would be... this disc would act as a nucleation for the growth of the virus, I remember saying that. It was poo hoo'd but nobody took it up. And then I began to wonder whether, you know, under what circumstances the disc existed because Reuben had crystallised it under high salt conditions; so I decided... and this was done with Tony Durham, was it?
[Q] Yes. 
And we'd had a new research student, who joined the lab. Who did the phase diagram?
[Q] It was Tony Durham.
Tony Durham.
[Q] Yes.
And so I... I got him to study because he was a research student and he was very keen and he had a good record. And I said, 'We ought to find the states of aggregation in the TMV protein.' You see, Don Caspar who'd proposed this never got round, ever, it was very characteristic, never got round to actually to studying these things. He would... he... he had a knack of avoiding the, not the difficult problems but the main... the main line problem.

So what we did was to make large quantities of protein, change the salt conditions, change the temperature and look at the aggregates, either by hydrodynamics using ultra centrifuge or by... and by electron microscopy and so on. And so we produced a phase diagram, the first time anybody had ever done it for a protein, but a very common physical chemistry of small... small molecules. We plotted the different states of aggregation of the TMV protein as a function of pH as a function of temperature. And lo and behold it told us something that had already been observed, been observed by others, that if you put the TMV protein, the so called A protein, the... the proposed or supposed trimer at low pH, low acid conditions, it formed... it formed a helix without any RNA. So the protein determined the protein... a helical array of proteins was determined purely by the properties of the protein; this was only a low pH. However, if you went to high alkali, then, of course, the thing disintegrated and... sorry, made only small aggregates of about roughly the range of a trimer. But in-between these two positions, at about a normal temperature, 20º and about a pH of 7, which is normal, what we saw were ringed shaped objects and they were the discs. The very discs that Reuben had crystallised, now this seemed to... And also, the salt condition was about .15 molar which is normal physiological condition. So I realised then that the disc was an object not adventitious, it was actually... the protein on its own at normal conditions made the disc and didn't make the virus helix. And I realised that it would be... that... it would be... I think these are Don Caspar's words, soon afterwards, it would be... but I realised... they were... it would be a disaster if the protein on its own formed the helix without the RNA. Because what he wanted to do was combine with the RNA and put the RNA into the helical array... and being biological, so it could. So that... so therefore... but the disc which is not... which is a number of rings in the disc was 17, the number of turns in the virus helix at 16 and one third, so it wouldn't require much of a change to start with the disc which would then dislocate and then start the growth of the virus just in the way that we built the Brussels model. And so now what I can't remember is whether I harked back consciously to the Brussels model but I... I must have realised at some point that was what I was just reliving that.

At this stage... I suggested this and I did say this in the lab and told Tony Durham, that we ought to use the disc for the assembly. Now, Joe Butler had joined us by this time... Joe Butler, of course, because Reuben was leaving. He was leaving to... he left, I don't know, when did he join you in Germany?
[Q] '69.
'69, so this was '70, so he'd left by them. So he... and I got Joe Butler who was a biochemist, a protein chemist to join us. So I asked... I asked Tony Duhram, who was my research student to do some experiments and make some RNA, probably do it with Joe... Joe Butler and to mix the disc with the pure viral RNA and see if it nucleated assembly, and started the assembly. He wouldn't do it because he'd been told by another research student unit of mine called Peter Gilbert, who was a rather toughy and very determined, who'd been carrying out three-dimensional image reconstruction on discs. And came to the conclusion that the two layers of the disc related by a two-fold axis of symmetry perpendicular to the axis of the disc, which meant that the two layers were back to back. Now... so that meant that... only one layer would be active, but you see in the... if a disc is to turn into a helix then the... the two turns had to be facing the same way, if it doesn't have a two-fold axis for symmetry. Peter Gilbert, being a very persuasive fellow and being a fellow researcher with Tony Durham said that I was, that my ideas wouldn't work at all, that's why he wouldn't do the experiments, he wouldn't do it. So I actually ordered, I don't often have to do this, I ordered Tony Duhram to bring me a solution of acetic acid. And he brought the acetic acid and I poured it, it's one of the few things I ever did with my own hands. I poured the acetic acid into this... into the solution of discs, it all went cloudy instantly. And then we called you and you looked in the microscope and what you could see were large aggregates of dislocated discs on top of each other. And so it was fairly obvious that if protons could do it... turn in changing the structure of the, it was a very facile thing to turn the disc... turn the disc into helix, just like... just like that. And the... And so... but then, Joe Butler was around, so we got Joe to do the experiments, Tony carried on with doing other things as well. This showed clearly that this was the nucleating agent, so then... we... we published a paper on the... on the discs, you and I and Tony Durham about the discs dislocating and forming helices. And over some time they annealed into a perfect helical rod, and so then I got Joe to make some... RNA and asked him to... he'd just joined, to just see if the discs would nucleate the assembly of the protein. So we... we added... the idea was we would nucleate the assembly, so we added the... Joe did these experiments, he made a solution of discs, we knew how to make them in the pH7. He added the RNA and within five or six minutes it began to... it went cloudy. You could see it by eye, I mean, of course it had a light scattering so it was clearly working. So I assumed at the time that the... that the agent would be that the protein contains small aggregates, so to start nucleation and the aggregation or rather the elongation as a biochemist would call it or the growth as a physicist would call it would take place by adding one unit at a time. And this turned out not to be true at all because the... the more discs, when... when we changed the concentration of the discs it went faster and faster and made a more or less a complete virus. And so, the discs were being involved not just in nucleation but also in the growth in dislocating. And so the... And so that is something... so we were able to make more or less complete viral particles in about six minutes compared to the 24 hours. Now, the recipes for making, reconstituting the virus out of protein and RNA, if you looked up Frankel-Conrad's papers, they added some salt to the protein and they waited for several hours before adding the RNA. And I... of course it was obvious what this meant, they were adding the salt to form a disc.

I remember going to a meeting of the British Biophysical Society in 1971, ahead of me was walking David Phillips and somebody else. And I heard them say, 'Klug is talking about the assembly of TMV', he said, 'What is there to say, it's all understood.' Well, I did speak about this and this was the... I spoke about this and we published some papers in Nature and New Biology, which was the first issue. The journal went defunct, it was the first time Nature had gone into a different field, it was now in many new journals of Nature. So we published these papers on the polymorphic forms of TMV protein and the assembly... the disc aided assembly of TMV protein; so this kind of biological role... and was very pleasing. And it meant, you see it now, the other thing that Joe went on to show is that if you had... if you added... if you try to do the assembly with foreign RNAs not viral RNA, it didn't work. So it was clear that the disc was not only an obligatory intermediate, and Don Caspar had argued there had to be such an obligatory, but, now we had one. But this was also one which distinguished... the RNA of the virus from any other RNA, because if you used yeast RNA or any other RNA or ribosomal RNA, they didn't assemble. And this was, you see, the reason it was important... was because it was believed by a lot of people, because of the paper by Roger Hart who worked with Robley Williams, that TMV protein could assemble with any piece of RNA, there was no specificity. Now... so this explained his observations and this was being echoed by David Baltimore who was trying to assemble polio virus out of protein RNA. And he found he could always encapsulate it under a wide range of conditions, foreign RNAs. So that sort of added to the idea that RNAs, that the... there was no specificity in the interaction.
Well, it turned out it was Rober... Roger Hart had been doing, he'd been doing the assembly at low pH. So what was happening was he was making the... he was making the viral helix, protein helix, there was an array and it was schlurping up, so to speak, the RNA, just sucking it up. And so it was under... but if you worked at pH7 then it was highly specific, so this ment that it was a rather important biological point. It meant the disc was not only involved physically in the assembly, in nucleating the assembly, it was also discriminating between... TMV RNA and foreign RNA, and this is vital for specificity because in the cell there'll be other RNAs and we... and the discs did that. And then later, so how... how did that do that discrimination, well, the thing was to find the origin of assembly, where which of the RNA was being recognised. And this was done by Joe Butler and David Zimmen who joined later; this was done a few years later. They found that the origin of assembly in the RNA was about a thousand bases from the three-prime end... and it was a bit mysterious, this origin of assembly. First of all, it didn't, they... it wasn't the full 6,000 bases of RNA. So although this might be the origin of assembly, the... the, you could only assemble... assembly was going from three to a five-prime direction. It left a mystery about the 1,000 bases around the other end. The... so the... anyway they did, they did the experiment... and they found by stopping the assembly at the early stages, they found that a piece of RNA got encapsulated in the first few seconds or minutes of the assembly. And they found this was a piece about 1,000 bases from the end. And when you wrote out its formula, the RNA formula, you could see that it had formed a hairpin with a loop. And on the loop there was a series of guanines, three bases apart, there were five guanines. Now, there are three amino acids for... sorry three nucleotides for every amino acid in the helical array and this probably meant that the guanine was a signal for the recognition by the... by the proteins. So... And so, that solved that problem.

Then the question about the other 1,000 bases, how do they get covered, they probably get covered by A protein. But then there was a lot of work about discussion about direction, I think you did some experiments with Joe Butler on this didn't you, to find the direction of assembly on the RNA; I've forgotten how you did that.
[Q] We could recognise the ends, I think.
Oh, the ends of it, yes, there's a slight difference in the ends, the tilt of the protein. So... so that system... so it means it's really... it has a biological role, so... so it was some biology entered into a specific recognition, which is what's required. So this is corrected... so it wasn't just a protein cell schlurping in some RNA. So I was very pleased with that and it still remains the best worked out system in viral assembly, as far as I know; where they have been worked out in detail. It was a simple system, the helix is simple to work with as is seen from the spherical virus, this was the... the very best system. So those papers were published in 1971 and I don't know of any other case, although I've stopped looking, I must say now, where this was worked out. And to this day I don't think it's clear how this spherical virus... its recognition probably is part of the RNA. I can imagine it's the same thing, part of the RNA will be some kind of loop structure which is recognised by some partial aggregate, a ring of six or a ring of five sub units of the icosohedral lattice. I thought at one time we would... work on that but one had... by that time we were moving onto other subjects, so...
[Q] The crystals, the fact that we had crystals and the X-ray work progressed on those.
Yes... of course... oh yes... but, now with the crystal, the disc... the disc had a molecular weight of 600,000.
[Q] Yes.
It was the largest object ever, at the time, to be crystallised and solved. It was the first... and to do that; it was a heroic effort, Ann Bloomer, using Uli Arndt's X-ray data collection system that is using a rotating, what was it called?
[Q] Rotation camera.
Rotation camera, and it was solved in 1978 to high resolution. So 76 to five angstroms and to 78 in... low... high resolution.
[Q] Yeah... Yes.
The disc, so that was... but... that... but, you see, being a low resolution, it explained how the hairpin entered the... so the idea was that the hairpin entered through the hole down the middle, a hole in the middle. This loop was recognised by the jaws, there would be two layers with the disc structure. And helix entered, RNA helix and then some other, the dislocator, I can't do that. And the loop was recognised, the guanine's in the loop were recognised.
[Q] Could you see the advantage why it's so far along?
No, we can't, I can't see the advantage. It must be... people have found the origin certainly of some other helical viruses and they are all some distance away. But this... this was met with a lot of suspicion until the Strasbourg people, that is... no, of course, other of the virus plant, virus labs jumped into the act. And a man called Leon Hirth published a paper to prove that this was the case. And... and it was originally he... they published... referred to our work, and... but they showed that they were doing the assembly into a partial intermediates in the assembly. You could see two, two RNA tails coming out of the partially assembled rod; which was the proof that we had the hairpin structure going in.
[Q] Yeah.
It's quite interesting. I think they were quite peeved that we did this because they were professional virologists. And so a bit interesting on the ethos of science... and in the first days they referred to our papers and gradually they published more papers. Our papers got pushed in and so the assembly mechanism is due to Hirth et al. at least in Strasbourg. But we showed it was very clear from your work, in fact you were labelling the ends, it was rather more cumbersome than it just seemed, the two tails, because we had to spread out the RNA to see the two tails, so it was quite pleasing; but, it was the... solving a problem like that. I... one could have gone on had I been a so to speak, a biophysicist, I would have gone onto spherical viruses and done some assembly things and looked at the intermediate aggregates. But one had to give it up to do something new.

tRNA is transfer RNA and this is what's involved in carrying... in protein synthesis... protein synthesis takes place on the ribosome and the... there's a molecule. And what happens there is that the... the genetic code tells us that three amino acids are specified... sorry, three nucleotides are used to specify an amino acid. And the... this recognition takes place by a molecule transfer RNA which recognises the anti-codon in the messenger RNA. At the same time, it carries at one end of the tRNA and the other end it carries an activated amino acid. That means one with a high energy bond which you can easily split off. And so this links... this links together the two subunits of the ribosome, the 30S and the 50S. And the 30S is where the code is read and the 50S is where the amino acid, which is carried by the tRNA, is... is... linked to the next one in the chain. It's the whole beautiful picture of protein synthesis, so the question is: what is the structure of tRNA? And Francis Crick came to me because we were the only people in the lab who knew something about RNA because of the TMV work. He said, 'We have to determine the structure of... of tRNA'. It was, you know, next thing on in the advance in molecular biology. Now, the... the formula for tRNA had been worked out and if you write down the sequence of the 70 odd nucleotides in transfer RNA, they form what looks like a clover leaf, that's four... four double helical regions connected together by loops, so-called 'clover leaf structure' which Holley worked out. Now, I assumed, and most people did at the time that these four bits would be like, some moveable object, one arm would carry the... amino acid, one arm would carry the... would be the... would carry the anti-codon which was on the other arm. And the other bits were involved in recognising the ribosome. So I imagined it was something like this with the four arms carrying and it gets into the ribosome. Francis said to me, Crick said to me, 'Oh, it's not going to be like that.' 'So what's it going to be like?' He said, 'It will be a single molecule, a three-dimensional structure.' And I said, 'Well, if that's the case we have to crystallise it.' And he said, 'Yes.' And you know there's... well, the... so we began, there was Brian Clark was in the lab working in Francis Crick's division and he was making large quantities of tRNA. And we decided to... he wanted to crystallise what's called met-tRNA which is involved in the initial... initiation of assembly. I thought that you couldn't put all your eggs into one tRNA, we just are trying to crystallise different tRNAs. There was a man called Cramer, a German, who was working on these things in Gottingen, Friedrich Cramer. And he had... he had got some very small crystals of... of one of the tRNAs. I decided that we would try, we need large quantities, and when you try to purify the tRNA they came off at different... different position of the exchange chromatography. But there's one tRNA which ran far ahead of all the others, that was, phenylalanine tRNA. Not phenylalanine... Which one?
[Q] It was phenylalanine.
Yes, phenylalanine tRNA, of course, sorry, phenylalanine tRNA. And... and so I said, 'Oh, let's work on this one which you get large quantities, it's free of all the others.' And by that time a lot of people were starting to try the crystallised tRNA, Alex Richard's lab, Jacques Fresco's lab. Jacques Fresco came to... the next thing on in, the next obvious thing, it's not often there's a period in science where the next step is obvious; not often, sometime there is such a period and this was one of those. And Jack Fresco came to the lab to try and find out what we were doing, a bit of a cheek now that I come to think of it. Anyway, because we were trying to do it.
[Q] Well, he had grown.
He had grown... he had grown crystals, a mixed tRNA.
[Q] Yes.
And I couldn't believe it was mixed because they were different species, because not phenylalanine it was some other tRNA. And he was convinced that, I said, he came to the lab and he wanted to work with us. So that was all right, but, in fact, it turned out that what he... what he'd grown was not a mixture at all, it was one particular species, I think it was Lysine tRNA. But he... he was trying to grow the crystals by evaporation from dioxane, it's volatile, it's not the way, you can't control things that way.

We solved the structure of tRNA, Jane, by this time John Robertus, a Post Doc from the States had joined us and also Jane...
[Q] Ladner.
Jane Ladner, yes, but she had... her maiden name was... she was really Jane Ladner by this time. And she had... And she grew... she actually succeeded in growing good crystals, four-, three-dimensional crystals of tRNA. She was actually trying to grow a mixture, I mean a tRNA with something else but it... what happens, one of the species crystallised out, she was trying to see interactions between them. And so John Robertus and you, John... solved the crystal structure, didn't you? And John Robertus who had come to do something else.
[Q] Yes.
He had been... he had been a, he'd been trained as a psychologist but he wanted to go into chemistry... because he found psychology too frustrating. He was a very active fellow. And so the first crystal structure was published in 1974. Now, we were competing with Alex Rich, who was working on the very same... very same... species of tRNA. And he was a fast follower and he... and they had... they had an orthorhombic from; we had monoclinic form, which is simpler in some ways. Of course, there were troubles about the heavy atoms, I won't go into all the troubles, but, it took... until, I think Jane's crystals were published in 1972 and it took till '74 to solve it. I won't go into all the technical details of that. And the structure was a three dimensional folded structure, it had all sorts of interesting... non-Watson-Crick bases and so on. Alex Rich, thought he would steal a march on us... he published a paper at four angstroms, sometime ahead and he totally misinterpreted the map. They were... they because it was low resolution but they didn't understand that they actually were... the backbone of the molecule they traced went through certain base pairs and they got it all wrong and our paper was right. But he managed to... he managed to tell the world that they had done it at the same time, which wasn't true at all. It was a conference that went on in Madison and so on. I wasn't there but John Robertus and Brian Clark were there and they weren't quick witted enough to see that what he was presenting was our structure, not his. Anyway, so there's quite a lot of... quite a lot of unpleasantness in science. When I charged him with it on the telephone, he said to me, 'I'm not a saint'. He's not a saint, doesn't mean to say you're not a sinner.
[Q] Sung Ho Kim.
Yeah... Sung Ho Kim well... yeah, that, I didn't want to go into that whole story, Sung Ho Kim whatever happened... they disagreed about the high resolution model. Sung Ho Kim actually got it right but Alex preferred to... he had left Alex but the... Alex had worked with a chap who went... went to Alabama whose name I'll remember in a moment; And Alex published... the wrong choice. They couldn't... the map wasn't clear enough to see the chain tracing and they choose the wrong one. But it's really quite cunning, in the model he shows that there's a certain base pair of 1538, a non-Watson-Crick base pair, as some people described these GC non-Watson-Crick. And I knew the model had to be right because you, in many tRNAs you had AT and GC but never switched chains, so it had to be a non-Watson-Crick, not like this but like this, this is the glycosidic bond. So I knew that was right, I remember showing it to Francis and he said, 'Oh, it must be right.' But Alex, in the text, in the models he pub... in the text he says: later on it could also be the other way round, you see, covering his tracks. So that was tRNA.

We used it to do metal binding to see how metals bound to nucleic acids, which we knew at the time. And I remember somebody in the lab objecting to all this, Peter Lawrence. Peter Lawrence was a gad fly in the laboratory, a very distinguished cell biologist. And he... he said, why... we gave a talk in the lab and said... 'Why do you, why are you doing this, why do we need to know this?' And I said, 'Well, metals are important biology, RNAs important, metal RNA interactions are important, this is an opportunity to follow this up and to see how they work'. He was the same as an... he was the same... was in the same year Fred Sanger talked about sequencing DNA, this is the same Peter Lawrence. And he got up and Fred was describing the methods for which he got his second Nobel Prize; Fred was describing these methods and afterwards with Peter... and said, again... again he said the same thing, this was some time later, 'Why do we need to know this; What will the sequence tell us?' It went on biological action. So after the session Francis Crick walked up to him, put his arm on his shoulder and he said, 'One day, dear boy, you'll have to know.' The sequence of DNA.
It's really... I tell this story because it gives back a kind of echo of what we were doing. In a way, if I can make a general comment, we were creating I think, some of us... some of us in... you and us... in the various other groups were creating modern structural molecular biology. But in order to do this you had to not just bring in the physical and chemical techniques but you had to steep yourself or really try to steep yourself in the biological and biochemical backgrounds, which not everybody did, I think. Well, Francis is the prime example of all this because he... he didn't even... hadn't done any biology or biochemistry when he started and he was purely a physics degree. I know I at least had done biochemistry and physiology, so I knew something about it.

I gave up further work on tRNA, Brian Clark had moved, had gone to Aarhus, so we had done protein synthesis in the laboratory was being wound down anyway by... by Crick and Brenner.
[Q] It was the time for chromatin...
So I turned to chromatin.
[Q] Yes. 
And I'd come to chromatin only because of the time to start, but I was, when I wrote a report to say one of our, you know, at the MRC we get examined every five years and I wrote in our division report that the work had stopped on tRNA was heavily criticised by one of the referees and by the visiting committee. They were saying, why did you do this, the first discoveries of the structure of tRNA and a lot of things to be found out, the interactions of tRNA with EFTU, other molecules. And I said, 'Well, we stopped something and we want to do something else and it was chromatin.' So I judged the chromatin to be much more of a mystery.
[Q] Yes.
And so what happened was that when Roger Kornberg wanted to come to the lab as a Post Doc, he was the son of Arthur Kornberg, the greatest biochemist of the day, and he said, 'I'd like to work on a... something messy, starting at the beginning'. And I said, 'Well, I've got a messy problem for you – chromatin, where the chemistry is not well understood.' And that was... that was Roger Kornberg. Yeah. So... so... And we moved on, the pointers I'd learnt which some people don't learn that sometimes you have to deny yourself the luxury of doing something, not following what you're capable of doing but to try to work on interesting and hopefully important problems, which I think... I think I learned that from Francis Crick. And I think, looking back on it, I was very lucky to be there because I learnt... from Crick as he once wrote about Bragg. He wrote in his thesis that he was fortunate to have learnt from [Lawrence] Bragg how to go about a problem. Well, I learnt, I read that in Francis Crick's thesis and I also learnt from him, well... by watching him, how he thought, in fact. He would always write out notes, he'd write down a whole, he was very systematic, he would write down a whole lot of notes about how to approach a problem. He wrote down... when he and [James] Watson worked on DNA, to return to an old historical thing. He wrote down helical diffraction three for bird watchers because Watson was only a bird watcher and didn't understand this. So I think, it was pretty important, Crick... So he was... we didn't publish much together but he was a... he was an influence. And then the lab as a whole meant, and I think I have to get this into the story, the lab as a whole was such a representation of techniques and when we worked on RNA and later on we were able to learn from people like Fred Sanger. When we worked on chromatin we had to go and... so I'm now speaking more generally, we had to start using nuclei, micro nuclease, DNAs 1 and so on; we learnt that from Fred Sanger.
[Q] Yes.
And not only that he actually gave us some materials; we didn't have to go through the business of ordering it and knowing what to order. So it's really... so the laboratory, and it's a tribute to the MRC, which I must get into this talk that they actually favoured such conditions where you had an institute rather, where workers were perhaps in different departments but under one roof and you could benefit even if only occasionally from the presence of the others.
[Q] A variety of know-how...
A variety of know-how, yes... you could always go down and ask, well, you could always read papers, but there's nothing like knowing you're getting some know-how, yes.

The citation for the Nobel Prize, an undivided Nobel Prize it was in chemistry, was for the development of crystallographic electron microscopy and the elucidation of the structures of... protein nucleic acid complexes of biological importance. And by that they mean the last part is viruses and chromatin and we've talked about viruses, we haven't yet talked about chromatin, which we're going to do now. But the... the other thing is crystollagraphic electron microscopy is a misnomer because we actually worked with both crystals and also with individual particles. But because the people who gave the citation didn't really understand it, they called it crystallography because the ideas, or some of the ideas which I used came from X-ray crystallography, so it's a funny citation, but I didn't choose it.

In the early '70s the... there was a man... John Hindley, do you remember him?
[Q] Yes.
He came to the lab, he joined us in the last few years at Birkbeck, the last year at Birkbeck, he came with to Cambridge. I've forgotten whether he was... he was a sort of Post Doc And I thought at the time I'd been reading about other things, in particular I'd read quite a lot about DNA and about DNA protein complexes including protamines, which are found in sperm. And... and there were the papers by [Vittorio] Luzzati and by [Maurice] Wilkins, separate papers, where they were trying to pull fibres of chromatin. And at about this time, people discovered that the histones, the molecules which are involved in packaging DNA inside chromosomes, the so-called histones were of two types, they were called arginine rich histones and lysine rich histones. They were just... the sequences weren't known at the time but they went... and you could separate them in different ways, you can make them relatively easily. So I got John Hindley to make all these different types of histone, they were mixtures. The arginine rich are in fact later called H3 and H4 and the lysine are H2 and H2B which are the four out of the five histones which are found, there's a fifth one called H1, which I'll mention later. And the... the... so we pulled fibres, I actually pulled the fibres, I mean, John did and I simply put a needle in. I said to John, 'Pull it out', and said, 'This is what you do pull some fibres.' But making different mixtures of DNA, different mixtures of DNA and... and the histones in a different concentration because we'd know what the stoichiometry would be. So we did this and we got fibres and well, we just got patterns, which were no better than patterns which were obtained by Wilkins and Luzzati using all the histones; I thought there might be some differentiation because they clearly were a different role. Of course, we now know what they are but at the time we didn't. So I didn't proceed with it because I obviously couldn't do any better than that. And then Francis Crick went to a meeting in Port Buc in the South of France on what turned out to be chromatin. It was about packaging of DNA and so on and he came back and told me, you know, 'There are only... there aren't 25 different kinds of histones as people believed', there was a husband and wife team in Edinburgh called the Stedmans who worked on this. And he said that they now know that there are only four types of histones, H3, H4 and H2 and H2B. These are being cloned and some sequences have been worked out in the United States, cloning had come in by this time, you see. And the fifth histone H1 and all the others, the 25 were post synthetic modifications of histones in acetylated forms and things of that sort; lots of acetylated, mostly the acetylated forms. Now, we... we knew the... but this made the problem sort of tractable. So when Roger Kornberg said he'd like to come and work on some new problem... a messy problem, which he could help sort out; I said, 'I've got the very thing for you, chromatin.'

He started by trying to make histone preparations, again of H3 and H4 and so on and trying to make them on a small scale and trying to aggregate them with small pieces of DNA, which we've got good fibres. But it was... it seemed to be clear that the way the histones were prepared we didn't know if they were native... in a native form or not. So I said to Roger [Kornberg], 'Can you try to look into', because he was a biochemist and he's trained by his father who as I said, was the best biochemist in the world. And Roger was very, very adept at biochemistry, making things. So he began to try to purify the individual histones, that is not just the H3 and H4 together, and the H2 and H2B together. In fact, they do go together as I'll say in a moment. And he... but in the meantime he took lots of X-ray pictures of different fractions interacting with DNA calf thymus. And we could gather all sorts of pics; we could see that on the whole there was some kind of interaction on a 100 angstrom scale that stood up in the X-ray pictures. Now, Wilkins and Luzzati interpreted the 100 angstroms as the pitch of the... as the... somehow the perodicity of a helix because they couldn't think of anything else by helices. And the idea was that the histones, like protamines folded around the DNA, clustered around and made some kind of knobbly structure. So the... but now, so Roger said... I said, we weren't sure about the condition for these histones and we tried different extracting conditions, different salts and all that and also tried to renature them. In the end, he read a paper by a group in South Africa, Van Holt and Van der Westhuizen who were working on sea urchin histones and he noticed that in the paper, they went through a step where the H3 and H4 were together. And the H2A and H2B were together, which were the... but in... in a reasonable form. And he thought that these might be denatured, un-denatured, so he followed it up and he adapted the prep and he made preparation and he made lots of material. And then he began to add them to DNA, both separately and... And together, again using X-ray diffraction because our guide was this 100 angstrom spacing and trying to recover it. It wasn't the best idea but that was all we had at the time, there's no enzymatic activity, the only thing you had was a structural indication. And we knew that if you took X-ray photographs of nuclei as a whole, and people had tried, you tend to get 100 angstrom lines, and also later on you could see 27 angstrom and 55 angstrom lines, that was done later. So he then thought that these might be and since the conditions under which they produce they went... they went on, then... sorry, I've forgotten, Van Holt and Van der Westhuizen went on to separate the histones. And Roger thought that maybe these go together naturally, which had been obvious indications of that. So he began to wonder what these aggregates were and he purified them, he also found that you could under the appropriate salt conditions you could add the H3 and H4 to H2A and H2B and form a really rather tight oligomer. And then he enlisted Jean Thomas, who was working in the biochemistry department, she was an expert protein chemist, which he wasn't. So she... they began to do cross-linking studies and he showed, between the two of them, they showed that H2A, H2B was a dymer, hetrodymer and H3, H4 was a tetramer, which was... so that was the... Now, these were and these looked like naturally existing aggregates. Now, you see, if this is the case, these are quite large and he also showed with Jean that you could put them together to make a histone octamer that is 1 H3 H4 tetramer and 2 H2A H2B dymers making an octamer. And this octamer seemed to be formed under a... and you could associate with DNA, you certainly recreated this 100 angstrom pattern and some other lines. So this was the psychological breakthrough because people had thought that the... that the histones coated the DNA. If they are forming octamers they couldn't possibly do that, they're much too large.

At about the same time or in parallel with the time some people called [Dean] Hewish and [Leigh] Burgoyne in Australia, I remember Francis [Crick] telling us about this because Francis was on the... on the sidelines cheering us on, you see. Francis was there, in fact we were quite active, we used to have a... I started a group called 'What is the Magnesium?' Because that was the... you always needed magnesium to make these aggregates. But then Francis went, later he went to the States, but he was also busy with other things. But the... so the... in the end... Roger noticed that the... Hewish and Burgoyne what they found was that you sometimes had endonuclease in chromatin and the DNA was chopped into pieces of roughly 200 base pairs.
[Q] Yes.
And you can also do this is with micrococchal nuclease if you treated... treated nuclei with micrococchal nuclease, you can get fragments in 200 base pairs. And Roger was the one who proposed the nucleosome. I... I had told him first of all that there... that there wasn't 100 angstrom fibre helix, there was nothing. There was some structure of some kind repeating on 100 angstroms.
[Q] Yes.
And the... it wasn't going to be a helix but there's no indication, any other helical lines. And Roger proposed that what was happening was that the histone octamer formed a spool on which 200 base pairs were bound, which he later... which we called beads, spherical beads, much later were given the name nucleosome by Chambon in Paris, he gave the name... the French liked cartesian straight forwards when they invent names. And so the... and they published this paper and a paper in Science, two papers in Science which they proposed the nucleosome. Now, the people had seen if you take out chromatin you sort of spread it out you see little, crude little aggregates they call them new bodies, new bodies, that was there Olins and Olins. And they had no idea what the composition was or what the thing was. So they sometimes claimed to have discovered nucleosome, they didn't at all. Discovering something means you not only finding what it is and characterise it and how it's made. So that was the nucleosome and now... this was in... published in 1974, and so Roger thought, now these if you actually made such a nucleosome you put the DNA on the outside. This would be the... this would form a string of 100 angstrom; every 200 base pairs were wrapped around the nucleosome. And but that still didn't... but, I thought it was rather weak, you wouldn't get a strong 100 angstrom spacing like that, it's just a linear array.
[Q] Yes.
You need to make something more substantial. And that's when, now, you were enlisted by Roger earlier on and by han... by Marcus Noll whom Roger influenced. He was another Post Doc working in Crick's department, that this... it wasn't called, I'll call it the nucleosome but these... these nucleosomes were... so they... they chopped up... with microchoccal nuclei they chopped up chromatin into different pieces. And on sucrose gradient they found what looked like repetitive bodies, and that was the so called one, two, three, four experiment. And in the microscope you could see that the first peak looked like little spheres, the second peak, the dimer looked like two little spheres together and then three and four. And this proved... and the DNA was the 200 base pairs, 400 base pairs, 600, so it was an absolute proof of the ex... physical existence of nucleosomes. And that was the so called one, two, three, four experiment. And it still didn't explain in my view the 100 angstrom spacing, and that's why I proposed to you that there must be some higher order structure which much must be different from the linear structure. And so we did, we did the... I suggested adding magnesium, I can't remember what we did with salt... high salt as well but there was certainly magnesium, a few millimoles of magnesium. And then we could see that the... that things folded up into fibres.
[Q] Yes.
And the... now what I can't remember is we must have an H1 in our preparation fifth histone...
[Q] With and without, I think.
We did with and without, yes. But we got folding up; we got zigzag structures and folding a bit later. And so and these, and they formed the nucleosomes folded up into what we proposed as a helical structure, a super helix which would give 100 angstrom spacing as a distance between turns of the helix. We called it the 'solenoid model' because we suggest that it was tightly wound and the word super helix had already been used up; the super helix is what DNA is on the single nucleosome. So of course, the solenoid which was meant to be relatively tightly bound... and that, of course... that's been the... that was the beginning of the story.

Roger then, I think, went off to Harvard and later to Stanford and we set about trying to crystallise the nucleosome, a single nucleosome without H1. H1 is the fifth histone, which we later showed with Thoma and Koller, it's absolutely essential for making a regular packed helix. That was a paper in '79, the paper got rejected by I don't know how many different referees but it turned out to be right in the end. How many different journals and referees... because they thought that a linear array would be enough, the answer... it really was at the basis of that. So the...
[Q] Len Lutter.
Oh, Len Lutter. So then we recruited Len Lutter and the idea was to try to find out what the nucleosome was, so he then... Lutter was an American Post Doc, a very skilful, very skilled at the bench and he began doing nucleosome preparations of different kinds. And he found, that if you added microchoccal nuclease then you could get a ladder, just as you went down in the one, two, three, four experiment, all the way down to single nucleosomes. If you went on digesting you found that the 200 base pair b, and turned into 160 base pair b, and so clearly something had happened. And during that time, I think I've forgotten which point we showed that, the H1, if there was H1 present, fell off. And there was H1 present because we did this from... originally from calf thymus chromatin, but I think that we got it from beef kidney in the end. Some people tell you, you can get better preparations from beef kidney, was it you who use to go to the abattoir to collect it?
[Q] No, no.
They used to have to...somebody... You had to tip the slaughterman to give you the kidneys.
[Q] Yes.
That was a good, useful source. And so we, so the... Ray Brown and Daniela Rhodes crystallised the nucleosome. It was quite an interesting crystallisation because it, if you actually started adding magnesium it precipitated. And they were trying to do things with manganese as well which had the same behaviour, and then Ray Brown and Daniela Rhodes, one day announced he's got crystals, but the crystals were at 40 millimolar magnesium; And I couldn't believe it. And then I realised what was happening, and I go back to insulin... this is not a digression this was actually part of the reasoning. You know, if you actually, insulin picks up zinc, this is the work of Dorothy Hodgkin, who worked out the structure, there's two zinc, there's four zinc and six zinc. And the different zinc they formed different... it's well known in organic chemistry they formed different... higher aggregates. And the... so it was clear that the... you could make six insulin because they were an aggregate of insulin molecules. And I realised that this must be an aggregate at 40 millimolar of the... so the... so what was happening before... so we managed to grow good crystals because if you... if you, so the... the low amounts of manganese they precipitate out and they don't give good crystals at all, no crystals at all. If you go on adding manganese, they salt in as the physical chemists say, so we actually determined the boundary at about 40 millimolar. It turned out to be dependent upon the exact length of the DNA that you chopped up. Normally it was about 100 and 160 turned out to be only a rough measure and the best crystals came with 147 bases of DNA, and these were crystallised.

We had done some earlier work at the electron microscope level... which using image processing I'd actually, we had two-dimensional rays. But these... two-dimensional arrays of nucleosomes as well as three-dimensional crystals and we could phase the two-dimensional arrays by electron microscopy and show that they formed a kind of wavy pattern, with a 330 angstrom repeat. And the thing about them is that they looked split into two, they looked bipartite, and this was electron microscopy. And so, eventually you got the crystals and they had a two-fold axis of symmetry parallel to one of the axis, which meant that the nucleosome had... was made up of two equal parts. Now, we knew it was made up of a H3H4 tetramer and 2H2H 2B dimers, so it was fairly obvious what it must be; but we still didn't know the order in which they were. Now, that paper was published in 1977, Finch et al, which was the first one. I don't remember everything that was in that paper, but the two-dimensional work in that paper as well as the three dimensional?
[Q] Think so.
Sorry, I can't remember it all. It was, anyway the work proceeded in stages and in parallel with this... in parallel with this we set out to crystallise the histone octamer and we couldn't get crystals or histone octamer, you needed high salt for this. But they did... the histone octamer was... it formed... it aggregated into helices which you see in an electron microscope. So we did a three-dimensional image reconstruction of the... of the histone octamer and the histone octamer turned out to be a bipartite made of... equal to two-fold symmetry which, as I remember, and Amos used the criteria for checking a two-fold axis and so on. So we... so we therefore had by different methods we had showed that the histone octamer existed and this was without DNA. And it was... it had ridges, in the two fold octamer which you could take 200 base pairs of DNA and wrap them round the ridges.
[Q] Yes.
So therefore we could postulate by different methods and... I spoke about this at a meeting where Hans Zachau was present. And Hans Zachau, he said, 'You haven't got a high resolution crystal structure'; I said, 'I know but we pieced it together from all these different observations.' And then he wanted to know where everything came from, which is a bit of everything because I don't remember whether we had the sequence but there was, in fact, cross linking studies by [Andrei] Mirzabekov, the Russian Group where they found by cross linking studies a very beautiful work... which residues on the H3H4, H2 H2B cross linked to the DNA by cross linking studies. So you could work out the order... along the DNA, the order of... the order of the histones, so I was... we were able in 1980 to postulate a complete structure for the nucleosome with the histones in the right order, all low resolution, all pieced together from different kinds. And that's what drove Hans Zachau a little crazy because he said, 'You haven't got a structure'. I said, 'No, we pieced it together from bits of evidence and this is totally consistent with it'. He said, 'I don't know if he said this, consistency isn't a proof.' And I said, 'You have to produce any other model which explains all these different observations.' So... so that was the histone octamer and the... and the histone... histone octamer and the nucleosome with low resolution.

Tim Richmond came in 1978 to try to work on the high-resolution structure, to try to get better crystals. And we had got better crystals by this time, thanks to Len Lutter's work. And they diffracted to quite high resolutions, about six or seven angstroms at the time. And with Tim Richmond, we solved the structure to seven... seven angstrom resolution, wasn't it, yes. In which you could see the DNA very clearly, the two turns of the DNA, and you could identify the different domains. You could see alpha helices just on the edge, you could see the alpha helices... of H3 straddling the dymer position on the DNA and so on. It was really rather... And so that was the nucleosome but Tim Richmond went off to Zurich... there was a hiatus in all this because a man called [Evangelos] Moudrianakis working at Johns Hopkins questioned and said it was all wrong, it was all rubbish. Because he had solved the structure of a histone octamer, he thought, and found that it was much bigger than the histone octamer we put into our model. And this, apart from anything else almost, it was published in Science, no less, it was done by a single heavy atom, it was also done by, oh, what's... the solution, what do you call solution averaging around, there's a word for it... beg your pardon, in X-ray crystallography.
[Q] Yes.
You take the shape, you carve out the shape. There's a man who worked it out, what was his name? Anyway, it was a standard technique and they claim to have done it.
[Q] Solvent flattening.
Solvent flattening, now, this is meant to be X-ray crystallography. One of the referees of that paper was Alex Rich and so it was published in Science, so our paper was regarded as wrong and the model regarded as wrong. And Alex Rich enjoyed a certain bit of schadenfreude because he'd been beaten on the tRNA, he enjoyed that, he told me he refereed it. He said, 'Well, you have to settle this.' And of course, the whole thing was rubbish because they'd done everything wrongly, the heavy atom was on a two-fold axis of symmetry and they hadn't realised it and solvent flattening. And so... and it almost cost Tim Richmond his job, he was... by this time he was going to move to Zurich where... where the Head of the ETH Zurich, you know, the Federal Institute of Technology, was a friend of Moudrianakis at the time. And said to this chap, was unreliable. Luckily, he... I interceded and said, 'Moudrianakis is wrong, totally wrong and we can demonstrate that.' And it turned out in the end and it was all solved by a chap at Pittsburgh, whose name I've forgotten; but he introduced... he was one of those who introduced solvent flattening. And so our nucleosome structure was right at that level but was quite one of those episodes that shows that you actually need, well, we had a perfectly good high-resolution structure but it was the... we didn't have heavy atoms at the time, did we?
[Q] No.
So that was the nuclear... nucleosome structure and also the higher order structure which was a string of nucleosomes. Tim went on to... Tim went on, yeah, so Tim... now, this was done, this was done by random... DNA extracted from chromatin. So 100... 147 base pairs was a... it was 147 plus or minus by two or so you couldn't control the exact length of the DNA. And we could see, within the crystal structure seven angstroms. The ends of the DNA of two different nucleosomes came together like this, so clearly it was dependent upon the length exact crystal, and we did shrink the crystals and so on to try and get them packed tightly. So what Tim did when... after he'd gone... after he went to Zurich was to use defined length DNA, of defined length... absolutely fixed length. And he used 146 and 147. And he crystallised it using exactly our crystallisation conditions, and he solved the structure. He could do it by ice water replacement because we had the seven angstrom structure, and he did that. I'm not sure that he used heavy atoms at all. And by that time also, by... by that time the people had introduced fast freezing, so you could preserve structures to high resolution and... Absolutely... well, it... it was important, he made a dimeric. And he made a dimeric, there are two ways you can make DNA, a DNA sequence dymeric with two-fold symmetry, that was important. You see, if you have a two-fold axis perpendicular to the DNA, there are two-fold axis in the plane of the bases and there's another two-fold axis between the bases. So therefore you could make... so that's why he made 146 and 147, which would mean that the two-fold symmetry would be in two different positions. So one would be totally symmetrical, the other case could be twisted to one side, he solved them both. And so eventually, this led to a high-resolution structure of the nucleosome. And that was ultimately published in about the early '90s, I think. I took quite a few years... and so it was quite an achievement. The... it's all based upon the basic idea on Kornberg's biochemistry and our crystallography were the foundations for that.

In 1979, I went to a meeting at Spetsai and came across two Swiss called Thoma, Fritz Thoma and Theo Koller, and they were taking pictures of... pictures of... electron microscope pictures of chromatin. And they were... but they weren't doing things systematically, and so I invited Koller... Fritz Thoma to come to the lab as a visitor. He came at a time when... I've forgotten it was just the time when Jenny Lightfoot, my secretary, came. And I just had some papers on DNA structure rejected by four or five referees and other papers rejected. I know this, that's how I fixed the date. They were... they were papers on DNA structures showing that the DNA structure was sequence dependent, which the referees David Davies, Strathern had all turned down, and JMB, but they couldn't... couldn't bear to have their beautiful DNA helix B form marred by these local variations in structure. I... I... at the time I was quite heavily involved in DNA structure, which is yet another story. And I tell you this... goodness, why do I tell you this.
[Q] The solenoid structure...
Oh, yes, it was... Fritz came, so the... so we did some systematic experiments, we'd already done some before, we repeated them in Cambridge. And it showed without any doubt that to fold up into this 300 angstrom fibre, some of the structures were 300 angstrom fibre, and the... this 300 angstrom fibre was present by electron microscopy in... people had reported these and these very crude preparations fixed us all. There's a lot of work by cell biologists looking at fixed chromosomes and so on, and you could see that the fibres were about 300 angstroms emanating out like loops. And sometimes they were 200, sometimes they were 100, they were... they could be depending upon the state of the... So we believe that 300 angstrom was a natural part of chromatin in the chromosome and so the... the 300 angstrom... so we made... and so, Thoma and Koller showed that you could make the 300 angstrom fibres using magnesium or salt, just in the way that John and I had done it before. But provided you had H1 present, if H1 was absent you found that they meandered across the grid, there was a string of nucleosomes but they weren't... they didn't have any direction, no directionality; so this proved the H1 was present. That paper again, it ran through a lot of trouble with referees people like [Pierre] Chambon and a lot of people working on all this. And they didn't believe it because some people claimed you could fold up without H1. Indeed, you can if you go to very high salt, very high magnesium, you will get a compaction, but it's not the 300 angstrom fibre. So... so that was 1979 and I guess that that together with the nucleosome helped... the Nobel Committee... decide that the structure was basically in outline at least correct. And so the... that's why they put in... so the citation which I said before was protein nucleic acids of biological importance; they didn't say viruses and chromatin.
[Q] Do you ever get the feeling that you had to work rather hard for your Nobel Prize?
 Well, I wasn't working for a Nobel Prize.
[Q] No, I know, but I mean there was a lot of input when you got back, there was an enormous work that they evaluated...
Well, you see, it's different; this is why this whole interview is very different. What we were doing, it wasn't... none of these things were discoveries in the simple straight forward sense, they were explorations. And on the way there you had to... we sort of invented the technology. And that's why I keep referring to the interplay of technology and... And although we call the technology methods, I suppose, and learning to do this. Because, as I said before, and this was, in fact, this proved to be a paradigm, the word was coming into fashion then, a paradigm, for how you do structural molecular biology. In fact I wrote it in my Nobel lecture, that you solve the structure in the outline and the large... large biological assembly by electron microscopy to low resolution. And you fill in the pieces; fill in the sub... protein sub units or even the RNA or DNA by X-ray crystallography of the pieces. And that, in fact, has turned out to be correct, that's the way things are going; except that with X-ray crystallography is now more and more powerful, you can crystallise much large objects. But... but that, in fact, is still the overall and so... this was a kind of payoff for the studies that Hugh... Hugh Huxley and I initiated, combining X-ray as I said, X-ray diffraction and electron microscopy. And indeed, in the early '70s, we ran summer schools, then went for several years ago, and later Hugh backed out and Tony Crowther and I ran the summer schools on these methods. And some of the people you know attended those; so it did have an influence in creating the subject. So I think we... so you had to work hard, yes, because we were developing techniques rather than doing spectacular experiments, which told the story in one go. What Hans Zachau wanted us to do was to crystallise a whole nucleosome, solve it more and go to four angstroms and then say voila, but it doesn't go... it doesn't work like that, you could probably do it now.

There's still models of the solenoid and there's still a controversy about whether it folds up into... a man called Woodcock... if you don't have H1, you get a zigzag fibre because the H1... And... And even at low salt you can get a zigzag fibre as well. So in the... sorry, at low salt, in the... in the presence of H1, you get a fibre which is zigzag; the nucleosomes and then there's another nucleosome and they zigzag like this. So he said, 'That must be a part of the nucleosome, of nucleosome five 300 angstroms', so he made a model called the zigzag fibre. And it doesn't explain the X-ray diffraction, and later, John... John William, who came in 1985, he published a paper on chromatin from chicken erythrocyte, which is a very stable chromatin and tried to fit the nucleosome into the fibre and we got a reasonable fit. But the... the conflict still continues to this day where people have produced new models. And in fact, just in last week's Nature, Tim Richmond has produced a new model of the chromatin fibre. It doesn't include H1, and so it's totally irrelevant, but he's built up such a head of steam that they have their news and views about it, so I guess I'm going to have to come out of retirement, so to speak, and I'll just field and go in again. H1 is absolutely vital, what he's done is to, this is highly technical, it's very current, so what you have to do is to work hard, you have to go working hard after your Nobel Prize. Because, Roger Kornberg said to me in great surprise when he came, he was sort of naive because he worked in straightforward biochemistry. He says, 'You not only have to discover the methods and the structures but you have to police them.' And you have to police them, because, you know, I... Shakespeare had it all... it was an unweeded garden that grows to seed, things rank and gross and nature possess it merely. And I'm afraid these things, it's like... it's like having weeds coming up and you have to knock off the heads of the thistles... you know, things like that. So... so, the... well, there's no doubt about the 300 angstrom fibre, it has to have H1. And so, what Tim Richmond did was to take his crystal structure, he was trying to work on what's called the chromatozome, that's the... but he never succeeded in crystallising it with the H1. So he's now... he built a model of the 300 angstrom fibre in which he took the crystal structure, his crystal structure, high resolution and he put in cross links assuming that the packing in crystal would reflect the packing in chromatin fibre without H1. That was... that was published in... that was published in Science a couple of years ago and then this last week, in Nature, he published a paper in Nature in which he crystallised a tetra nucleosome but without H1 again. And through various somersaults and tercifications, you know, that is the base changes and so like that, he managed to say, this is consistent with his model. It's quite wrong, in my view, and I'm thinking of writing coming out of retirement, as I said, in this field and writing a note about it... pointing out about H1. So there you are, the subject never ends; well, it does end, but I think we're still policing the field.

When we were working on tRNA, when we made heavy atom derivatives one of the derivates we made was adding lead, lead acetate, to tRNA crystals and when we looked for the lead in the crystals... we couldn't find any. We did find some positive peaks, we also found a lot of negative peaks which means either the density had moved or been removed and I wondered about that and I began reading about lead and I discovered that lead, actually I knew this because we'd used before, that the lead could hydrolyse the nucleic acids at pH7, that was pretty important. You had to go... if you went below pH7 it didn't work. Now this was well known, in fact I had totally forgotten that when we were working on Turnip Yellow Mosaic Virus, we had made empty shells of the virus by adding the lead acetate the very same lead acetate to the virus. And that chewed away the RNA. So it was known by quite a lot of people, and there was a kind of curiosity, later on when I raised... brought lead into the lab, Fred Sanger used it. He was actually sequencing RNA at the time and he could use lead to break it up in yet another way. He wanted to break up RNA into the random things. Now lead had this capacity because it has a PK of seven and what it does is to bring in basic, you know, OH groups which then extract protons from various enzymatic reactions, it isn't only on... they work on proteins as well. So I was mystified by this and then realised that what must be happening was that the lead must be... catalysing some chemical reaction in the tRNA and the peaks, the positive peaks probably did represent lead atoms, and the negative peaks represented regions where the chain had been cut and nucleotides removed. And so, I had a visitor, a man called Brian Hingerty at the time, Chris Looter had put onto this and indeed we found that this was the case. The lead was bound by certain sites and a passing chain of RNA close by was hydrolysing the cut and if nucleotides were removed, we actually had lots of nucleotides. So this meant that we had a metal enzyme, an RNA enzyme with metal in it. And so this aroused the interest of a man called Bill Scott, who was coming here, sort of as a post doc from the States and so he wanted to work on this lead enzyme, as we called it. It was quite important because at the time, it was a government... commission on pollution and lead was believed, of course, to bind the sulfuric ribs and proteins, so this shed a new light on how lead might act to produce damage in the brain. So in fact the Royal Commission of pollution took it up as a matter of fact, but I think the major effect is that it's the... with lead as tetra-ethyl being added to... it leads in the end to the production of more and more lead-free petrol, but that's a side issue. So when Bill Scott came, we did some more experiments together with Hingerty which showed that we could catch the lead by changing the pH, by lowering the pH we could catch the lead before it acted, then after it acted and so follow the change. But by the time that... and RNA enzymes, ribozymes as they are called, had just been discovered in processing RNA by Sydney Altman and Tom Cech in different systems, so by the time Bill Scott came, I thought that this lead enzyme is all very well, it's a kind of interesting, it's a curiosity and an oddity but it's not going to be something that you could really put to work seriously because you couldn't control... the lead would be taking up. I thought designing enzymes, putting in sites for lead, but I thought it would be best to work on the... on the structure of a natural ribozyme.

The natural ribozyme I chose to work with, the so-called 'hammerhead ribozyme' which is found in certain plant viruses which use them in rounds of replication and there were one or two other people working on it, so Bill Scott said he would work on that and in the end he... we prepared the hammerhead enzyme which was about 70... it's about the same size as the tRNA actually, and he crystallised it and out of the... follow this chain. Now there had been work in parallel by a man... [Dave] McKay at Stanford, now in order to stop the ribozyme acting, what he had done was to replace one of the chains of the hammerhead sequence by DNA rather than RNA. Now we tried to stop the action by changing the pH of our hammerhead RNA but in fact it was... they did do that but you couldn't get to such good crystals when we changed the pH, so in the end we made... a derivative of a sugar, one of the sugars of a nuclear side close to the scissile bond and that stopped it. It just made a mutant basically and it didn't change the structured crystals, were exactly the same. So we solved the structure, it was the first all RNA ribozyme to be solved and then for a little while we followed up its mode of action, it seemed to require magnesium. Magnesium required for folding up and we then pursued it, we postulated a mode of action, magnesium was fairly close to the scissile bond but when you have the following enzymatic reactions it's very hard to prove anything unless you can capture intermediate in the reaction. So what we did was, well there was fast freezings going around all over... was using electron microscopy, it was used in fast freezing of crystals in the liquid nitrogen so we fast froze the... tried to capture the reaction, so we found... changed forms on, when you added magnesium but before that we tried to... it was fast freezing with a low temperature, we tried to slow down the reaction so we could catch the intermediate, it's enzymology you see, but this time with RNA, molecular enzymology rather than protein. So we used the sort of tricks that enzymologists had used and we were able to produce a reasonable model of how magnesium brought in the hydroxyl group, magnesium can also bring a hydroxyl group to sort of lend us but magnesium requires a different pH. So we did a lot of studies on the pH control because magnesium has a pK of nine rather than seven, as lead does. So we proposed a mode of action which involved making a cyclic phosphate penta-coordinate in media so it's quite interesting enzymology really and I know enough chemistry. Well I knew about the extra ribonuclease and so on. Which acts on... so we followed that. So we proposed a mode of action and then Bill Scott... by this time I'd got very much involved with zinc fingers which I'll talk about later and Bill Scott and I had a problem, I think he would like to have stayed on in the lab, I had only one position, one post and I decided to concentrate on this zinc fingers because the end Schugman that I'll mention later was around at the time. But Bill Scott had built up a reputation, he had no difficulty getting jobs in the States, he'd married an English girl and so I think he thought he might like to stay in England. Well he'd like to stay in Edinburgh exactly... he was actually Scot... you know merry... of Scottish origin so he went back. So that was a kind of foray into RNA but it was quite interesting and I think it was quite important in its time.

I was head of structural studies at the time, Hugh [Huxley] and I were joint heads of structural studies, and after my Nobel Prize, about a year later, in about 1983 or '84, maybe later, Martin Roth, Sir Martin Roth, a professor of psychiatry came to see me and he said, 'Can you do something about Alzheimer's disease?' Well I'd heard of Alzheimer's disease and I thought it was a disease of the elderly. I'd read about it of course, it's about a 5% chance above the age of 65, but over 85 its 15%, it's serious. And moreover, my own mother, living in Durban, showed symptoms of Alzheimer's, so I felt duty bound to try to do something about it.
So I read about it and I read that it wasn't general degeneration of the brain, it was very specific. Certain parts of the brain degenerated first. They were the hippocampus which is involved in short term associations and also in short term memory, but it's mostly it's associations it's involved with. And the first neuropathological lesions are showing there. Now the neuropathological lesions are of two types that are found in post-mortem brains of people with Alzheimer's disease and there were studies going on in Cambridge, because Roth had come down from Newcastle and he had shown that there were basically two kinds of lesions, one were extra-cellular deposits called amyloid deposits, now amyloid is a very general term, there are many different proteins that can... misfold to form amyloids so it's really a tinctorial term because amyloid is defined, histologically, it's something which have add various dyes including primulin, it has apple green biofringence and red absorption primulin and there are other dyes as well, so it's... but nothing was known about amyloid structures. So I decided, I said, 'Well, I think we'll work on this', we'd had some experience, you know, of extracting chromatin and quite a lot of experience of what you might call crude biochemistry, setting up a problem and the question is how do you turn a disease into... a clinical problem into a biochemical or molecular biological problem. Well, the obvious things was to get this stuff out of the brain, get some of these lesions... and other people worked on amyloid fibers but I came to a conclusion that because they were extra cellular they may be not as directly involved as the intracellular tangles, this was the second lesion. Intracellular tangles as they were called consisted of filaments which from electron microscope studies of sections of post mortem brains, appeared to be filamentous and they appear to consist of two chains and a man called Kidd had called them paired helical filaments. These were inside the cell. So I thought, so I had to make a decision and from reading the literature and talking to people, I thought that we should go for this and I thought we should get them out, get them out of a brain, nobody ever extracted these things, so I said to Roth well we would do it but you have to send somebody along who knows how to work with brains. So he sent along a man called Claude Wischik who was a medical doctor and so we said we must get these tangles out of the brain and purify them but how do you... you know they're not enzymatic, it's just a structure so what I thought we would do is plan to take them out, try to find a chemical label or an antibody to label then and then as we would follow the process of extraction by the label at the same time we could look in an electron microscope to see what these filaments looked like. That was actually... in fact that was the plan of action and it worked. Some of the so-called experts had never got as far as... they were cross linking things inside the cell and trying to do things but the main thing is to get the stuff out, it's sort of obvious. So I started out in the managerial way and got Claude Wischik to come to the lab, Sydney opposed it, Sydney Brenner, he thought it was too far a diversion from the lab... and also he used to make fun of Martin Roth because he was quite an interesting figure, a fellow of Trinity, lots of stories and... old-fashioned type of professor, you see. But he had done very important work, counting the number of... correlating the extent of a disease with a number of fibrillary tangles and also the amount of extra cellular amyloid deposits. And of course, he was a great man... he was later elected FRS, which pleased him no end.

[Claude] Wischik didn't know very much, he'd never done any real biochemistry or chemistry, he'd been a medical student and what he'd worked on was catecholamines and drug action and things like that. So I said, 'Well, you must get them out' and I said, 'You must describe various recipes and we're doing things on sucrose gradings', the kind of things we did on... chromatin, I gave him papers to read and Jo Butler gave some advice but then... so what happened was that he started, now we couldn't extract brains because there was a belief, spread by Carleton Gajdusek who was a Nobel laureate that this was... that Alzheimer's was caused by a slow virus and therefore you couldn't... you had to work in special quarters so I managed to get a special centrifuge which Jim Gowans gave us from MRC private funds one in the lab and Roth set aside a place in the medical school and Wischik worked there and he would bring the preparations and for several months nothing happened and I was mystified. We couldn't even get any soluble material, and I was mystified because I was doing other things as well so I did watch on a daily basis, then I suddenly twigged. You see I said... the idea was to get patients who had just died, they were on the record so we kept tracks, there was lots of patients on the Addenbrooks Hospital's register so as soon as they died Wischik would conduct a post-mortem examination, he was the only doctor and to take the... extract the hippocampus which you can do by dissection. Of course, we had the patient's permission or else a relatives permission to do all this, as I first mentioned, it's rather tricky but some people don't want it, other people are quite glad to leave their brains if it's going to be of any medical use. And nothing happened. Now this was being done in the medical school so I didn't see what was happening. Then I suddenly twigged, and that goes back to the fact I'd once been a medical student. What you do when you dissect is you put things into formalin. Absolutely true and suddenly I woke up so to speak, of course that's what he would do because there was a brain bank where they were studying samples and they put things into formalin and of course he didn't know any chemistry or biochemistry so I nearly had a fit and I said what's the first thing... I assumed he took the brains out and froze them. And no, he was putting them into formalin and then you couldn't extract anything so sometimes having been a medical student is of some help, because I could suddenly remember the smell of formalin in the dissecting room. So I put a stop to that and then Wischik began to extract the brains and as we cut out the hippocampus and the idea was of course to get brains which were heavily... had heavy deposits of these tangles, you can see that in the... so we gradually began to build up supplies of the neuro-fibrillary tangles, we had amyloid fibres as well but decided not to work on those.

Tony Crowther at this time had started doing electron microscopy from the work on viruses, he actually started doing micro... but I think you, John, taught him how to use the microscope.
[Q] Probably did, yes.
You must have, but I can't remember, did you take pictures of the amyloid?
[Q] No, I think it was Tony.
It was Tony Crowther. So Tony Crowther and [Claude] Wischik worked on these fibres and we... and we developed an antibody in Cesar Milstein's group to label these. This was done by a chap called [Michal] Novak working with... so that we could then prove definitely the material that came out of the brains was the paired helical filament. Because you could see it on the microscope labelled by antibodies and at the same time the preparations of course where you could tell the... how much material you extract from the brain by antibody labelling and primulin labelling also was used at the same time. So in the end we were the first people to extract the paired helical filaments, and they did look like filaments in the microscope. Kidd was right, in the sections they did look like a pair, they aren't actually paired helical filaments they're really a single helix, bit like actin, you can describe them in different ways. As a single helix if you look at the... you can think of it in terms of two cross filaments but of course it's a single helix. So at this stage I got quite interested because I did devise the plan of action and I thought, well, now the next thing is to identify the protein, we get it out and the thing to do is to clone... cloning protein had just been introduced. Now there's no cloning going on in structural studies.

In 1986 I became director of the lab after Sydney... after Sydney Brenner and I had to take stock of what was in the lab. I discovered that a group of four people, whom Sydney had got in, as he called it, to solve the retina, one of them was a man called Michel Goedert now didn't know he was in the lab because Sydney had him in one corner and there were three others and they were going to solve the retina, it's a major problem in biology had Rogers and several others, and I don't remember their names and I wondered what to do with them, they were in a section called the director's section. Sydney had set up as well as the department, a thing called the director's section where various... he pursued some of his own interests as distinct from... from the cell biology division of which he had been the head.
[Q] The retina business has fizzled out?
No it hadn't... well, they were left dangling, they didn't know what to do. I was at a meeting in... I think it was an EMBO meeting and I saw they were handing out papers on brain and I started to look... papers on brain research and I saw a paper by Michel Goedert, MRC laboratory of molecular biology... on nerve growth factor which involved and... so I thought, 'Who the hell is he?' And I discovered he was one of Sydney's four retinologists and he was dangling, they didn't know what to do. Sydney had gone and no one had made any great start on it. So I said to him, 'Well, would you like to work on Alzheimer's?', and he was trained, he had done work in neurochemistry, his PhD was with Les Iversen in the MRC group, he was actually from Luxembourg and he had a degree in Switzerland in medicine, Basle, and had some training on neuroscience. And here he was, that's why Sydney recruited him, and the retina had just... had stopped. There was nothing... nothing had really been accomplished, not even really properly started, so I said well, we must clone this. So I went to talk to people to find out what was... Eric Barnard... there was in our neuro chemical unit, MRC, and I went to see Eric Barnard and I thought they I would... knew how to clone DNA, and how to make libraries, but turned out they didn't. So Michel said that he would do it, he would learn it. He was very good and he learnt it. So what he did was to... we had to first of all determine the protein sequence and so I enlisted... you know this was the time when I enlisted, I was doing it in a managerial way you see, so I could enlist people to do this. So John Walker at that time was in the PNAC as it was called, protein nucleic acid chemistry and he ran the protein sequencing so I enlisted him and so what we did was to get bits of the... we were purifying the protein and Wischik started chopping them up under our instructions, by proteases to find fragments, peptides and they were sequenced by John Walker and so we had our peptide and then once you have an amino acid sequence you can make a nucleotide sequence and then you can clone the gene. And Goedert cloned with the gene, Tony Crowther and Wischik had already published a couple of papers on the structure neither was a paired filament, they were twisted filament we knew the periodicity and now we were finding what it was made of and cloning the gene you got a sequence out that turned out to be a microtubular associated protein called tau, t-a-u, which had been cloned by Mark Kirschner who is a very distinguished cell biologist at Berkley and this was none other than tau. This was a natural protein but unnaturally aggregated into these paired helical filaments. This was the disease, it was a neuro degenerative disease caused by abnormal aggregation of a normal cell component. So later it was shown, we didn't know this at the time, that it was actually highly phosphorylated as distinct from the low phosphorylation you find in the foetal brain and also in the adult brain, phosphorylation state changes over the development, but we didn't know this at the time. But clearly it was tau and so this was the... and before that there had been at least half a dozen candidates for... possible candidates for the protein in which the paired filaments were made, actin was one of them, is was... this is because people, mostly neurologists and people really didn't know how to do practical biochemistry, they were trying to get bits and pieces, they're trying to break up the cells and so on, hippocampus cells, they didn't know how to extract the protein but they tried to create fragments out of it and this clearly showed that this was the main component. In fact, once we purified it was the only component, so we published a series of three papers in 1988 in PNAS which told the whole story of the structure, the cloning and the sequence.

I went on working on this, by this time I'd been scientifically interested... And of course, I'd made... I'd already begun to work on it in a way and so the project continued and I was involved with it from... this was till about 1990. There were all sorts of red herrings, one time it was this related to beta amyloid? There were all sorts of people in Australia called Masters and Beyreuther in Germany, do you know Beyreuther? Who got everything... who got things wrong that one time they said it was the same thing the amyloid and the... they were the same. In the meantime, later, Beyreuther together with [Benno] Müller-Hill, Beyreuther and Müller-Hill cloned... but Michel Goedert had also cloned beta amyloid. He didn't publish the sequence and there was a lot of people... I got very much involved in the whole sort of neurological group, I found it fascinating. But so, we did do some other work on trying to understand the relationship of beta amyloid to... to the tau because they're both manifestations and are they related? Now most people believe and still believe that the extra cellular deposit that beta amyloid is what... is the cause of the disease, now cause can mean many things and either in an Aristotelian sense is it the ultimate cause or the proximal cause or the efficient cause. I did quite a lot of reading with Michel who's a... Michel Goedert who is a very well educated European and he had a proper classical education, speaks many languages. Well, I thought that the paired filaments were the efficient cause, they are the cause of cell death. That's what's in the nucleus and they cause their death but other people did experiments to show that if you... by now you could make vast quantities of beta amyloid and you apply them to neuroblastoma cells or different kind of cells which you extract from brain or transform cells sometimes, you can kill the cells. But they had huge quantities and that wasn't the real proof. And then there was another school who believed there was oxidative damage and there's still a controversy about it. I'm still pretty clear that the two things are chemically linked. In 1990 I proposed the link. You see, when the beta amyloid fibres are made, beta amyloid it's actually a breakdown product of what's called a beta amyloid pre-cursor protein which is a cell membrane protein. And this is... so what happens is that there's a cleavage, several sets of cleavages which are part of the normal development but if the cleavage takes place in the wrong place, then you can get these beta amyloid deposits. And it was found there was a genetic link for producing... Alzheimer's disease which was related to one of the enzymes which cuts the beta amyloid... cuts the amyloid pre-cursor protein. Now... so they therefore thought that's... that was the proof of the genetical link. Now what I proposed in 1990 and wrote it in a paper was to say that indeed there is a link but when you chop... when you cut the amyloid pre-cursor protein you have a C-terminal tail which is present inside the cell and this C-terminal tail could be the link. And I wrote it and proposed it, but I couldn't continue it, most of the field still believed in the beta amyloid. But the... in 2001 a group in Texas showed that the C-terminal tail goes into the nucleus and interacts with the protein that's actually likely to be something which is in the gene so that story isn't settled yet but I believe that the beta amyloid is secondary to the production of the disease. It's not actually the main cause. It's highly controversial.
[Q] Can you see what causes phosphorylation?
No, now that's pretty important. People in the Sates showed that the highly phosphorylated... and there are lots of serine proline sites which are seats for phosphorylation. Serine or threanine and there have been lots of studies of all this. It would take several hours to tell this whole story. But Michel Goedert is carrying on with this, but he's mostly... and his wife, who's called Maria Spillantini who came to work on the medical school on the subject and the... but he's also working on Parkinson's disease. So what I did was basically as a result of all this and I was director at the lab, and I later created a new division of neuro science in the lab. When I talk about my directorial activities this met with quite a lot of opposition from certain people in the lab. I might as well say it now, two people that shall be nameless, who were sort of gadflies, they were gadflies with Sydney Brenner and when I spoke about Alzheimer's, or rather I spoke about... I had a note from one of them who said, 'Are we going to turn the lab into a department of applied molecular biology?' Because I'd made a talk at the annual lab talk saying that would be interesting to do, if you can see a potential application in medicine, or biomedicine and why not might as well choose it, on this occasion. Then the Alzheimer's was rather frowned on. These were purists in the lab who thought we should only be working on these very, high important problems and I thought it was pretty important that we, like you know, say the development of the fly or the C-elegans and so on. I thought it was important that if we could see an opportunity to do it, and so I... which I still believe and so this would take another whole hour to describe all the ramifications of all this will still continue. But I didn't do any more on it after 1990 because by this time the zinc finger work also was now beginning to flourish so I had to make a choice. That's my personal scientific career, so that was the Alzheimer's. But we... so we now have a rather good group, small group and we reckoned as part of the Alzheimer community, there's a huge number of people working with Alzheimer's disease as you can imagine because it's... 15% of us are going to get it if we live over 80.

I decided in 1982 that... by which time we had worked out how DNAs packaged in chromosomes, at least at the first couple of levels. The nucleosome and then the higher order structure, the 300 angstrom fibre and that of course applied to bulk chromatin. But already in the last few years, before that, people had been exploring chromatin by enzymes seeing if there were patches which were... part of them which were accessible to enzyme actions and so on. And the concept grew out of what was called active chromatin. That was chromatin in which the DNA was either being transcribed, turning into RNA or about to be transcribed, poised to transcribe. And the way this was explored was by... as I say, by enzymes, particularly by DNAs one and so on. And there were the beginnings of understanding, a question was that also people found that there were HMG proteins, another class of protein which were found in 300 angstrom fibre a particularly in embryonic forms and so on. But basically I thought that the bulk understanding, at least for the first two levels, and there were higher levels in which the 300 angstrom fibre could be folded but I couldn't see how that was accessible. So I became intrigued by active chromatin and I looked for a system, this was deliberate, I looked for a system, I read the literature, on transcription obviously and also on transcribing chromatin and I looked for a system which we could access biochemically, but to produce material on a large scale for structural studies. And I read about the work of Roeder, that's Bob Roeder who was then at the... St Louis in the USA and Don Brown who was then at the Carnegie Institute of Washington, which happens to be Baltimore, oddly enough, on the system of transcription which is used to make 5S RNA and Xenopus. Xenopus the frog, as a biologist insist on calling it a toad and I'll call it a frog. It's a South African toad. It is a very important animal in biological studies, there's a whole groups work on Xenopus, it's one of the classic animal models. The 5S RNA genes are switched on by a transcription factor called TF3A, TF3A is transcription factor A of polymerase three, there are three different polymerases in your carriers. Bacteria only have one, but there are three different ones all closely related but they are used for different classes. Class two is what makes ordinary; switches on ordinary genes which make... are messenger RNA... polymerase three is what makes RNA which is the final product, such as RNAs going into the ribosomes and so on, and the... so although it wasn't in the main class of... but this is one which is accessible because they showed that there were large quantities of TF3A in immature Xenopus oocytes. And it happened that in our lab was Hugh Pelham newly arrived, he is now the deputy director and he'd worked with Don Brown and he's shown that TF3A was the same as a storage protein, identified by some French work as 40 kilodaltons in size which was thought to be a storage protein for 5S RNA, so this was a real conundrum. The TF3A was both a transcription factor but it also bound to the product of transcription 5S RNA itself. So it bound both the 5Ss RNA gene and the 5S RNA product. Well, we found out it's only in 2003, two years ago, we found how it bound to RNA, actually that's yet another story, it's a quite important postscript to it all, but I'll come to that. But this intrigued me, but the thing that intrigued me most, or rather that attracted me most, was there seemed to be large quantities and... we had Xenopus in the lab because John Gurdon was in the lab so these were taken from oocytes and the way that you do this is that you can extract the material... you stimulate, you put in factors which will promote ovulation in the female frogs and then what the experts do would be to actually cut him open and take out the oocytes, extract them and you can sew them up again, apparently that's what Gurdon did, but cruder people simply kill the frogs and take out the oocytes, so you can get large quantities.

I had a new research student coming, a chap called Jonathan Miller who had a degree from Yale and also a higher diploma in biophysics from them, he turned out to be a very good mathematician, he landed up... it's an interesting story himself, he used to walk around with books on abstract mathematics, I don't know if you remember him, John? He could never decide what he wanted to do and just as an aside I discovered later on he'd been enrolled as a PhD student here in Cambridge and I was his supervisor, but in his third year he was also enrolled in Princeton physics without telling me... because he still then couldn't decide, I think he's rather sorry now because he could get onto a good thing if he had realised where this was going to lead. So he had had practical experience although he was good at mathematics, both his parents were doctors and they wanted him to work in medicine or biomedicine so he'd spent every summer in the last four years working in labs so he knew how to do bio chemical operations but he was very terribly messy, very messy, one of the messiest people I've ever known... never cleared up, which figures in the story later. So I said, well, the thing to do, you can follow the recipe and there should be... and so we began to make TF3A, there were recipes for this and it was interesting, none of the people later on, Louise Fairall and Daniella joined... and they couldn't bear themselves to kill a frog so I had to pith the frogs and kill them because I used to do that when I was a medical student and extract the oocytes. So they followed the recipe and they got very low yields, looking at gels where you could run the protein on, it was all described by Reuter and Brown and the binding sites. We got very low yields so there was clearly something wrong with it, so I thought obviously the extraction procedure they describe are very inefficient, but you see those two were molecular biologists and they work with gels and they work in microgram quantities, we wanted to work in milligram quantities, which we knew to be there. Because Hugh Pelham had shown me gels which show that there must be able to be milligrams... you should be able to get dozens of milligrams from a set of ovaries which were ovulated. So now we were going to change the buffer conditions and now I looked at their buffers and what they had done was to use EDTA which is a chelating agent which takes up metals, which was very sensible to do because if you have any metals around, you're working with RNA or DNA they tend to hydrolyse the nucleic acid. So they put in EDTA.
Now the sequence of the protein wasn't known, the sequence of the gene wasn't known, TF3A, but amino acid analysis was known, was known to contain quite a lot of cysteines and histidines. Now cysteines, there were a lot of... there were... about 20 cycsteines in it so they assumed there must be SS bridges in it, so they put in reducing agents, dithiothreitol to protect it and so the... now both of these things were removing metals, because dithiothreitol because of the sulphur groups in it will also, and in fact has a binding constant for metals, for zinc which turned out to be the metal, was ten to the ten, ten to the eleven for other metals as well. So what they were doing, and we showed that what was happening was the... we were trying to make a complex of the TF3A and the DNA target, we knew the sequence of the DNA target, everything was known, it was well set up problem, the things associated, so we gradually changed the buffer conditions and I came to the conclusion that there couldn't be any SS bridges because it didn't make any difference. And indeed, sorry I won't describe everything, let me go back a bit. I thought there'd be a test if there's SS bridges, so I knew enough chemistry to know that sodium borohydride was a very strong reducing agent so I got Jonathan to add sodium borohydride to the TF3A, it had no effect at all and this meant that there couldn't be any SS bridges in it. So the only thing it could be would be a metal. And so what we did was to gradually omit the dithiothreitol, start omitting EDTA, we began to get higher yields. That was just... but by this time I deduced there must be a metal there. So then to find out what the metal was we did send the material to a lab in medical school who were involved in, had absorption spectral photometry to test metals in different specimens, but the sub wasn't pure enough, we had to purify it still further... so what we did eventually to... it's quite a long story, was to start adding EDTA specifically, titrating it and using other collating agents for example phenthramine which takes out copper and other things which take out iron to see if they acted. But the EDTA and these things, we found that... and then added metals back to the preparation that Jonathan was doing, titrate metals back and we found that zinc and only zinc... when added back was able to bind back to... in other words, it restored binding to DNA which was the target and also to RNA.

We still had to find out what the structure was, there was no sequence, there was no amino acid sequence and no... it hadn't been cloned. Trying to recall exactly what happened. But it was a 40 kilodalton protein. Now it was known from Brown's work that it's bound to a region of about 50 base pairs. That's quite a long region DNA for 40 kilodaltons is 340 amino acids and this bound to 50 base pairs which is a really long stretch, it's about 100... more than a 150 angstroms long. So this had to be some kind of linear program. Now Brown, that's Don Brown, had shown that this 40 kilodalton protein could be broken down by adding proteolysis. Was quite common in those days to look for domains in proteins and you could chop off a 30 kilodalton domains which still had DNA binding and... so I got Jonathan to start doing systematic proteolysis experiments to see if we could reduce the length of the protein and still get binding. So he actually did it systematically, we used trypsin and chymotrypsin and the... I was looking for... what I was looking for was some kind of domain structure. I thought it might be made up of lumps of protein something of that sort, but one day I noticed on his desk, because he never cleared up his desk, a lot of gels as a result of those experiments, I could see that you could see that you could break things down to a rather small amount, which will be about three kilodaltons, but there were little tell-tale bands in-between on the way down. So he told me he'd spoken to Hans Christian Thorgerson, the protein chemist... he said you always get that when you do protein digest but I said they looked to me pretty regular so I said, 'Plot them, measure them and plot them out on the log scale' and it was clear that they were three kilodalton intermediates and a three kilodalton final product. So this meant the thing is made up of repeating domains, repeating domains and if you... if you look at the 30k then you see it was clear that there would be about ten domains of three kilodaltons each. And so I was pretty sure it had to be a repeating structure of some kind and also the repeating structure would explain how it could bind to a long stretch of DNA, there would be repeating units. So then we were stuck at this stage and I was waiting and Brown and Roeder were working on this, Brown particularly, and then the sequence was cloned by Roeder and the sequence was published. I didn't know this but Jonathan Miller and Hans Christian Thorgerson had advanced knowledge of this sequence and they played around. When the sequence was published I looked at the sequence and by eye I could see repeating units. And repeating units had histidine and cysteine in it. They're common ligands for zinc, remember I told you they had that. They're also ligands for iron and for copper. So... it was pretty easy to interpret, I went to Andrew McLachlan who was a computer theorist and put it onto the computer and did computer searches and showed that there indeed... of the 340 bases... about 300 of them, just under 300, actually about 280, could be put onto... into... sorted out into nine repeating units of about 30 amino acids each and each one contained two cysteine's and two histidine's. And that's exactly what you need to kill zinc because zinc is tetrahedrally coordinated. I mean I knew enough chemistry for that, it was fortunate knowing some chemistry as that had come into play, that's ordinary classical chemistry that I'd learnt, the ligands for zinc, so it fitted very well. So we wrote a paper, published in EMBO journal in 1985, the work was started in '82. Now while this was going on other people were working on all this. A group working in transcription, Hanas and Bogenhagen and so on published about there were two zincs they had founded. This was published just about the same time as us. But they... just a little bit before. We already knew that... there would be two zincs, you looked at their preparations and they were using EDTA so it was a... the reason they were using rather small quantities of EDTA and so... and we had nine different ones and Ray Brown also, who'd been in the lab, was now working in Heidelberg, also... had studied with a man called Patrick Argos did you know them when they were in Heidelberg? Beg your pardon, Patrick Argos?
[Q] Yes, Argos.
But who's group where they in?
[Q] Well, I think at that stage Chris Sander...
Chris Sander, yes. Well, they also, they were simply doing computer analysis so the... we sent our paper in to the EMBO Journal and I know for certain that John Tooze showed them the paper and they quickly wrote up a paper, their paper, which is just purely amino acid analysis and they had twelve repeating units, they hadn't understood... because they hadn't understood about the zinc binding, they took Hanas's result about two... because they hadn't understood so they assumed that the repeating units were like the florets, petals of the flower, and the zinc was putting all these at the edge, they hadn't any real idea that these things were linear at all. Anyway, they published their paper... the reason why I dwell on this because they sometimes regard themselves as co-discoverers of zinc fingers but they had no... they hadn't done really anything much, just computer analysis. And they indexed it, they indexed it on the 39-repeating unit but the abstract says 30. Published in FEBS Letters, so... so... I went to a meeting, 1985 that year, this was published about, just 20 years ago and I heard Roeder speaking when I was there, he said we've been sitting on this sequence for a whole year and this fellow Klug, that's what he said, he didn't know I was there, told us what it was. It's... I think it's very simple, it's because Roeder and Brown brought up as molecular... and biochemists don't know any chemistry. And later on, this was repeated, because when zinc was found another class, which were later called zinc finger proteins by Ron Evans, he actually made a model in which the zinc was accorded with six ligands, and of course zinc is not, it doesn't make six ligands... so there's some virtue in knowing some chemistry.

We published this paper and it seemed to us that we got repeating units and we thought that each unit would bind about five base pairs because there was an interact of 50 pairs, when we published the model. So we showed... so what we proposed was the units folded up, it was two zincs, two cysteines and two histidines, pethidine and you folded up into a compact unit, a module. And so what we had discovered was not just a new fold, because this was a new fold, we hadn't worked out the three dimensional structure, depend upon zinc and the... and there were also... in the sequence, when we noticed in the sequence, we noticed there were three conserved hydrophobic... amino acids, in different positions in the 30 amino acid unit and so McLaughlin's computer analysis showed that there was a link of five amino acids, 25 amino acids and within these 25 amino acids there were in fact seven conserved residues, two cysteines, two histidines, and three conserved hydrophobics, large hydrophobics like phenylalanine, leucine and sometimes methionine, and tyrosine, all large hydrophobic and it was pretty clear that these things must be involved in stabilising this very tight module. You see it's a very... I called it a module, or a structural unit because when you chopped it up with a nuclear... with proteases, this is what was resisted. There were no cuts within the units they were between the units, that was the linker. We were able to define the whole notion of a new principle of DNA recognition, not only a new fold but this was a set of linear domains strung together in a polar fashion, a tandem fashion, which bound a long stretch of DNA. And none of the other transcription factors, people who worked on, worked like this to return to transcription factors, of course a lot of people were working on them, other systems particularly in bacteria and in all cases they work as dimers, homodimers, they bind... they make use of the symmetry of the DNA structure, which is two-fold and moreover the sites which they bind are inverse repeats of sequence, palindromes, which of course have two-fold symmetry, so the helix turned helix, the homo domain, all these have these.
So this was very clearly a new principle and it could bind any sequence of DNA so I actually wrote in the paper at the time... words to the effect, I think I cribbed it from... I didn't want to write a sentence... it would not surprise us, that's a [Francis] Crick fact of sentence, but not surprise that this type of recognition of DNA would be found in many other species other than an lowly frog you see, I didn't write that, I said, 'It would be very likely to occur elsewhere', likely to be used elsewhere. Well, within months papers began to appear. Of course the Brown-Argos paper appeared but they hadn't... they had simply got 12 units and they hadn't really grasped the point about zinc with each unit and so there was a paper on drosophila, a paper from Herbe d'Acula, they wrote and said they found sequences like this, cripple in drosophila Rendite had found it, was it an end rail and things like that, they had all these... they were cloning genes everywhere and within a year the numbers had grown and we now know that 3% of the human genome contained fingers of these TF3A type, that's two cysteine's and two histidine's.
Well, the word 'finger', we used the word finger loosely in the lab, I called it a structural unit, a binding unit, a mini DNA binding domain, but we called it like fingers because we thought of them as fingers gripping and grasping the DNA and each finger, we didn't know how many base pairs we had at the time, that came later from crystal structures, we thought a small number of bases in each finger would bind a small number of bases and because each finger has structurally the same... has structurally the same structure, they were modules in the proper sense of the word that architects use. Unfortunately, the word got debased when you think of the Apollo mission where they had the moon module, moon module is not... totally... it's different part of the thing, but the word module should mean, used to mean the thing is built according to a certain plan, like a building or so on. And still used in that way, after all mathematics is something modular for whatever or multiples of four... so I still call them modules, so the fingers were physical modules, physical units. And I say it now, but unfortunately the term... people began finding zinc-binding sites in other proteins. Now it was known, many of the hundred proteins already known to contain zinc and most of them are enzymes, but it means the alcohol dehydrogenase, which has a zinc site which is bound by four cysteine's, is part of... it's a structural site, zinc is used structurally. Of course, zinc is used structurally and of course zinc is found in quite a number of proteins, enzymes where it's used as a catalytic centre where its four-coordinated but it can adopt a fifth water molecule which is active but this is... but normally zinc is a safe metal.
People used... I started getting invited to meetings by... by organic people and I would always be asked, why zinc? Well, the answer is very simple, zinc has... no other oxidation state. It's very stable so I got to the end of getting... saying it's a dull, grey, boring metal, a safe metal. Now, copper and iron are more glamorous, they're coloured, but iron you see is in involved in ferric and ferrocene and it's involved in, in fact it's used in proteins involved in redox reactions and copper, of course, is found in many proteins which are used in electron transfer reaction. So again, you have more than one oxidation state. And so I did... so this was a, I think, an important discovery. But as I point out, people misunderstand it, we didn't set out to discover the fingers, we didn't know they were there, they simply emerged from exploration which is one of the reasons I find I'm talk... a bit of a digression, there when people say you have to write these new plans, nowadays when you have to, I think it's beginning to be unfashionable... it was in the fashion to write a proposal where you had a hypothesis that you were going to test, you see. I know that the MRC and the EPSRC and people like that began to put in... well, this was... we would never have got a grant... we were trying to explore what these things where you see. So I think it's important to stress that just trying to be curious about something can lead, some phenomenon you have to know... trying to understand it can actually lead unexpectedly to quite important results.

We tried to crystallise the whole... there were various attempts... try to crystallise the whole of TF3A and also the TF3A bound to 5S RNA, when I talked about the... binding there's a 42 sediment... 42 S-particle, and a 7S-particle sets, sedimentation particle which are found in the ribosome, these are storage proteins, like the TF3A and so we tried to crystallise the 7S-particle, 42S was deemed to be too big and failed over many years, Louise Ferrel now joined the group and tried for a long time. In the meantime, Daniela Rhodes, Kyoshi and the guy in the lab had shown that... another transcription factor, in fact a SMI-five which is involved in yeast mating type, it switches on HO in the nuclease, they had found that... they'd shown that the DNA binding domain is enough to carry the... this very large protein to its target and so it was absolutely essential that this was... and other people began to show similar things. So these were a new class of DNA binding domains and that's what the zinc fingers are. And the numbers began to mount. Typically, proteins contain groups of fingers, maybe but usually not more than three or four in any one rung. But there is a protein called X-fin which has 37 zinc fingers. It's involved in Xenopus but it's divided up into groups... six or seven groups, I've forgotten now... which the discoverers called hands you see. Nobody knows what that does, so the numbers are growing.
But I want to return to other so-called zinc fingers and get them out of the way. Chambon in France and Ron Evans at the Salk were looking at a certain class of enzymes, transcription factors, involved in switching on nuclear transcription factors, these are nuclear genes and these are ligand driven, these are steroid and thyroid hormones, oestrogen receptor... and they found that the sequence contained... you had things in the sequence that looked like zinc fingers but you could... they had a fold of about the right shape, instead of two cysteines and two histidines, they had four cysteines so they... well... as I said Ron Evans didn't know enough chemistry but I think he read my paper and he thought it must be a zinc finger, you see... and Chambon tried to disprove that these things contained zinc by replacing the two cysteines by two histidines and of course the thing didn't fold up because it didn't have the right geometry, but there was a long story. Anyway, it turned out this is what they called 'class II zinc fingers'. And they are C4, four cysteines, but it turned out they're not like fingers at all because they do fold up, they have two helices in them, one helix is the recognition helix, that's like TF3A the other helix is the kind of strut but they operate as dimers and they bind two dimeric DNA sites. So they belong to quite a different category and they're not... although they use zinc and it turned out there are many other protein designs which involves zinc, use zinc to fold up. And the reason why they use zinc is very obvious.
In the nucleus, which is a strong reducing agent, you can't use SS bridges so zinc is used to help fold up proteins. Zinc in the next commonest metal to iron in the nucleus, and in fact I was able to suggest a diagnosis for a disease... I kept being invited to meetings you see, for zinc, and it turned out that a whole lot of people working in bio... as I've said, bioinorganic chemistry and at one meeting I heard about an Egyptian doctor called [Ananda S] Prasad who in the 1950s worked in Iraq and he found that certain young men suffered from not passing through puberty properly. Girls were inaccessible of course because of the culture and they... I heard this from somebody working at Georgia Tech, at a meeting and he said that when they brought up rats, female rats, on a zinc deficient diet they could never breed, never ovulate. And it was obvious what is was, they need zinc to fold up the nuclear receptor protein... if you haven't the zinc that can't have an oestrogen receptor and they don't pass through puberty... female rats don't develop, don't mature. That was happening in Iraq. Now the reason it's happening in Iraq is that the soil is very much, it's a clay soil, it's in the marsh areas of Iraq, the so-called marshes which Saddam tried to drain... or did drain, and so these clay... absorbed minerals and so they're zinc deficient and so they tested that and they are zinc deficient so it serves them right. Another nice little story how this throws light on a disease. So zinc is an essential part of the diet, as we all know that, but now we know why. And certainly, it is essential for passing through puberty.

The first thing we did was to, I had by this time introduced two dimensional; NMR into the lab, I'd recruited, against the opposition of some of my cryptographic colleagues, NMR structure determination, got a man called David Neuhaus to come here. In the lab... I wanted to do this for many years while Sydney [Brenner] was director but he couldn't bring himself to do it, he didn't really... himself feel the need for it. Also, the crystallographers object to that, they used to say... well, can you solve a structure more than 20,000 daltons? And of course, you couldn't at that time. They said, 'Well, that's not of interest to us.' But once I was director I found some allies, Tom Creighton for example wanted to know the structure, different folding forms, intermediate forms of BPTI used in the folding of a protein, so I had a bit of support in the lab I couldn't one sidedly just fix the... the lab is... well I was director but acted more like a chairman. So I did recruit structural studies so we had David Neuhaus in the laboratory and so we decided to solve a structure of a zinc finger.
Now, at that point I made an unwise decision, I said, 'Look, we're not going to need to know the structure of a zinc finger, we need to know how the zinc fingers are joined together by this linker.' It seems to be that it would be highly flexible and we didn't know that, so I suggested he solve the structure of a two-zinc finger construct which we made, two-zinc fingers is Y5. Unknown to me at the Scripps Institute Peter Wright had... was working on the structure of the single-zinc finger, so they published first and the NMR structure of a zinc finger showed very clearly what we had proposed, that the zinc was holding the two parts of the protein together and the two cysteines came off a beta sheet of two turns, two beta strands and the two histidines came off a helix, three amino acids apart, we could predict that, I could see that something like that was about to happen. And David Neuhaus republished later showed that the two-zinc fingers were totally independent solution, you could solve them as two separate fingers and you could work out their different orientations from the NMR and that covered the whole range, so what he proved was the two fingers had identical structures, to within less than a fraction of an angstrom, though the sequences were somewhat different. Of course, they have seven conserved residues and so it was I had basically predicted, zinc bound to the two cysteines, the two histidines and the three hydrophobic acids formed the kind of core, structural core, so... and Neuhaus showed that the linker was flexible so therefore it could end position itself on any sequence of DNA.
And then we also showed by... we'd also... before that I've got to say we'd already showed by EXAFS that the environment of the zinc was two cysteines and two histidines, we knew that from EXAFS, that happened in Manchester. We did this in Daresbury, by EXAFS, but then we still didn't have a crystal structure of the zinc finger with DNA and by this time a lot of people had joined in this field. Jeremy Burke had proposed a structure based upon the idea of three conserved hydrophobic groups and cysteines and histidines and based upon the structure, pherodoxin, Jeremy was at Johns Hopkins, proposed a structure which turned out to be basically correct in outline and the NMR structure showed that he was correct, so it's not often that you get a theoretical direction but he used the three conserved hydrophobics and showed that they packed... that preceded... the NMR work. I must say, by this time, a lot of people had joined in and Carl Pabo who was then the MIT, and there was one that Chris Lock was working on, transcription factors together with a young man called Nikolai Pavletich, a student who has then gone on to great heights, solved the structure of the... complex of the three-zinc finger peptide from a gene called ZIF268 which was a DNA binding domain. The DNA binding domain was ZIF268 which was an early response gene and showed very clearly that the three fingers bound in the major group of the DNA, they wound and wound the major group and that each finger bound to three bases and... three successive bases so that the three fingers bound to three base pairs. And so it's one finger recognises and binds to three base pairs. These were all on one strand of the DNA and that the fold, of course, the fold was a tremendous mark that the fold was NMR work, that was correct. Now, the three sites on the helix is the recognition helix, and positions minus one, position three and position six on the helix, are where the amino acids are, so you then can of course generate diversity by putting different amino acids onto the three positions. But the structures showed that it couldn't be alphabetically, because there isn't enough, and so we... so for example, the structure showed that although one... if we had a guanine it could be recognised, a guanine in the DNA sequence it could be recognised by either arginine or by a lysine. That was if you had them in positions one or three of the triplet, but if you had position two in the triplet then you had to use a histidine but there's not enough room for a long residue to get in.

So people began to try to work out a stereochemical code and Jeremy Burke began doing site-directed mutagenesis, changing one residue at a time. Changing one residue in the DNA, the DNA target and then looking to see what amino acid he had to do to replace that. Now that seemed to be a very laborious process so at this stage... I decided that wouldn't be the way you could do it, it would be much too complicated, much too difficult because of something that I knew from way back and I mentioned this yesterday, that the structure of DNA was dependent upon the sequence and I realised that the... particularly what brought home to us was that the tightness of packing, so there was a histidine position two of the helix rather than the guanine, those kind of structural chemistry considerations. So that time in the laboratory, and one of the advantages of being here, there's all those sort of things are going on around you and Greg Winter had introduced a way of finding antibodies binding sites by what's called phage display and what's done is a selection method... what's done is if you want to find out... have a particular target and want to find out what the sequences of a structure of a well-known protein which binds to it you would then just make a repertoire, you would change a lot of the binding... you would generate a repertoire of different versions of the same protein and see which one's bound most strongly. We go through several rounds of selection and the way this was done to implement it was done on phage display in other words what you did, this was done by Winter, but based upon the work of a man called Smith who was doing this for peptides rather than for proteins, you had bacterial phage, bacterial virus and you fused to it... you fused to it... the gene or part of the gene for the zinc finger, the DNA sequence for the zinc finger and you made thousands of versions of it. 107 or 108 versions of it and then you had the target and you then selected by infinity, making some conditions more and more stringent and you picked out the selection method. So I decided that, although we talk about making tailor-made proteins to recognise DNA, really, it's a selection process, they're not tailor-made they're selected. And so, the Yen Choo whose name figures here for the first time joined me as a graduate student in about 1990 and I put him on to start off the site-directed mutagenesis and that was clear that this was going to take a very long time. And then Greg Winter was doing this is the lab so I thought that we would really do it by phage display. Now phage display is all right, you put an antibody, so you see you have the sequence... let's go back to phage display with an antibody, you have the antibody at the tip of the bacterial virus and you have the gene inside. You have the DNA sequence for that inside, so it's like a B-cell in immunology. So you select, you select on the phage, and with a large library, and then you find which phage's bind and then you look at the sequence of the DNA inside that tells you what the amino acid sequence is. So that's a very beautiful system. Sydney Brenner was trying, also jumped into this but he was trying to do it with lambda and other people tried to do it with whole cells. This was called repertoire selection technology, it's very standard now, but we were fairly early on this.

So Yen Choo started using... perio-phage display to try to build up... a repertoire of sequences of zinc fingers which would bind given sequences of DNA and the way we did that was to fix... to take the Z1F268 which we based it on and change the middle DNA triplet into the desired binding site. And so, we had two fingers, fingers one and three, binding to the DNA sites one and three and the DNA target, that was put into the DNA sequencing... the DNA binding site, subsite that should be, into subsite and then we varied the DNA sequence just because we didn't know how representative the crystal structure was, in all nine positions of the recognition helix. And we found miraculously that all the selected binding sites all basically we got consensus of binding in the positions minus one, three and six which was rather very gratifying. But you see you have to know a structure. Now these libraries weren't so big as we were varying... we were varying nine positions and our libraries they only had, at that time, 107 or 108 members. But later on, we built bigger libraries and varied a smaller number of sites, only four sites, and not just positions minus one, three and six, but minus one, two and six. Minus one, two, three and six and I'll come to say how site two was involved.
But in the meantime, in the laboratory, Louise Ferrel who was the assistant of Daniela Rhodes and they started working on zinc fingers and Louise tried to crystallise a zinc finger peptide. There were only two-zinc fingers, it's from Tram Track which is a gene in drosophila which was being worked on by Andrew Travis in one of the other divisions. And Louise managed to crystallise this, binding to DNA and the structure was solved and published in Nature in 1993. Which was about 18 months after the pair position paper. Now what this showed were two things. The one was it broadened the amino acids which would bind cells: for example, it showed that you could... that if you had an adenine which wasn't represented in the Z1F268 structure, then you had to have an asparagine to bind to it and so it extended the code. But the other thing it showed very clearly, something we had suspected from our phage display, but we found with our phage display experiments, there were certain positions which we couldn't determine because it was clear they were being coupled to something else. And so, the structure not only gave us some new elements in the stereochemical code but solved the mystery. What the structure showed very clearly was that, from position two in the recognition helix there was an interaction with a site on the second strand of the DNA which was part of the... sorry base of the second strand of the DNA which was part of the subsite of the preceding finger. So in other words there was a... it was an interesting business because that site, that DNA position had to... was part of a double helical and so its partner had to be recognised by the preceding finger. So what this meant, a very important discovery, it meant that although the fingers were structurally independent they were synergistically involved and that made a big difference. But there was still nevertheless... it was still one amino acid per one... one amino acid per one DNA... sorry to one base. Now I didn't say this before... but in the many transcription factors being worked which all... where there's homodimers or variant heterodimers it isn't like that. The interface between the DNA recognition helix and the DNA is more complex. In most cases there's one amino acid interact with more than one base and conversely one base can interact with more than... more than one amino acid, so we haven't got this simple stereochemical code, we've got zinc fingers, even with this extra interaction to the second strand it's still one amino acid per... per base and vice versa and one base per amino acid. Now this meant, and it was at this point, that I decided that really this is a marvellous system. We should be able to develop it for intervening in gene regulation. Particularly as once we'd worked out the stereochemical code, so it was a very important discovery, the second crystal structure.

When [Carl] Pabo went back to refine this structure, of course he found this. It turned out that he'd actually seen this interesting crystallography, he's a very pure crystallographer and if he doesn't understand the result he doesn't publish it. When he looked at his map, and he told me this, and we could see it in his map anyway, he could see that there were interactions with the second strand but it was from a... it was from a glutamate to a cytosine. Now the glutamate is negatively charged, now it interacts... and so... now we, I knew this but I also knew that in other crystal structures of certain... what do you call them? Restriction endonucleases you've sometimes got this interaction and I don't know how it came about because it seemed to defy the laws of chemistry, but Pabo saw it and he didn't put... he didn't say anything about it, just omitted to mention it. But when you refine the structure to 1.98 resolution he saw very clearly what... well, that was done some years later. It's very cunning, what happens is that the glutamate, I'm sorry to go into such detailed stereochemistry but it's one of the things you really have to understand deeply if you're going to work in this field, the glutamate has a couple of aliphatic residues before you get to the acidic residue. And what Pabo didn't know was that the five six bond of cytosine is hydrophobic. And so, these aliphatics... the binding is not to the... it's not hydrogen bonding at all, which as most of the other interactions are, its hydrophobic bonding and it involves interaction between the aliphatic residues of glutamate and the five six bond of cytosine. And I suspected that because I knew about the five six bond of cytosine from our tRNA works. And then the acidic part bends backwards and binds to the backbone of the protein... so then Pabo published that later. So... but there are many different ways you can recognise a cytosine. Valine will do it because it's a methyl group, so will alanine and so on. So in the end we did work out a stereochemical code but it's very complex so you... so in the end you would have to... I couldn't write down by that time, write down by eye the sequence of zinc fingers which will bind the DNA but it won't be the highest binding. To find the highest binding you've got to make combinations of those different sites, that's really... that's really what it amounted to. That's why the selection... so thought we used to write, particularly Yen Choo, we always talk about tailor-made proteins... they were selected proteins, selected zinc fingers.

We also by the way showed that the linker, Yen Choo showed this, that the linker DNA once the finger's bound to the DNA, the linker, the five amino acids also folded up in a pretty great way and bound the sequence of DNA, the contributor of the binding. And we found that with three fingers, binding to nine base pairs you could get nano-molar binding. Which was pretty good for three fingers. One finger on its own binds very weakly, it... they're synergistic you see so you don't get one finger binds barely with... micro-molar binding or something like that.
[Q] So the... the specificity is higher...
Three fingers, well yes, but it’s not all that high because there are many different sequences it will bind to so the question was how do you get high specificity and high affinity.

We wanted to see whether you could actually intervene in gene expression. Later on, the second part of the development... the further developments which was done in the late 1990s we developed improved systems of specificity and high affinity. I'll come to that in the moment but first I want to talk about the first application gene... intervening gene regulation. So by this time I thought it would be ripe to... to actually take a real example and use the zinc finger... not just to do in-vitro binding DNA sequence, but to intervene. Now in the lab was Terry Rabbits who worked in cancer biology and one day at the lab talks which we had every October, one of his post docs, a man called Isidro Sánchez-García from Spain talked about a... onco-gene, a cancer gene which was created by chromosome translocation which gives rise to leukaemia and the way it's done, is chromosome nine and chromosome 22 interchange the tips of their chromosomes so therefore you make new sequences, new combinations and what happens is that the... a gene called BCR and a gene called ABL which is a tyrosine-kinase... some of the exons of BCR get fused to the axons of ABL so you have a new kind of protein, it's an onco-gene, and it produces in one leukaemia it's the... the junction is such it produces a 190 kilodalton onco-gene protein which is the onco-gene... sorry the onco-protein and another one is 210, these are different ways of fusing the... so it's a family and they all give rise to different kinds of leukaemia. They recognise, one is chronic myeloid leukaemia the other is...  BLL it's called, so what Terry was trying to do, he wanted to make antibodies to the protein, because you see the protein, the onco-protein will have a new piece of protein sequence in it. And so, they talked about this and I thought, my god, this will be a very good target for the zinc finger. If we could get a zinc finger to bind to this new DNA sequence with... and which could distinguish this new sequence from the parent sequences, from the bit of BCR and a bit of ABL, they were fused and so... now the reason I chose this, because we did this in-vitro was because there was already a biological assay.
And what Terry Rabbits had done was to transplant the C-DNA of the onco-genes into a cell line called BEV3 developed by David Baltimore which depends for existence, for its continuation I should say, on a cytokine, IL3-interleukin-3 and so what... so I heard from the talk this was copied from Terry really that they were going to put in the antibody and they would then block the onco-gene, cell would then... it wouldn't interact with the parent sequences, interact with the onco-protein and then the... then you'd be able to tell it was no longer oncogenic, it wouldn't be dependent. See an onco-gene once you transplant an onco-gene to a cell it becomes independent of growth factor and they demonstrated that. So we recruited... we borrowed Isidro Sánchez-García from Terry and we had his constructs so we developed a zinc finger construct, three fingers, we used three fingers because the majority of zinc fingers were... that we knew at the time were three... in three fingers at a time and that seemed to... we already knew it was nano-molar binding in-vitro experiments, so we made three fingers to target this junction, the junction between the BCL and ABL genes but we had to discriminate it from the sequence of BCL and ABL itself and we did this and we did two things. One in we showed that making a zinc finger peptide blocked the transcription of the onco-gene and restored the dependence on growth factor and you could see that the... once you've blocked the dependence on growth factor the cells just died by apoptosis, and you could see... we managed... we saw that 90% of the cells into which we'd managed to get the DNA were dead and we also had put a tag on, we made this three finger peptide, put a nuclear localisation tag, nucleaisation signal to go to the nucleus and an epitope tag so we could use immunofluorescence to follow it. This paper was published in Nature in 1994. Now in the same paper, we published an experiment along the way which was not to block a gene, but to switch on a gene and we did this with a cell line and a plasma. This was using a reporter gene, this is sort of standard molecular biology, chloramphenicol transferase gene, CAT gene, and that was put into a report and we made, we put this gene with a nine-base pair sequence which was the target for our zinc fingers construct. And we fused our zinc finger to an activation domain and put it into this... plasma into the cell line. And it switched on the reporter gene. So we had shown that you could intervene in gene expression both in inhibiting a gene expression at the same time activating the gene.
[Q] How do you get the protein in?
In? You do it by transfection, you put up the DNA level so you don't have... but you see you don't have, they weren't very highly efficient in those days, we'd only get about 30 to 40% efficiency. Since then the transfection have now... nowadays we get 70% in and what we did of course was to... because we had immunofluorescence we could target the cells in which the... we could target the cells in which the finger had gone in. We had the epitope.

That paper simulated, and this is part of the story, simulated... a man in the States called Edward Lanphier who was a business development officer at one of the biotech companies, to set up a zinc finger company, you see they don't lose any time, these Americans. And he invited Yen Choo and myself to join the scientific advisory board. And I didn't know who he was. He wasn't a respected scientist, he was a... he had a degree in biology and so we rather pooh-hooh'd the idea you see. We underestimated him and I'll come to that later in the story as they figure prominently later. So we decided after that the next step would be to try to improve the affinity... improve the affinity and the specificity of our zinc finger constructs and there were two ways that you could do that. One was to change our phage display methods so we could take into account this... cross-contact interaction figure from position two to the second strand. And that required quite a bit of fancy engineering and this was solved by a student of mine called Mark Isalan, very bright fellow, top of the biochemistry class in his year, who came to... applied to me to work on zinc fingers because they'd got around. And he succeeded in doing that and the second thing we did was to try to extend the three fingers to six fingers and eventually to nine fingers. Now, other people had tried to do this and a group at the Scripps who had now jumped in, there were people all round the world now jumping into this, they spoil all the fun I must say, as you well know from your own experience. And of course, some people say a bit of competition is healthy but it is galling sometimes when they... it would be okay if they contributed to the subject, mostly they create a lot of noise, a lot of extraneous noise and diversion and you have to sort out the good stuff from the stuff which is rotten, as I said yesterday. You have to police the subject, you haven't got time to police and answer every bit of nonsense that's published, but there are some good papers in the field, of course I mustn't be too damning in all this there are some good...
[Q] Your scientific inquisition?
Not an inquisition. Well, because you know they make it difficult because people can't see what's being achieved because of this clutter. There's a lot of extraneous clutter. And you know very well how examples of molecular biology or any branch of science where this happens. So we decide to do this and I. Marcus and I recruited a man called Michael Moore.

Three fingers bind to nine base pairs, six fingers will bind to 18 base pairs. Now if you simply go and add another set of six fingers... three fingers to the three fingers, just join them on with the same linker you find it gives you hardly any increase in affinity. Now the reason is very simple and I suspected this from the crystal structures and again from experience. The periodicity of the fingers doesn't quite match the periodicity of the DNA bases. So they get out of register, so you have to restore the register. So when we started making... adding three fingers we put in either some extra amino acids or we left gaps in the DNA and started to do protein engineering, or on the target basically we'd leave a gap and we developed different forms of combination of fingers. Now the most important one came later, where instead of having two times three fingers, we had three times two fingers. And the reason we did that was that the three times two fingers... these pairs of fingers had this cross standard interaction which gave you another tenfold boost in the affinity. So... between them we also... I had a favourite topic which was to say, 'Well, I'm going to find the site which is so rare that a single finger could recognise', and that was to take two DNA sites, that's a distance apart, so ten base pairs apart and you have a finger, two fingers which recognise each of these, linked by a fairly semi-stiff link, it has to be semi-stiff otherwise you loose entropy when you do the binding and in fact we showed that you could get enhanced binding this way if you had something with seven or eight base pairs apart, so it's a very nice laboratory exercise but it turned out to be, and we spent a lot of time on it, but that's the way of things, it turned out to be unnecessary although it's pretty but not useful. But that's what happens when you're doing this kind of research. So we found that when you got... if you put in the correct... did the correct protein engineering putting in things like glycines, serine glycine, things of that... purely empirical. What we found was that putting in a glycine, serine glycine in the zinc finger skipped one base. And that's how we worked out rules of this sort. Putting in a single glycine didn't skip a base, but readjusted, made things better. And so, we had a set of sort of know-how, which we began to build, libraries of six finger proteins.

By this point Yen Choo who's half Chinese and half Greek, his name is actually Evgenios, the Greek, but he can't bear to be called Evgenios, his mother's Greek and as you know... he has an entrepreneurial side... he decided he's going to leave the lab, he could have stayed on, and set up a company to compete with Sangamo because Sangamo had done that. So he did succeed in raising finance and he recruited Michael Moore and... Mark Isalan students, one was a post doc other was a student in the lab and he did, he set up a company at the MRC technology incubator in Mill Hill and he built quite a good... he built a research establishment, it was difficult to raise finance, in the meantime, Sangamo went from strength to strength and they floated, at the peak of the high tech of the dotcom boom, so he floated the company, went public and raised $150 million which would keep the company going for many years. And by this time, he was attracting good people, he'd attracted Carl Pabo to come and work for him. Carl Pabo the crystallographer to become a CEO. I'm not that that was a good choice, he's no longer the CEO because although he's an absolutely marvellous crystallographer, I'm not sure how strong his biological instincts are, but he's very, very efficient and he read books on managerial, managing and all that, rather a bad sign. So what happened is that, to make a short story of it, Sangamo acquired... they bought out the investors in the MRC company which was called Gendaq, 'gen' for gene and 'daq' for Greek 'dactile finger'. It was Gendaq and with them they bought all the MRC patents, the MRC patents were devolved on Sangamo. I'll be talking about transcript technology later on. But this was one of the things where I saw to it that we always patented everything we could. And the MRC held the patents, so the... so what happened was that the... so the libraries we built up of the two times three fingers and three times two fingers were all passed onto Sangamo and the work I'm going to describe. I don't know when I'm going to do this, perhaps after lunch, used our libraries. Originally our Cambridge libraries which went to Gendaq to improve in Gendaq. So I just tell you this episode, why this is important because the work that is now being done in therapeutic applications is being done by this company called Sangamo, but using our know-how and I'm on the scientific advisory board of Sangamo, as was Yen Choo but then he decided to leave and he's now set up yet another company. So those are the connections, but they are part of the story.

We began to make two kinds of libraries, of archives of zinc fingers. At the beginning, we did two times three, putting in various extender linkers and so on. And they bound with picomolar affinity. But what we found was they didn't discriminate so well, if you had a target of... a target of eighteen base pairs, if you change one-base pairs, it didn't discriminate so well because you had to have even higher sensitivity. Now, I had thought at one time that we should put in, just link individual fingers and have spaces between them. That seems a lot of work, but as I said a moment ago, the... we were making two-finger constructs anyway because of the way of getting in the cross-strand interaction. So I suggested that we ought to distribute the strain, and Yen Choo said, 'Why don't we just combine three lots of two fingers to produce six fingers?' And so, we did that and Michael Moore developed the correct linkers for that and that's when I talked about gylcine serine, things of that sort. And it turned out that these had a great advantage. They bound with picomolar affinity but they were much more sensitive to any mutations or omissions in the DNA sequence and so that, if you... if you introduce a single mutation they loose anything between ten to 100 fold... loss of affinity and sometimes 200 fold. So... so we decided in the end that, and Sangamo's libraries are mostly made now, combining sets of two fingers. So we tend to make twos, fours, sixes and even eights. We did make some nines here, that is three times three, but they were just laboratory exercises and Sangamo, not Sangamo, Gendaq made a few of those, but they didn't really give much gain. You see, because once you got 18 base pairs, it's pretty well unique in the human genome, six base, nine base pairs would occur several hundred thousand times, 18 base pairs would occur an only a very small number of times, in the genomes which is random, as you can calculate that. But the... of course genomes aren't random so you've got to have some reservations about that.

All these people dispersed, one of them became a patent agent, that's Michael Moore, others, Yen Choo went on to do other things, he's now got another company, Mark Isalan went off to the EMBL and so on but I still have a small group, I'm still a group leader here. At least for a limited time. And I decided that what we would do was to try to... target zinc fingers into mitochondria because mitochondria are a sort of black box, and of course they do replicate and they do produce proteins, but most of the proteins in mitochondria are coded in the nucleus and they get transferred, transported into the mitochondria and there are carrier signals... amino acid sequences in front of the mitochondrial protein which act like an entry ticket into the mitochondria and these get cleaved off. The reasons this was sort of adventitious, the reason I chose this is because I wanted to do something that nobody else was doing, as I've said before there's so many people working on zinc fingers and zinc carriers in the obvious places, but it turned out to be not so easy. One of the advantages we had a... I have a Polish... originally Polish, married to an Englishman, a woman post doc, Monika Papworth who comes from a lab, originally a lab in Poland where they work on mitochondria. So we had a visitor from the lab who came to learn zinc finger technology and he introduced us to mitochondrial technology. And there's also a study of mitochondria going on in the MRC nutrition unit and I thought that would be quite useful because they are trying to understand various aspects of gene regulation... very little... it's really pure science. Well, it's pure science but one might be able to switch off genes in what's called heteroplasmy. It turns out that many diseases, mitochondrial diseases, of which there are many, are rather strange. Some mitochondria have a mutation and these are deleterious mutations and of course they inherit it in the next generation. At the same time, it's a mixed population, there are other perfectly healthy mitochondria so one or two diseases of mitochondria you could, you probably could if you could knock out a simple, knock out those mitochondria which have the deleterious gene then you could cure the disease. Of course, as I have said, I was interested in applying these things to real cases.

As I've said, the libraries were acquired by Sangamo and they have quite a bit staff, about 60 people. I'm on the scientific advisory board, Carl Pabo was at one time the CEO, he's now on the scientific advisory board. And I... so... any new ideas in order to execute them and on a scale have to be done through Sangamo, we haven't got the manpower or the visitors because I have to wind up within the next year or so. So that sets the scene. Well... so Sangamo have applied zinc fingers to fairly obvious targets like trying to switch off the gene VEGFA.

Vascular endothelia growth factor, and this is a growth factor which starts a cascade of gene expression to develop the vasculature in most of eukaryotes. It's the, like many of eukaryotic genes, it's spliced, there are six spliced isoforms of which three are pretty important. And so, one of the thing that has been done by many people, or tried by many people is to switch off VEGF in certain cancers because the tumours recruit blood vessels and they use VEGF, they also use other growth factors, FG, FBGF and so on, and so in the Sangamo lab they switched off the VEGF, in a number of cases, but I don't think it's reached therapeutic applications. The other thing we did here with Monika Papworth was to inhibit virus expression of herpes simplex virus, that was done here, using just six fingers. You needed six fingers to do it on rather than three fingers and we used our libraries. This is herpes simplex virus and we chose that deliberately because it's a very, highly infective. It carries with it its own VP16s, are activation they use in the virus particle and it carries six immediate early genes. And all of these, these genes interact with each other and there's a second set of genes which is the early genes, these are the immediate early genes, so as a kind of exercise we switched on, we decided to target a gene called 175K which is the most important of the immediate early genes. And using six fingers, using three fingers we were only able to reduce the infective titre by a factor of 20% but by six fingers we were able to reduce it by 90%, a ten-fold reduction, so that wouldn't be enough to... so if you wanted to use it as a therapeutic for virus you'd really have to target all the other immediate early genes. So you have to target at a very early stage because then by the time the virus starts replicating it's making more and more virus and you haven't got a hope. That's why we target the immediate early genes.
And we did the same, or rather I say we did, this time it was done by Yen Choo and Lindsey Reynolds at... Gendaq and they targeted HIV. And this was the, we made a lot of zinc finger constructs, partly they were made here, partly at Gendeq and you simply looked at the HIV promoter region and what you do, since we have now... zinc finger production is automated, high throughput automation, and they're cheap to make, you don't worry too much about looking for accessible regions in chromatin, which people did, what Sangamo used to do. It's like scatter bombing, you simply scatter enough zinc fingers around and you hope that some of them will be able to get through the chromatin structure. There was a lot of fuss made about determining chromatin structure. A man called Alan Wolffe, one of the leading people in the field who died unfortunately, advocated this, but it's not necessary. Because the promoters may be 300-bases long and you could usually find some way through. In fact, we found that you could switch off HIV expression in HeLa cells with the three-finger peptide. This surprised me no end until I discovered something about the life cycle of HIV. When HIV enters the cell, it picks up very cellular transcription factors including something called SP1, which is a three-zinc finger, a well-known three-zinc finger transcription factor, it uses the cellular factors. And by sheer chance, because we were simply doing, as I say, scatter targeting, this zinc finger we'd chosen bound the... obviously prevented the SP1 binding which meant that the other domain, the non-DNA binding domain of SP1 couldn't be put into play. So it stopped, actually, gave a pretty good result. And so we did things of this sort. So I think I decided that we could do more of these things, but we'd got enough proofs of principle and I think for virus diseases, anyway, you might use other targets, either vaccines or else small molecules and so on. So the... that's why I switched on to mitochondria.

Now I'll return to Sangamo, as I said Sangamo made zinc fingers against VEGF but by this time RNAi. RNAi interference appeared on the scene and that's pretty powerful in stopping gene development. It doesn't always work, sometimes you have to try four, five times with different sequences. It doesn't seem to have that specificity that zinc fingers can produce but you can make RNAi pretty cheaply. You can use a whole range of RNAis. So that's good at repressing genes but what they can't do is switch on a gene. So I think a lot of the work that Sangamo is doing is activating genes and so to activate a gene or to manipulate a gene, there's straight forward... you make a zinc finger to target the right region and you fuse it to some kind of affected domain. Affected domain can be an activation domain, it can be a nuclease domain. I wrote this in '94 that is to chop up the gene, the nuclease, to make... in fact to disable a gene. And in fact, I did make one with an Israeli group which didn't work out. Somebody wrote to me they wanted to knock out a tomato virus and this is a lady called Dina Raveh and we sent her three fingers, for the particular target, but the nuclease domain she had chosen still had a certain amount of DNA binding, it wasn't a pure catalytic domain, so it bound to other places... she had minor cuts elsewhere so if you tried to use this, switch off the virus, it would be... it would start making cuts in the host, because you see it's not too fussy. So this illustrates the point about having high specificity. And having a pure nuclease domain. Now I'll talk later about the nuclease domain because that is what led to what's now called gene correction, or gene editing. But that will be the punch line.
I'll come back to VEGF. So VEGF, as I said, in a normal production of vasculature the first thing to do is produce capillaries. Capillaries have to grow and so on and then you start making arteries, there's a whole set of genes after VEGF, there's angiopoietin and many others. Now the... so Sangamo showed that you could switch on VEGF, we know obviously, but pretty nicely with three zinc fingers or six zinc fingers, but the point of it was that the... you had to do it in an animal. This was one that had been done in cell lines, in human kidney cell lines. And so they did it and they decided that they would... where you need to switch on the vasculature now the real target, and I don't mean to make a pun, is the heart because people had been trying for quite a time how to grow new blood vessels for people that had coronary disease, so you make new blood vessels and there were various people trying stem cell, putting stem cells in to the heart because supposedly they'll turn into blood cells under the right conditions. Some people are actually injecting, I don't know how they do this, this is in monkeys, but now starting it in humans, apparently you can do this, you can get ethical approval, injecting VEGF into hearts of people who have serious heart disease. It's probably something of a last resort so apparently, it's permitted ethically. But what this a rather late stage to do this in, so the... but there is a disease which isn't as debilitating as coronary disease, it's called peripheral arterial obstructive disease, it leads to a condition called claudication where the people have great pains in their legs mostly because the arteries are blocked, they're furred up and so there are treatments for it, or pills that people can take to reduce it and so on. But the obvious target would be to try to grow new arteries.
So Sangamo started, together with... collaborating with various academical laboratories, a program to see if they could grow new vasculature in patients with peripheral arterial obstructive disease. Sometimes it's called PAD, peripheral arterial disease, sometimes obstructive is left out, the British do, one is PAD the other is PAOD, but they then to say PAD, of which there are 8 million patients in the United States. Now this will be a costly business. So Sangamo, this is the way things work in biotechnology, we try to make about $22 million on a company called Edwards Life Sciences to start... they've done the basics, which I'll describe in a moment, to start doing... applying for the clinical trials in such patients of whom I have said there were 8 million. So the way you proceed is this, this is interesting because it's my first... I'm on the scientific advisory board, it's one of my first encounters with the progress of a drug to trials. Cambridge anti-body technology we haven't talked about, I have watched that as well, so I do have some experience but this was the first time with the zinc fingers. So what they do, the first thing you do is there's a model called 'the mouse ear model', the ear of a mouse is pretty transparent, you can see it by eye with a low power microscope or a low power lens, you can see the blood vessels. Now, as I said, VEGF, this is obviously a target other people have been trying, obviously wanting to do things in the heart and also perhaps in the limbs. So the... what companies had done had been to patent the different splicing isoforms of VEGF and they tried them one at a time. This is all in the literature and they do grow, you can see in the ear of a mouse very easy to see the new capillaries. You can look at the mouse, you can do the... you simply inject the plasmid of DNA into the... then miraculously the DNA gets into the nucleus, this is standard stuff now. You can help it on its way with a retrovirus, in fact plasma injection or by lipo infection, it's actually pretty efficient, as I said. Nowadays there's a thing called the MAXA which gives you 70% success in many places. So you can see the new blood vessels develop.

So if a single isoform is used to switch on VEGF then you do get increased vasculature and you get increased vessels but they leak and you get a bloody mess. Literally, you can see it in the mouse ear; it's very easy to see. So the... but with VEGF which switches on the gene, gene expression which produces the precursor messenger RNA, precursors of the... and the precursor messenger RNA is split into the different messengers and they produce this splicing isoforms. And if you do that, switching on the endogenous gene, the vessels don't leak. So clearly you need a cascade, it's very clear that you need these other isoforms, for either strengthening the walls of the capillaries or whatever... moving onto the next stage for maturing them and so on. And it's known that angiopoietin would be the next in the list, but that's yet another gene, that hasn't been studied yet.
So the next experiment was to try in a rabbit. The rabbit's skeletal muscle, the hind limbs of rabbits and this was done, as I said, by Yale and also by a group at Duke, using Sangamo's zinc fingers for switching on VEGF. Well, both experiments showed that if, in the ischemic – ischemic means lack of blood supply – in artificially ischemic rabbits, it's rather cruel, but they tie off the arteries and so there's no blood supply but that's how medicine progresses. The rabbit's injected with VEGF, grew new blood vessels and you can measure the amount, you can measure the blood flow and so that was regarded as a success, in fact the rabbits were cured. They grew new blood vessels. And there were other experiments of this sort, so the... Sangamo applied to the FDA, Food and Drug Administration, who license trials and this was in last... 2004 in March... April 2004 the FDA sanctioned the use of clinical trials and having the money, as I said, from Edwards Life Sciences, they were able to start recruiting patients and people are eager to come to try there for their... apparently the people with peripheral and arterial disease have great pain, they can't work... it's very debilitating. So they enrolled patients and the trials were planned and they've all been executed by somebody at NIH, nothing to do with either Edwards or Sangamo, these are totally independent trials and not with either Frank Giordano or the man at Duke, that's how these things are done. And they... it's a double blind with placebo trial and started last August by which time they'd recruited sufficient patients for a what's called a phase one/phase two trial. So that's nearly a year now and as I say double blind, nothing is reported, however if in trials of this kind there's an adverse event, it's called a serious... an adverse event AE and SAE, not a stamped addressed envelope, but a serious adverse event... then the trials are stopped. That's the way it works, they're monitored all the time.
Well, nothing's been reported so whether they're doing any good or not, I don't know. You would have heard if they... We would have heard. Now if they'd been doing miraculously with people jumping up and saying their lives had been transformed, you might have heard as well. Because if that happens and that happens very rarely then the ethics is... because some patients are getting the drug and other are not, but if you have enough patients saying we're getting better, then it looks as though the drug is working. It's a pity but they have to then stop the trials and give it to everybody. That's unfortunate in a way if you think, taking a hard, cold look at it, because if you still have to do the dosing, can see the dosing hasn't been improved and see when people get a bit better, they might be a lot better if the trials were to go and be able to establish the dosing issue. So people aren't encouraged to leap up and say I'm cured or I'm feeling better, so I know this from other... experience I've read about. So that is number one, so zinc fingers are in patients. And the number of patients is several hundred, 400, 500. But various degrees of peripheral and arterial obstructive disease. There are many ways of approaching this when you plan these trials. I know this from my experience with Cambridge anti-body technology, you sometimes take moderately disturbed... moderately affected people in the beginning but the pressure is, if you've got a serious disease, the pressure is to give them to the most seriously affected, because they're the ones who need it most. But you can see... you can't learn much from that. As much as you learn from only moderately handicapped people. So... so the patients chosen for the PAD trials actually involve a spectrum. Whether there were enough people I don't know, I don't know enough about it.

Gene correction... It's replacing a mutant gene in a monogenic disease by correct copy of the gene. Now this is not gene... this is not adding a correct copy as a lot of gene therapy has been, and as a background, and I'll tell you about the French trial for SCID. SCID is Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disease. It's the disease in which children are born without an immune system and the reason is that they have mutation in the IL receptor, IL is the interleukin, IL receptor gamma-gene which is found in the precursors in the development of the immune system. So children born without an immune system and then susceptible to disease, so they had to be brought up as babies, they had to be brought up in a bubble, they're called 'bubble babies', you must have read about them?
[Q] Yes. 
And now there are not so many, numbers are tens of thousands rather than hundreds of thousands, but I think there's 80,000 in the States, I don't know what the numbers are in Europe. So there's a trial which had some success, was conducted in Paris by a man called Alain Fisher and what he did was to make a correct copy of the SCID gene, put it into a retrovirus and carried this into the cell. Integrated into the cell. There were ten children originally and that was three years ago, three or more years ago now. And eight of those children are still living, two died, they died of leukaemia. One of the still living ones has got leukaemia, so what went wrong? You see, it was met with great acclaim. Now this is gene addition. You're adding a good copy of the gene which can be read and transcribed but doing it this way you have no control where the gene goes into, it goes into the chromosome. Also, you have a vector which gets separated from the gene when the gene... from the correct... which is inserted. So the effect was diagnosed, the two children who died had the vector managed to lodge itself in front of a well-known cancer gene, called the Lmo2, and this produced cancer in the children, leukaemia. So that's gene addition. Now there could be ways of overcoming that if you could deliver the gene... deliver the correct gene to its right place and there might be a way of doing that with zinc fingers. I can think of several ways, but that's not been done yet. What has been done is to gene correction or gene editing and that's quite complicated without diagrams. It invokes the use of two natural systems, one is zinc fingers which I said 3% of the human genomes can target and we now know with synthetic engineered zinc fingers you can target a gene with single gene specificity. I didn't tell you this, but these things we make, or have made, if you use a DNA array of 20,000 genes only one out of 20,000 lights up. So it really is virtually single gene specificity. So... now that should have been in the preamble.

So you can target a mutated site with a zinc finger. Question: what do you do with the mutated site? Well, you... have to replace it. Now, there is a process by which cells, this is the other natural process, by which cells repair double-stranded breaks. Now, the cells in any organism are constantly being bombarded by ionising radiation, X-rays, things you don't... and the cell, at any one time, there are thousands of breaks in the DNA. The DNA has the most elaborate machinery for repairing this. You know DNA is its most precious content and the way it's done is that when there's a double-stranded cut there's a whole dance of proteins, it's really choreography, an ensemble of proteins, one protein which is well known Chek2 finds the double-stranded cut and switches off... it switches off any of the rest of the cell cycle. Other proteins come along and bind to the cut and there are different outcomes. You can actually do different kinds of repair processes. One pretty dominant repair process is carried by... what is called homologous combination... with the sister chromosome. What happens is that you... quite elaborate protein structure is built, remember I asked you for some reprints on the electron microscopy? A protein scaffold is built and the sister chromosome comes alongside the... place where the mutant is, where the double stranded cut is and there is an exchange by what is called homologous recombination which is a natural process. In genetics it's called gene conversion, it's a well know process in yeast genetics and lo and behold the... a piece of DNA, and from the Sangamo experiments, it's probably something like several hundred bases, are cut out, this is not known, and the... the DNA of the sister chromosome is copied and repaired so that's how you repair. It's... homology driven, or homology recombination driven repair and it's a natural process. Now people had been trying for a long time to do what they call gene targeting. This goes back to [Mario] Capecchi in 1989. And what he was trying to do, he was trying to make mutants and so what he did was introduce large quantities of mutant DNA into a cell and hope that by homologous combination the mutant would replace the DNA but the efficiency is about... one in 10 to the five. That's one in 100,000 cells get repaired. Now that's enough if you're going to do something in a mouse or something like that because you can then cultivate those cells and so on, in fact it's quite good, but generally it doesn't work. So a lady called Maria Jasin... J-A-S-I-N in France thought... demonstrated if you can make a double-stranded cut then the frequency of re-combination went up by a factor of 5,000. And she did this in a very clever experiment. She couldn't target the... what she did was to do a principle experiment she took a... a well-known endonuclease, it's called homo-endonuclease which a well-known for endonuclease which has an 18 base pair target, so she took a chromosome artificially and artificially inserted an 18... this 18-base pair target and then she used this homo-endo nuclease and then she did this... and showed that you can do a homologous recombination and it went very, very fast, 5,000 times. Not fast, efficient, it also went... goes quite fast. So the next thing to do would be to do it, it's fairly obvious from there on, is that you must target the gene, the natural gene. The way of targeting it, you can't build in the site, you must have a zinc finger which targets the natural mutated site, if you can replace the mutation or the other way round you could introduce a mutation in the natural sequence, anyway we're talking about gene correction or gene repair or gene editing. 'Gene editing' is what The Guardian or The Times called it when they wrote this up last... April.

A number of groups, two groups in fact: a group at Utah began using zinc finger nuclease and I'll explain those in a minute, to... to introduce mutants in drosophila. A man called Dana Carroll. Now he used the zinc finger nuclease developed by a man called [Srinivasan] Chandrasegaran who worked with Jeremy Berg. Now what he did, he made a zinc finger nuclease which was, had no specificity other than the DNA, other than the zinc finger part of recognising the DNA. This he took from the catalytic domain of restriction enzyme called FOCII which he had been studying. And he showed that this... that his targeting depended purely on the zinc finger which he used. Now the early work was done making three zinc fingers and it was used by a man called Matthew Porteus in David Baltimore's lab, to show stimulation of gene editing or gene correction in a model system using GFP protein. And they got factors of sort of modest ten, a factor of ten or something like that, 20 depending on what they did. Now, these were fairly home-made zinc fingers which he made himself. As I've said before you could write down the sequence of a zinc finger from all the published work which would bind the two sequences enough, what's the word? Redundancy that almost anything will bind. So it wasn't... it wasn't optimised in any way, not very efficient but it showed that you could stimulate... multory combination this way, or gene replacement. Gene replacement is what it is but it's not the whole gene, so gene editing is the best word or gene correction. I think editing is the best word of all but they tend to call it correction.
Another group was the group of Dana Carroll who I mentioned were they made their own zinc fingers and using Chandrasegaran catalytic domain, they made mutants of drosophila and they made fingers of various kinds... nothing was under control. Many of the mutants they did died, but those that survived they were able to select on the phenotype. So they had some success with that, making mutants in drosophila. So these are model experiments but now if you want to target into a patient you have to make sure there's nothing hanging over you... you can't start having selection, you have to do it in one go. And it must be absolutely targeted uniquely. So... what Sangamo... there's a group led by Michael Holmes, under Philip Gregory, these are the people... Holmes, Fernhoff and Gregory and they published a paper, it appeared in Nature on June the 5th this year. It was on-line in April and the paper was sent in last November. I had a hand in writing that paper, I don't appear as an author but I'm thanked for reading the manuscript. I was thanked for a critical reading of the manuscript, but critical this would be... in fact I wrote quite bits of it, but never mind. I think Nature editing. So it had quite a long history and the reason was I discovered that Nature were very... careful, there were very worried about publishing a paper that was zinc correction, so soon after the death of the French children, the editor clearly didn't understand that this was something different as well in gene addition and because they want to make the paper short they wanted to cut the preamble where this was explained and so on. But anyway, it appeared in Nature and they consulted quite a lot of other people, I know this because people have told me about this. So that's a great step forward and the paper's entitled Highly Efficient Correction of Endogenous Gene using Zinc Fingers [sic] or something rather like that, that's what it is. It's zinc finger nucleases. So it's a great triumph and what was done was this.

They took this SCID gene. Now the SCID gene it's known what it is. And it's a single monogenic disease but it occurs in different places and different patients. It isn't like sickle cell anaemia where there's... every single patient has the same mutation, in the very same place, but the mutations tend to be clustered, they tend to be clustered in one of the X arms which is 100 base pairs along but you can make zinc fingers for any particular target. As I said they are cheap to make. So in order to do research on it, there's a system of cells called K562 cells in which the SCID mutation has been transplanted into human kidney cells. So this is a model system but it's got the SCID mutation in. And this K562 cells are basically leukemic cells. If you introduce them into mice, you can put the human cells into mice and then mice get leukaemia. So this is the object of the experiments at Sangamo.
So the K562 cells were... Sangamo made... Michael Holmes made a zinc finger nuclease using four zinc fingers, two twos, remember I said things were made in twos? Four zinc fingers attached... to a catalytic domain to target... if this is the mutant site... four zinc fingers to bind to one side carrying the catalytic domain which then would be in position over the mutant, over the mutants of the desired site. Another group of four zinc fingers with another catalytic domain and the two catalytic domains interact, they make homodimers, they homodimerize. Each makes a single strand you cut them together you make a double stranded cut. So they made double stranded cuts and then they introduced an extra chromosomal DNA donor, a DNA donor which carried the right sequence and this was a piece of DNA which is several hundred bases long, with the correct sequence, put into a plasma which is a thousand bases. And they did this, of course this was all experimental medicine really. They did this with different amounts of donor DNA, extra chromosomal donor DNA rather than then donor... so the donor is now the piece of DNA rather than the chromosome because the sister chromosome also has, of course, the same, it's a homozygous disease, also has this... also has this defect. And the... and now so you have something which is a pretty unique target, you've got four zinc fingers, four zinc fingers, that's twelve base pairs on either side and they are a certain fixed distance apart. And the chances of that occurring anywhere else in the genome is negligible. One of the chaps there calculated it, it's ten to the minus 22, or something which means it's negligible. So they created this and they said... they did rough and ready experiments with different amounts of dosage, different amounts of nuclease and so on. And they found that as they improved the efficiency, they were getting anything from 15% to in the end 21% correction. So 21% of all the cells are corrected. In some cases, the 21% or the 20% is 16% on one chromosome and 4% on the other. So this is correcting, basically they can correct... you only have to correct one chromosome really, but that would be enough, so that showed. And they also did study to make sure there would be no disruptions anywhere else in the genome. The referees were pretty hard in all this, you had to demonstrate that.
Now, the other thing about this editing is that in the model experiments, which I talked about earlier, but done by Carroll and Porteus the corrections weren't stable gradually they, so to speak, died out and these things reasserted themselves. So by southern blotting, which looks at the genome sequence of the... they showed that after a month, Sangamo showed that these corrections in the K562 cells were stable. And after six months they're still stable so it looks as if they've made permanent modification of the mutations in these genes and it's now more than six months now but I think they would have to report if they've now reverted their lifetime. So this means they're in a position to apply to the FDA for, probably, for a licence to start clinical trials. And for clinical trials they'd have to use the precursor cells, the original cells from the patients. So what they've done in the meantime, although that hasn't been published, so they have reported it at meetings, they've taken what are called CD34 cells which are immunoglobulin cell line and these are primary cells, they're not artificial cells they're really immunoglobulin precursor cells and they've corrected those and they haven't published that because that would require a whole lot of extra labour. I don't know what the complications are... they haven't published that. So it seems that... and they're in touch with a man at the Children's Hospital, UCLA who has SCID patients and I think that... anyway we'd have to start handing it over to the medics, to the consultants, and the... one worry is... is an adverse immune reaction because this after all is, in some sense it's foreign, it's not very foreign because they're so many zinc fingers in the nucleus anyway and the paths of these zinc fingers are all exactly the same. Clearly the exact amino acid sequence isn't the same as any natural sequence because these genes aren't switched on by zinc fingers, so there'd have to be some kind of testing, maybe they'll be required to be done in animals, I don't know enough about it. But it seems to me that... there's a good chance... that... permanent gene therapy will be achieved in the not too distant future, and this has been done by zinc fingers so I find it very gratifying to see these things put to this use.

VEGF is, as I say, is the first gene in the cascade of developing new blood vessels, it also happens to be... it's not an accident but it is... it is a protein which protects neurons. A neuro-protective. I was surprised when I first came across this but it turns out, if I'd remembered by histology, the paths of blood vessels and nerves are very similar, they follow the same tracks and so VEGF is neuroprotective and there's quite a number of diseases, Lou Gehrig's Disease, ALS and things like that, motor neurone disease where there diseases are these neurons and people have started... made trials using VEGF itself. Just adding VEGF to motor neurone disease, well, the obvious thing to do is to just switch on VEGF which is a natural gene which hasn't been, it's not harmed in this case because the defect isn't in that gene so it's probably going to be used for neuro protection, so that will be another application of VEGF. And one can think of many other applications, I've thought of several where to switch an endogenous gene which can help, which can help cure, not necessarily diseases, but even things like muscle injury. If you injure a muscle then you have problems with it, creating the nerves growing back and the blood vessels and so on and people find that IGF which is insulin-like growth factor, a lot of people add that to the muscles and that helps to repair, helps to grow again. Well, the obvious thing to do is to switch on the IGF gene in the cells. So I can think up lots of applications but we can't do them all, so I think I'll end there. At least for the... I wrote a paper for a Nobel Symposium last October when these results were beginning to appear, it was only a mini review, but they said that the results are astonishing. Because this has transformed the subject from getting... a few percent or fractions of a percent success by what they used to call gene targeting, where you only had the homologous DNA you didn't have any cuts, you didn't make the cuts and didn't have targeted cuts compared to what they now get, so I do think it's a... well, it's very gratifying to me to see this development. I'd always thought that the gene... that the zinc fingers would be a very useful research tool, but I must say I didn't think... at the time, the early days in 1994, that it could actually be possible therapeutic in serious diseases.

I was made a Fellow of Peterhouse when I arrived here in 1962, as a Teaching Fellow of Peterhouse. This was prompted by John Kendrew who was Director of Studies in Science at Peterhouse, in fact one of the, the smallest Cambridge College. John Kendrew was then Deputy Director of the Laboratory of which Max Perutz was the Head and so... I hadn't done much teaching, I did give a few lectures at Birkbeck, but I had a fairly good all-round education in science and he said, would I become a Teaching Fellow? I was always quite interested in it and it offered 300 pounds a year, seven meals a week and parking. By this time, we had a car. And so I said I'd do it.
So what I did, I taught a variety of subjects, as indeed John had done. In crystallography, he had done... taught crystallography, parts of chemistry, history and glossary of science, we were supposed to be all-rounders. I gradually specialised in fact, and discovered that the different chemists would only teach either physics, physical, organic or inorganic, and this is against the grain, you were supposed to do everything. In the Oxford system, you assigned the tutorial, he now looks at the tutor, he looked at everything, but here in Cambridge, there were supervisors for different subjects. And the job... so he was Director of Studies and I, in my first year, I supervised in physics and I started at year one, when through year two, year three, although I couldn't delay, so I did some things in parallel. So I really learnt a lot of physics. I had a good foundation, really through the teachings of James, but then as new... but then when John Kendrew... this was in 1962, by 1970 John Kendrew had got himself involved with the EMBO, that this European Molecular Biology Organisation, and later the Laboratories he was setting up, so he was hardly ever around. So he asked me to take his place as Director of Studies, which meant I not only had to teach myself in subjects, but also find supervisors for the students doing the Tripos and the Science Tripos in Cambridge covers a lot of choices, quite unlike Oxford where you are assigned to a Department and they teach everything. So it meant that I had to make myself familiar with quite a few other subjects. Well, I'd done experimental psychology years before, and as they introduced new subjects, for example, biology of cells which was really an introduction to biochemistry, this is in the first year, and things of that sort, and crystallography I hardly did at all. I enlisted some people, including John Finch in mathematics, and later I enlisted Tony Crowther, and Jo Butler for biochemistry. So it was having a look at the people in the Lab. They paid reasonably well, and it was also good to have contact with students, because we sometimes attracted them here.
I always thought... some people in the MRC Lab here thought that the most important thing they could do would be research and teaching would be a waste of time. I found it quite stimulating, because I learnt more, not that I was sure what I could do with all that I learnt. But as I said because I was teaching optics, which I think must have influenced me when I was trying to understand electron microscope pictures of periodic objects and introduced optical diffraction, so there... there is a direct pay-off, so to speak, but more generally. And in the College... in the College, you taught for six hours a week, and I used to do it in two batches of three hours, which was quite a big stint, and you... the system consisted of people handing in work, they'd been set questions before. The questions were either worked examples or essays sometimes, like 'Are Newton's laws a tautology?', but those have gradually faded out. But I taught everything and up to... in the end, I also taught molecular spectroscopy group theory, which you would classify molecular orbitals and microwave spectroscopy, which actually introduced me to understanding NMR which is a very similar system, so it was really quite useful. So when I came to set up... or tried to get NMR set up in this Laboratory, I actually understood what it was about. So I think it was generally quite useful. It took up some time and I used... I wasn't very adept at it, but I... because I hadn't been through the Cambridge course myself, but I think... I think I was a good teacher, partly because I wasn't totally skilful. I remember what Ken Holmes told me... He'd been supervised by Abdul Salam and Fred Hoyle, do I remember correctly? And they just whizzed through. They absolutely... they were physicists, one a theoretical physicist, and they never had to struggle. Occasionally I used to have to struggle with some of the problems, particularly in part two of physics, but I think they'd learned from that, because I didn't mind saying I didn't know, and I would tell them tomorrow, and things of that sort. But in the College, I wasn't what was called 'a good College man'. I did my bit. I sat on committees. I was... I joined the Estates Committee. I was told it met before Governing Bodies on Monday evenings at 7.30, and these had met before, I assumed an hour before, it met four hours before! So I learnt quite a bit about the college system and so on. It was a... but I was able to do it because I had very able either research students or post-docs or members of the Lab, including Holmes and Finch. I wouldn't be able to do it, if they hadn't been able to carry on with the thing, I would think. But it was a useful link. I was encouraged by Max Perutz because so few people in this Lab had links directly to the University. I also taught a few courses in the University, just as an invited lecturer. I wasn't... we didn't have a rank in the University, except through a Fellow at College, but later on I was made an honorary Professor of Molecular Biology in the University, so I got the title of Professor which would have pleased my mother. I know it pleased... I know it pleased John Kendrew when Heidelberg was made a Professor, because I remember coming back to Durban once, and one of my mother's friends, a rather bossy woman, said, 'What? Not a professor yet?' You see, because I was already an FRS, but wasn't a professor, you see, so... It's a sidelight on Cambridge.
I went on teaching after my Nobel Prize for a few years, which surprised people, but they were introducing new courses in quantum chemistry, and polymers, which I knew a good deal about, I had worked on that in fact, so I did go on teaching a bit because I taught solid state physics. So I had a rounded repertoire. It was a bit of a schizophrenic life but I... looking back on it, but I didn't seem to mind, and we also, of course, had... by this time in 1962, our second son was born, nine years older [younger] than the first, and so... I was a reasonable parent and, I hope, husband but I did hear people say in Cambridge that there were three things you could do, and you could only do two of them. One was in the Lab, the other was to teach, and the other was to be a family man. But somehow, I did all three, yes.

[Q] Did getting the Nobel Prize affect your life considerably?
Oh, yes, I got invited to things. I got invited to attend meetings and began to open buildings, but not as many as when I was later President of the Royal Society, but I think... I think it went on because at the time I got the Nobel Prize, I was already thinking of what to do next after chromatin and I had already started on the 5SRNA and TF3A system, and I was very much absorbed by that. So I guess it was... and in anyway in Cambridge, they don't make too much fuss about a Nobel Prize, not like Italy where you become a bit of a film star, and I think it's quite a good thing. It wasn't all that novel. I mean, people were quite pleased, because there had been a 20-year gap from the Nobel Prizes Perutz and Kendrew, Crick and Watson, but of course in the meantime, that's in... if you call it structural biology, but of course Fred Sanger – had got a Nobel Prize, his second Nobel Prize in 1980. The mystery was, why did I get a Nobel Prize and César Milstein not, because he was hanging around on the list. I think mine came as a bit of a surprise to a number of people, because the kind of work we were doing wasn't in those days, it wasn't even called structural molecular biology.

Hugh Huxley and I had been Heads of Divisions and I became Director when... after Sydney Brenner left in 1986, and I was Director for ten years. Originally it was mean to be for seven years, which would have taken me to the retiring age, but I was renewed after seven years because my would-be successor, who turned out to be Richard Henderson and it was clearly... now the current Director... he when approached didn't feel ready to do that, so I was asked to stay on for another three years, but by then, I was fairly... you know, I knew how to do it, and so on.
[Q] Initially, you found it an extra work load?
Oh, yes. I did. Yes... extra work... yes it was. It was... well, I had to deal with Whitehall. I didn't get any honours in my Nobel Prize, didn't even get a CBE which was the current... the current recognition. Nowadays, people are made a Sir even before they get a Nobel Prize, but I didn't even get a CBE. I don't know what happened. I mustn't have been put up for it, but I can hazard a guess at why. And then in 1988 I was offered a Knighthood. MRC put me up, and they said I really ought to accept it, against the tradition of the LMB where Perutz had refused because he didn't want to be different from his colleagues, and Crick had refused because he was going to be the great commoner, and for other reasons. I did plead with him and say, 'Please be a knight.' Sir Francis Crick goes trippingly on the tongue, you see, but he wouldn't satisfy us. Incidentally, I did ask him. I said, 'Why not?' He said, 'I won't accept any honours which carry no function.' So I said, 'Would you be prepared to be a member of the House of Lords, where you can vote and you can affect legislation?' I think he was quite taken aback. He didn't expect that, he said, 'I'd have to think about it.' But in the end, he did accept the OM, which was an honour, a very high honour, which carries no function, other than dining and lunching with the Queen every five years, and having some special dinners at odd occasions, and so on. So he did accept that. But in fact, it was useful in Whitehall, because the... so I got involved with the MRC and quite a lot of administration. The MRC was changing over from... from... in a way, Jim Gowans had been the original Head of the MRC. They used to be called the Secretary, which is the old name like Pepys was Secretary of the Admiralty, but in Dai Rees's time I think he began to be called the Chief Executive, which is the modern term. And I got involved with them, and I got involved with technology transfer, and that was pretty useful.

When I inherited the Lab, there was technology transfer going on, that is things developed here which had a potential application, but also potential exploitation. Application means what they say, exploitation means to make money out of... by commercialising it. And the traditional course was to... to get a company to fund... Sydney had done quite a lot of this, Sydney Brenner, he got a company to fund, say, a post doc or a few posts... for a piece of research which we would be doing anyway. We didn't know it, at least I didn't ever start anything with the idea of making money eventually, but my attitude was that if you saw an opportunity to exploit something, you don't be shy about it, you do it. And I think I referred to this yesterday, did I not? About the person who thought I'd be turning the Lab into a Department of Applied Molecular Biology. Well... so in taking transfer, there were several things that I did. In the course... I was there for ten years, the one was... which... basically led to the, in 1990, the setting up of Cambridge Antibody Technology which is a big biotechnology company which really would be making tens of millions a year for the MRC if it hadn't been embroiled... by mounting a court case by a very large pharmaceutical firm that won't pay the royalties to Cambridge Antibody Technology. And I was involved the setting up of Cambridge Antibody Technology in my capacity as a Director. I did other things as well, but I'll just go on to this one.
Now, the Government had realised, and Sydney was very active in all this, there'd been a Spinks Committee in Biotechnology, and Sydney was a very... spent a lot of time in Whitehall, and so on, and resulted in the Government setting up Celltech, a company which was partly funded by the company and which had access to MRC inventions, and the inventions they had at the time were mononclonal antibodies which César Milstein had not commercialised for reasons... well, not through any doing of his own, because the NRDC, National Research Development Corporation, which had been set up by the Government to make sure that there wasn't another debacle as happened with insulin. Insulin was a totally British invention and at the time, Britain was paying royalties to Americans because during the war, the production of penicillin was shipped to America and what the Americans invented, or rather patented, was the improved production of penicillin which they did do. They then imported a man called Healey who is really the unknown hero of the case. Everybody knows about... about Florey and what's the man at St Mary's? You know... the man that everybody thinks is the greatest British scientist? Fleming, Fleming! The discoverer was Fleming. They did ten years without doing anything about his discovery, but it was Florey and Chain who extracted the active principle and made the antibiotic, the first antibiotic penicillin. Anyway it was very grating that this should happen, and I was determined this shouldn't happen again. Now Celltech was a private company, but was backed by the MRC, and it seemed to me that we in the Lab working away had absolutely no... had absolutely no... we got nothing back from it. There was at that time no system of rewards to inventors. By mixing this up with the story of CAT, because they were all intermingled, and it was all part of changing, if I could call it that, the culture of the time, the culture from being a pure research Laboratory to one who still continues to be but exploits its inventions or discoveries, and if I can say right now, for I may forget to say so later, this Lab earns in royalties and licences more than it costs to run the whole place, which is fairly unique I think in any... certainly in any MRC or any average Research Council Laboratory. And you see it's paid for by the public, where we get our money from the public, that's who... eventually the taxpayers of the country pay us, and this ought to be a return to them. But the rewards to inventors came about during the course of these... of this work. They said things would move in parallel.
Let's return to Celltech, and setting up Cambridge Antibody Technology. Greg Winter, who was in one of the other divisions, basically invented a way of making purely monoclonal antibodies, not in the system that César Millstein developed, but making them in human... making effectively human antibodies that had nothing mouse about them inside bacteria. Before that he'd invented a method of what he called humanising antibodies where the antibody was made in the mouse, and he... but by working on antibody structure, he grafted on the determining regions, the regions of the antibody which determine the specificity of the antibody, so this had CDRs which were found from the mice, but were grafted on to a human framework, and these much less immunogenic. You see, the early promise of antibodies when you inject mouse antibodies to humans is anaphylaxis, that people sometimes practically die because you get a reaction against a foreign body. So it went through various stages. Michael Neuberger invented what's called chimeric antibodies and that... that there are still a few being made, but Greg's great achievement was to make fully human antibodies, using phage display selection technique in bacteria, and he did this by cloning the whole the human repertoire, all the V and the... all the V genes and the J and the D, so we had a complete repertoire of all the genes. You could put them together, make combinations as combinatorial chemistry really, put them together and put them into a bacterial cell and make an antibody, which didn't involve animals. That was very much welcomed and on the basis of that, I went. I was Head of the Lab and I thought, well this is something really big.

So I called a meeting of... I called a meeting of Glaxo, Unipath, which is the antibody arm of Unilever, and they are the people who make the kind of antibodies which you can test for... basically pregnancy tests and so on, which you can buy over the counter, these are antibody tests for various hormones in the... in the... well, you can do it in the... and things of that sort, and other antibodies for testing for toxic agents. They are quite a big company. And the third company was Burroughs Wellcome. And so I... so we had a meeting and they all... I hoped that they would begin to exploit it in some way by putting effort into it and we would set up some system of licensing, or royalties, or whatever, and they all said, very, very, oh very, very nice and so on, and went away and did nothing. To say, you know, the culture of the time was really... well, in fact, in Britain you expected it, that they weren't very adventurous, but in 1990 I went to a meeting with Johnson & Johnson with Michael Neuberger to talk about these new kinds of antibodies, therapeutic antibodies, and the chairman of one of the sessions was James Black. James Black is a man who's the greatest benefactor of mankind. He discovered the antihistamine drug, Tagamet, later Zantac for ulcers, and the second one he did, was propanolol which is a beta-blocker beta-recept... you know... blocker. He got a Nobel Prize later. He hadn't got it then, but he was running very high, so when we spoke... Mike Neuberger spoke about chimeric antibodies, I spoke about Greg's work, because Greg wouldn't go to America, he hated Americans for some reasons which escape me. Later on, he made some peace with them, and James Black, full of prestige and the greatest... the greatest... I think they call themselves 'pharmacologists of the day', said, and he was the chairman of the session, so he spoke ex-cathedra... an antibody can never be a drug. So it was all part of the... and this is, I guess, reflected in what these other companies are.
So in the end I didn't know what to do. I thought we might do something else, so I went to Rothschild's, to various other companies so see if we could get money in other ways. Sydney Brenner was then advisor to Rothschild's, but we didn't get any money or anything from them. I think Sydney was a bit jealous of Greg, because he had been trying to do something similar in putting antibodies on the surface of lambda and he couldn't it to work. There was a... well, he didn't have all the secrets, the secrets of course lie not in the technique but more in the little tricks that you have, so you had to use Cadbury's milk powder. The only thing that worked was Cadbury's, which you added to the various mixtures, which prevented adhesion to the glass... you didn't lose the material. It was well known you added things. Bovine serum albumen is what one normally added, but Greg or Greg's people discovered Cadbury's milk powder was much better, and that was one of the know-how that you don't put into papers, you see. Anyway, I mustn't get trapped in these asides. So what could we do? So Greg Winter stimulated by Alan Fersht said, 'I'm going to set up my own company', and if he had been an American, the American style would be you leave academia and you set up a company, you get people to finance you. Now, we could get people to finance us. There was a company called Peptech in Australia run by Geoff Gregg who had been a student of... a student of... Fred Sanger, a very large genial Australian, and he... now, when you had to try to get money, you had to present a business plan. Now, business plans are all bogus, because as this is something totally new, how can you say what it'll cost to develop, how many years it will take, and so on. And so he didn't... he said, 'We don't need any of that. I'll try to raise some money for this', because he had confidence in this Lab and in the people, and he got money from Carlsberg Biotech which was the offshoot of Carlsberg Breweries, and they... they raised... they proposed that we form a company.

I went to Headquarters, MRC Headquarters, and I said, 'We must make an MRC spin-off company, and... we have... well, we will have £750,000 invested in making antibodies, human antibodies and also possibly humanised antibodies', which had already been licensed to other people, they had been licensed. So they said, 'Oh no...' – this was the second Secretary, who said, 'Oh no, we can't have equity, have shares in the company'. I said, 'Why not?' He said, 'We're not allowed to by the Treasury.' I said, 'Well, you may not know this, I didn't use those words, but you already own shares in MRC.' They were aghast, he and Norman Morris, the second Secretary, 'We're not allowed to do that.' I said, 'Well, I'm sorry, but I've acquired some shares in a company called Somatogen, and I have to explain the background of that.'
These were the days of Mrs Thatcher who didn't believe that anything in the public sector was going to be much good, and we were supposed to channel everything, channel everything through private... through companies. That refers later to the con-focal microscope, by the way, because there again we were supposed to have sent it out, not develop it in house. So they were aghast and I didn't know what to do, so I said they must take 10% of the equity. Peptech who were putting up the money would have 40% and the rest would be from other investors. And I said that if the MRC invested, it would be a mark of confidence, you see. Obviously, they didn't have to pay any money, they would just be given the equity and royalties and so on. So I said, 'Well, you already have shares. Well, how did these shares arise?'
In the Lab we'd had Kyoshi Nagai who'd been a post-doc of Max Perutz and he was the man... the first person to express the eukaryotic gene in bacteria. This was going on at the time, people expressed bacterial proteins. This was the new technology, you know, we were living through this revolution, recombinant DNA technology and so on, and making proteins and bacteria. But he showed that you can make globin inside a bacteria... a rather large molecule, and you could make haemoglobin by... it's just simply a haem group which made haemoglobin and the point of all this was that you could make basic-recombinant haemoglobin. People had made recombinant insulin by this time, but this was... but those were really a small molecule. And this is a big thing, four sub units and so on. And the reason for making it is because blood supplies were poisoned by herpes, various sexually transmitted diseases where you got them from donors if you want to get blood supplies. And also AIDS by this time, HIV. It was very clear that a lot of specimens had HIV and herpes, so there was a market for blood products. And then you wanted something that held... could supply a large amount of oxygen very quickly. Now, Kyoshi Nagai was working on haemoglobin, trying to modify it in such a way that you changed its binding characteristics for oxygen so that you could carry a whole load of oxygen. The binding properties of haemoglobin are very carefully controlled so that not only can they load up with oxygen in the lungs but offload them in the tissues. This depends on their pH and so on. It's a very beautiful biological system. We didn't want that. We simply wanted to have a great load, and so what he was doing was trying to take bits of proteins from the haemoglobins of crocodiles which are diving animals and others which would... trying to fuse bits of it doing protein engineering, you know, trying to make a new kind of haemoglobin and again in the tradition. There was a small American biotech company called Somatogen which was paying for a post-doc... and Somatogen working on this very problem, and nobody else was doing anything like this and they had confidence in this, and they were paying for a post-doc. And of course, expenses and things of that sort, and they would have a... they would get royalties if they produced something, so one day... an industrial liaison officer, who had been set up by Sydney, there was a certain amount of industrial liaison, David Secker came and said, 'They can't supply, they've run out of money and they can't pay for this post-doc.'
Now, there was a set of posts that I had additional to our Lab establishment, the number of posts which the MRC gave to the Lab. This was one of Sydney's wheezes, Sydney Brenner, and he was marvellous about these things. He had reckoned that we needed extra posts for special projects, and MRC are reluctant to give us more posts in the establishment, but they agreed with Sydney's... Sydney had got... they were three lots of three posts, and each post lasted for three years and these had started one year after the other, so at any one time we had nine posts, and after three years one group of three would return to the MRC so they weren't permanent in the establishment. So we had some posts and Sydney had set up a Director's Division to control these posts, and what he did with them is another story, he pursued all sorts of adventures of his own, including new ways of sequencing DNA which didn't succeed. But this was a pretty effective... thing to have, and it did mean we could put people on... hire people for new projects and if I can interrupt the story, I'll come to another application of having these Director's posts which may have helped to lead to John Walker's Nobel Prize. Anyway, to return to this subject, so... so I then decided I had these posts, and they weren't specified what I could do with them. Earlier on I'd asked the MRC whether we could use some posts for what I call applied work and they said, no. I asked for extra posts, and they wouldn't give it to us, but there was no barrier on these posts. So I said, 'We'll continue with it ourselves', and Somatogen offered 25,000 shares. I said to them, 'Ask for 50', so when I... To return to the story, when I told David Noble and Norman Morris at MRC Headquarters that they owned 50,000 shares in Somatogen, they said, 'Well, we're not allowed to own those.' I said, 'Well, you have them, you'll only send them back – they're worth something', in fact, eventually they were sold for a million dollars, something just under a million dollars. So they said, 'Well, we'll have to think about all this', and in the end they came back some weeks later to say the Treasury would agree to our accepting, to MRC accepting a small fraction, so what's a small fraction? I said, well, instead of 10, why not 4, which is 10% of 40, you see. They said, 'No, no, that's too much.' So we eventually settled on 2%, so little it needn't be noticed. You must understand the culture was very different at the time. They were like... they were civil servants, you see. So we accepted 2% and we set up Cambridge Antibody Technology.

Antibodies are bringing in a good deal of money and CAT has brought in a fair amount of money, but will bring in a lot more because CAT has developed an antibody called Humira. It's called... as you know, it was made for a German firm, BASF who's going over to biologicals and Knoll, and this antibody is for rheumatoid arthritis. Now there are a lot of antibodies for rheumatoid arthritis. Now, what they do mostly is to stop the pain, but the Humira actually stops the progression of the disease. This was developed purely by CAT together with Greg, Greg was the scientific adviser, and this is a big blockbuster. It will be selling... it sells at the moment about 1.6 billion worth a year. It looks as though the sales next year will be 2 billion. Now that's a blockbuster drug, it isn't as big as some drugs, but it's bigger than almost all of them. But as I said, there's a court case where they refuse to pay the royalties. So after... so from then on, the MRC accepted equity, and we're going to set up companies, but before I set up the... before we set up CAT, I had to be... I had to break the tradition that all our discoveries went to Celltech, particularly in this field. So when I became Director, I had the support of... we were in the position, roughly in this position, CAT hadn't been established yet, and I found that a man at Headquarters was simply assigning any patent we took out to Celltech for no recompense, you see, non-whatever. The idea was this was part of British industry, would help British industry, and we were just backroom boys and shouldn't be involved in any of this. This was the way they looked upon it. In fact, I think... they didn't call us boffins, but that's the attitude they had, you know, we didn't know about the wider world of commerce and exploitation, and the Head of Celltech... so I began to try to get rid of our agreement with Celltech. This took a whole year, and I had the backing of César Milstein, who's Deputy Director, and of course, they'd made some monoclonal antibodies, but I was leaned on by MRC Headquarters, I was really literally leaned on, called in to MRC Headquarters and I resisted. I said, 'Well, I think we'll patent an antibody. We're not going to give them... we'll make the antibody and then we can patent', and things of that sort, and then we can do something with Celltech, trying to find ways of evasion. I was helped by Dai Rees who was the Head of the MRC elect, so he told me, 'Hang in there. When I become Head of the MRC, I'll support you.' So for a whole year... it was quite fun, with César Milstein who got very worried about the difference between winding up our relation with Celltech, and winding down our relationship, so we were... we decided to wind it down and eventually wind it up, and we did. So this was the brakes... this was now the MRC, this is beginnings of modern transfer... technology transfer.

During this period, there was also... I discovered that although Greg Winter was very interested in all this, and when Greg Winter was set up... when Cambridge Antibody was set up, he became Research Director, part-time Research Director, so he earned some extra money, but they also wanted people to push it. Michael Neuberger, who I heard can make antibodies, showed no interest in developing them or exploiting them. In fact, he said to one of the Ministers in the Government, I've done my bit, let the others do it. Now, it doesn't work like that. You can't develop anything unless you have a champion of the science and technology. You have to have that. And Greg was a marvellous champion. He wouldn't go to America, but he did talk about it. So the... so it was... there was no... the awards to inventors... there was an award to inventors based upon the Government policy and Ken Holmes may remember with Bill Longley getting an ex gratia grant of a few hundred pounds, 250 was it?
[Q] 250 pounds.
250 pounds. That was called an ex gratia payment, so if something had been invented in the public sector, you would... and had brought in money to the Government or to the country, could be to the country, you could apply for an ex gratia grant, and a prime example of this were the people invented the cavity magnetron which is what powered RADAR. Now that helped win the war. The inventors of the cavity magnetron after the war, Randall and Boot, got I think something under £3,000 which could buy a house at the time, but these were the most... the greatest invention of its time, the invention of RADAR and they got... and that was the system of awards.
So also, I argued for having awards to inventors, and eventually by now this time the Head Office at MRC was waking up to this, that we were doing these things and so over the year or two, we created a system of awards to inventors which... a complicated system, it's been revised over the years, but roughly speaking, if you get an invention which is in the... not bringing in great amounts of money, one third goes to the Lab, one third to the inventors and one third to the MRC, because they supplied the money. Now the inventors are not necessarily the people whose names appear on the patent, but everybody who has helped get it, and the 'inventors' – inverted commas – I as Director decide on the inventors, so when it came to Greg's invention, there's at least six people on it, not just Greg himself and Peter Jones and so on, all who'd helped in one way developing the technology, and the other thing about the... we were committed to do was that in Cambridge Antibody Technology we were, César and I and Greg, became... I become a Director of Cambridge Antibody for which I got £1,000 a year, which was novel, César became a Consultant and he got £1,000 a year... we were equal because he invented... and Greg got something also similar. Later the money was increased, but it was the first time we could receive, and I had needed the permission of MRC, so there was now a... so this was the first that this had ever been done, which broke the old Cambridge... you know, the old academic adage which you find in Cornford's book... in academia nothing should ever be done for the first time. Roughly, this is what they basically... was in the culture at the time. So that was technology transfer.

I was involved in the creation of the first practical confocal microscope... not involved, I actually started it. Now the confocal microscope was the first of its kind, brought in a great deal of money in the early years. It was made commercial by a company called Bio-Rad which I'll tell you about in a moment, and brought in a good deal of money when they sold, but because of very bad management, absolutely terrible management, they lost out to the companies like Zeiss and Leica, who followed later and actually didn't break the patents, but they simply outsold them by introducing new versions which had more facilities and so on. But the confocal microscope was the first microscope where you could see the tissues of a cell in a detail which nobody had ever seen before. And the way it came about was that I had read a paper... the confocal microscope was invented more than 30 years ago, but never made practical, the idea being that you scanned the picture and put it together on a computer. It was done by this Marvin Minsky, a very brilliant... he's sort of a near genius, invented all sorts of things in psychology, artificial intelligence, and so on. He proposed it in the 1950s, it must have been, but nobody built it. But there were people who were building confocal microscopes in Oxford, where they had moving stages rather than a scanning head, which is what the modern ones use, and I knew something about confocal microscopy because at one time we were going to do confocal electron microscopy. This is because the man at the Argonne Lab, what's his name, was building one, and at one time I commissioned AEI to building a confocal electron... what's his name?
[Q] Crewe.
Crewe! Albert Crewe, Albert V Crewe, yes, Albert Crewe. He also introduced the filaments, these gave you high intensity. I can't remember what material it is from which you extract the electrons. But he was a very good inventor. So I knew about the confocal principle, but I read a paper which was sent to me for refereeing by a man in Holland called [Fred] Brakenhoff, and Brakenhoff was building one of these stages... confocal microscopes, and what he had done was to introduce an aperture in such a way that it cut out extraneous noise. He was getting remarkable detail. The paper's purely on chromatin. This was what he regarded as a standard application of confocal microscopy. There are others who have built... the people in Oxford were trying to build one as well, which also had moving stages. And then I realised... so I wrote a report on this, and I realised you can probably get much better or precise illumination if you introduce a system of stops. I mean, I didn't invent it, but I saw... that what Brakenhoff had done, without emphasising it, because I couldn't understand why he got such detail. So I went to John White... John White is a man who was working on the nematode project, the worm that Sydney [Brenner] had set up, and he was doing the anatomy, but he was trying to use optics, by using laser optics to kill cells and developing worm, working together in fact with John Sulston. So he knew something about optics, had been trained as an engineer, he knew something about optics and he knew something about biology. So I went to him and said, 'Look, why don't you go to Oxford and see what they're doing in Oxford, in the engineering department, with this confocal microscope and see if you can adapt it with systems of stops to give you a much better images', and so it turned out he never went to Oxford, but in the Lab we had Brad Amos, who was a... had been a zoologist but interested in microscopes and optics, and he built a new kind of scanning instrument based upon the carbonometer principle which scanned the instrument, and we also got... now the thing about the confocal microscope is that you can get... you can get very high resolution, but you can also get high resolution in the line of view, in the longitudinal direction, and it goes roughly as the square of the abbé which is in the lateral resolution, so in other words you can... with a confocal microscope you also get an optical section, a section optically, so they improved the illumination. They were really very good. It was all done in-house and I got the... I got the Lab to start a project on building their own confocal microscope.

Now this is what I was talking with Mrs Thatcher. What we should have done, according to the MRC... we weren't allowed to do near market research. We were supposed to hive if off to private industry, because by being in the public sector, we were hopeless, you see, because we were lazy, lackadaisical, kind of... very doctrinaire stuff at the time. It was all part of the move to privatise our Labs. It was all happening at about the same time... well, over a period of years. So, so I also... So we enlisted Richard Durban who was a very skilful programmer to write programmes by which you could... you had to measure, look at the... what's the word? Digitise the films and put them together in three dimensions, and then you could calculate a view from any direction. That was a very good programme... and so we built completely the first working confocal microscope and we tried to find a market for it.
By then, we were now doing... this was 1986, this was fairly early on '86 or '87, in fact it was before CAT. Zeiss didn't show any interest. There was the Cambridge Instrument Company which had built on them, built scanning electron microscopes, which showed surface features, and they hummed and ha-ed, they said, 'Well, we want to go into optics', and there was a company called Bio-Rad which made medical supplies, and they supplied things for optical equipment and so on, you know, washing fluids and they provided chemicals, and they wanted to get into medical or bio-medical instrumentation, and in the end they decided to back it. So we built completely the first one, and they built... we built and then we really taught them how to build four identical copies and this is where they came into their own, because they had... they were a large company with a rather large sales force, and they took this confocal microscope to various Labs. They went to Garry Borisy, Wisconsin, who's working on a motor motility and others, and simply left them there, and the programmes that were written by Richard Durban were such that they were easy to use, they were really user-friendly, and Brad Amos went along and gave a couple of hours' tutorial or something on the use of the programmes, so within a year the Bio-Rad thing started to sell very well. And then later on... this is just one colour later, you know, the things were illuminated by... it was one wavelength, one colour, but later as other dyes were invented so that you could have different colours, you do multi colours, you could do multi labelling, multi chemical labelling, and you could look at the components. And a paper published by Hugh Pelham in Science, was the cover of Science, on the endoplasmic reticulum, this is the first time anybody had seen the endoplasmic reticulum in glorious colour, and follow it in 3D, you could follow all its invaginations and ruffles and so on. So it was a great step forward. The Lab made quite a bit of money from this and the MRC did, but now the rule of one third, one third, one third, actually only applies to small amounts of money. As you get into bigger sums of money, and this applies to the antibodies, there's a sliding scale, so the inventors and the Lab get less and less, and the MRC gets more and more, the idea being that you mustn't have, you mustn't... well, I'm not against it at all, because you can't have very great inequalities in the Lab, so though people can be really perhaps double their income, or something of that sort, it shouldn't be... so that was the... so that's part of the rewards to inventors.

Mrs Thatcher, oh, what's his name, he later became Lord Mayor of London? What's his name? Levy? Not the current Lord Levy, Tony Blair's friend, another man? He'd been in one of the Ministries and he and Mrs Thatcher introduced... there were various... earlier on we'd had various scrutinies... we were scrutinised by... I've forgotten the name of the people who scrutinised us. Mrs Thatcher was very worried about this large public sector. Because she believed passionately that anything the public sector, as I said, had to be inefficient, and in fact Dai Rees told me, who was the Head of the MRC, he'd been Head of the Unilever Research Laboratory, he told me much later than when he left to become Head of the MRC, she criticised him for leaving a serious and important job in industry for a soft job at the MRC. Those were her words. And she had, of course, heard the news of this... a very doctrinaire business, and so they set out... it went in three stages, the first was the Levy Report and that was sent out... no, I've forgotten the name of the man, there was one which we were scrutinised, I've forgotten the name of the Minister, who was acting for Mrs Thatcher, the minister who... and one of the things they reported, I remember being in the Lab, they reported... we had 19 different kind of test tubes in the stores, why didn't we rationalise this? This was some modest scientist who'd been rolled in and didn't understand that there were many different instruments of different kinds, and so on. So that's was the first... it was called 'the scrutiny'. There was a scrutiny done.
Then after the scrutiny they set up what is called 'prior options', which was much more sensible. Prior options was... is some research worth doing? If it's research worth doing, is it best done in the private sector or in the public sector? And this was prior options. By this time, Mrs Thatcher had been replaced by John Major, and John Major's Ministry of Science kicked it into touch, roughly. It never got very far. He could see... well, before that had happened, I had... you see, there was total lack of understanding... in the Government what the Treasury's job was not to spend money to further research, but to save money. That was the... they still work like that. That's where all the cuts from, the Treasury. And although there'd been in the white heat of the Harold Wilson thing, when the government was going to spend money on technology. Do you remember Tony Benn and all that? That idea was to spend money, but that didn't work very well, because they didn't know how to choose winners, if you remember the politics of the time. No, this was partly, this doctrinaire policy was that people aren't good at spotting winners, that's best left to private industry. So it wasn't, although it was doctrinaire, it had some foundation. It wasn't just purely theoretical. But we already by this time had begun to do transfer of technology, and it was all worked out in the basic establishment. So we were marked, we were on the list, so I got... Crick and Watson to write letters to The Times to say about this laboratory, what it had done not just in Nobel Prizes, but it actually had inventions coming out of it, for which we could... I think the confocal had just then come out at this time. But this was in the early days. So when the finalists appeared, we went on the list, but the Dunn nutrition Lab was on the list, for example, and the so...called inspectors came to see me, to see how we worked here, and it turned out they were absolutely surprised to discover that I was Head of the Lab. They expected to have an administrator as Head of the Lab, and I was supposed to be, like on tap, you see, to head the science and recruit people, and there was no understanding because I discovered I was called in Treasury terms a Senior Manager, because I was a certain grade. The MRC grades are parallel to the Civil Service, and my grade put me as a Senior Manager. So I told them what I did, and they said, 'Are you a working scientist?' I said, 'Yes, most certainly, I try to be part of the time but I have an administrator, who was Anne, but she does the budget and things like that but I keep an eye on all that', and they thought this was all wrong. And this was the Civil Service! So I think we also helped educate the Civil Service. Things have changed... a good deal now.

I did carry some new initiatives. One was I mentioned creating a new Department of Neuroscience, because it seemed to me this is an important coming subject, and we had people doing odd bits there, particularly with an nematode, and particularly with an nematode, and the other thing I think I did, was to... I had this Director's section which I inherited from Sydney [Brenner], and there were all sorts of odd bods in it. One was some neuroscientist. I think I talked about Alzheimer's Disease. There were people who were going to do the... solve the retina, had actually begun. There were also... John Sulston was in the Director's section.
Now, John Sulston was originally a chemist, and he'd come to work on DNA, and so he had an appointment in the Lab which was not that of a group leader, but that of an essential person in the Lab. It was a new category. They were called B appointments and A appointments in the office but not known publicly. So he wasn't entailed to be a research group leader, and so one of the things he did was when Sydney Brenner started the whole nematode, created the whole school, John Sulston was a kind of assistant, a high class sort of lieutenant of Sydney's, originally working on various aspects of DNA and... not DNA sequencing, but DNA sequencing had been carried out by Fred Sanger and Alan Coulson. What he had done was to find out the lineage of the C. elegans there's a whole... one of the profound problems of biology, the C. elegans has only 931, I think that's the number of cells, and everyone is the same. They all have a fixed number of cells, and it was known from the old German work that the embryo of the C. elegans has rather more cells, and how do these number of cells get determined? So the other thing was, was there a lineage? Were there elemental steps where the number of cells could be varied, and so on? It was one of the big problems, and John Sulston spent four years in the dark room observing the growth of C. elegans, this worm, which was already the object of a great deal of research in the Lab. That was Sydney's great contribution for which he got the Nobel Prize later for starting the whole project as an experimental animal.
So then John Sulston went on to start mapping the genome of C. elegans. Now, a map means that you find signposts along the way. So the C. elegans has got, oh, I've forgotten how many million DNA. The human has 3,000 million. C. elegans might be a tenth of that, 30 million or something like that, which still is a large number of genes. And he began to map these, together with Alan Coulson, just a two-man job. They were working on only a two-man job on C. elegans and then Sydney left the Lab and I found John there, John Sulston there. He was in the Director's section. So of course, I had to find out what he was doing, and I inherited him, and he... I could see that he was a very, very, very good experimenter... a very good observer. By this time, he had already observed... he established, by the way, there was a lineage exactly, a perfect lineage, but that during the very stages of the lineage, when certain cells divided, one cell died and the other cell continued. Now this is called apoptosis. It was known there were such processes in higher animals. The word in fact was invented by a man called Curry in Edinburgh, and... but this was a precise... every single cell was accounted for in its origin. He had the complete lineage, just like a family all the way, and he also, because of the anatomy which John White was carrying out... this was part of Sydney's grand plan, because of... John White determined where all these cells were and produced a three dimensional map of the anatomy, but John Sulston did it all by visual observation.
There was a German group developing... working on developing that. They'd automated everything, but you see, if you automate, it's not as... unless you know what you are looking for... but John Sulston noticed that certain cells, what looked like cells, began to sparkle by eye, and what these were, these were the residues of cells, residues of cells which had died in the course of development. This was programmed cell death, which is the right word for apoptosis, and then these disappear after a short while, because they get phagocytosed by their neighbours. They gobble them up, and they leave no trace, and I think that's why the German group, with all their heavy automated equipment, didn't spot this. It was the keen observer and the eye spotted it. So he had done this already, but I'm just going backwards. But he also started... now I'm doing the mapping, the genome with Alan Coulson, and when I became Director, I found them at the stage where they'd made really quite a large map. Other people were trying to make maps of the human genome, a group in France for example, but they were very skilful mappers. I can't explain how they started to map. It's not my work anyway. But then the question of what to do next? Now, Sydney had left, so to speak, a legacy with John that they must go on and now sequence all the expressed mRNA. In other words, look at that part of the genes which produce a protein. I thought it would be a waste, and that one really ought to do the whole genome, because by this time I was working on... I'd been working on transcription, and I realised that the regulation of transcription is far more important, and understanding the development, than just knowing the sequences of all the products, although of course they need to be known as well. So I persuaded John... by this time, John was also being courted by various Americans who wanted to go into this, including a group at Darwin, in Seattle, and so on, and we were in danger of losing him. But I urged him that he should... he and Alan Coulson should start sequencing the whole C. elegans genome. Now it seemed within... so he had started sequencing, developing sequencing, they were still... they weren't all the very automated sequences which Applied Biosystems developed later, but the idea was that he simply start with what there was. It's a very British thing to do. You make the best of what you have, because in the world there was a HUGO, the Human something... I wonder what the U stands for, Genome Organisation, where people like Walter Bodmer, Sydney to some extent, all the leading luminaries went around having meetings about the importance of the human genome and trying to raise money for it.

John Sulston together with Bob Waterston, who was a post-doc in the Lab and later went to St Louis, he... they simply decided to start, and they started to sequence the whole genome. And they broke it up into pieces, and of course, by this time, Fred Sanger's sequencing had been in, and they gradually began to do it, and in the meantime, it became clear this was going to be a big... big problem. It would cost many millions of pounds, so I went to Dai Rees and said, ‘We must do this.’ This would be the first organism to have its genome mapped. Dai Rees managed to raise some money. I'm not sure if he got the approval of Council. I haven't been told, and I am not going to ask. But you see, I do believe in patronage. In fact, I did earlier on talk about the way to proceed is that you have to back somebody, like Hemsworth did Max, you know, and things like that. He said, ‘I can't do that.’ I said, ‘You can set aside £2 million out of your whole budget and just use some people and take on things which an ordinary committee who's playing safe would never... would never... agree to, because it's too daring.’ Will it work? We know those are the usual answers I've had in committees. Well, the answer's straightforward, we don't know until you try it, you see, which is the... but most committees don't want to be blamed. They'd rather not be blamed for failure than be praised for success, if I can put it that way. It's the risk adverse, adverse. Well, partly because of committees, but I've had the same problem with the Royal Society, but I'll talk about that later. So they began sequencing, and not waiting for all these meetings about meetings that were going on, and it was very clear that we couldn't finance this, or that it would cost more than a million pounds to do the whole C. elegans. We were now beginning to estimate what it would cost, so we actually worked out the cost per base.
[Q] Were Wellcome in on this?
Well, I... what happened is that I looked for a patron in this case, and by this time Wellcome... exactly. The Wellcome Trust had come into money, large sums of money from being a small trust. A new head called Roger Gibbs had actually spread... he bought shares in other businesses. He built up a huge... they were very, very wealthy from being a relatively small foundation, they became a big one. And so, I approached the Wellcome Foundation and really what I wanted to do was to say they should spend their new-found wealth on the human genome. And we'd got John... we'd got Jim Watson interested in this by this time and he had said that if Sulston and Waterston can get down the sequencing of the bases to less than 50 cents a base, he could persuade NIH to set up genome sequencing in the United States. So this country took the lead. And Wellcome... and so Wellcome asked Jim Watson as one of the head advisers... and so as John Sulston puts in his book, I dragged him down to London, well, I dragged him from not going to the United States which is where he wanted to go at the time, and they agreed. Bridget Ogilvy was Director of the Wellcome Foundation and welcomed the idea, and we pointed out to them that by this time John... and Alan Coulson were getting runs of 600,000 to a million bases continuous, and just as an aside, it was at this time that Craig Venter did a bacterium and got a lot of publicity for it. That was 1,500 bases, but it was already being done, John was already in the mega base. That's an aside, but that's what the public know. But John's mega base... I wrote a memoir for the Wellcome Foundation and pointed out that if you're doing... trying to find genes by traditional mapping of genes, using for diseases and using families with diseases, if you can get down to fix a mutant gene within about a million bases, then it becomes harder and harder to narrow it down by simply genetics, by looking at getting a pool of patients with a large amount of... or reducing the return. And I said, you can sequence the million. They were astounded that you could sequence the million, and see what the sequences were. And compare the sequence of that with somebody who didn't have the disease, so you'd arrive at the mutant.

I think this is what persuaded them, and the... and so they set up, they decided to set up, to put money... but not into the worm, that was an MRC project, but into the human genome. So we started the first human genome group, practical one, and the arrangement was that it was called an MRC... MRC Wellcome... later the name got changed, because it was clear that Wellcome became the senior partner. What the lab supplied was the... [John] Sulston left the lab with four others, including Bart Barrell, Richard Durbin, Roger Stalen and people like that, and went to... he looked for a home and eventually the home was found at Hauxston. We look around Cambridge for some time. There was an old laboratory, GKN had been there and there were buildings that were going defunct, and they built new buildings. And things got... things were quite difficult because Dai Rees and Bridget Ogilvy didn't get on, because Dai Rees acted as a kind of... he didn't actually patronise, but the MRC had been doing things for 80 years, and Wellcome were new boys to the whole thing, and she bristled at this, you see, they really had technology transfer. So I had to be somewhat diplomatic about all this, and I had to meet with people from the Wellcome Trust and try to piece over this... the two Directors argued with each other because the question is, when you had... spend money... but in the end, it was sorted out, and the other thing was about the Wellcome Trust being a charity. You see, they are not allowed to make money, so I said, 'That's not right.' You're not allowed to invest in things to make money, but if you invest... if you back research, and money can be made from it, surely you should get the money back to the charity, then you can use it for the purposes of... this was some sort of new idea to them, you see, because I'd had that experience with the MRC, and so I was pretty heavily involved in all this. This was in the... by now, this was well into the nineties, and so things began to be clear.
Now, John Sulston says he only did the human in order to do the nematode, but what it meant was that the people who are going to do the human genome were trained on the nematode, and they recruited people and it turned that John Sulston was a marvellous organiser. He set up working groups, he planned it all, he was really... this was an unknown talent, because before he had worked on a small scale, first all alone, and then just two people, with a small number of people, and here there were several hundred in the end. So it became clear that Wellcome were the major... major runners in all this.
[Q] This was with the Sanger Centre?
And they decided to... they wanted their name, they wanted Wellcome MRC rather than an MRC Wellcome. Look, they had a... they had a... what's the word, a start, a leaping start, from our Lab, which in their writing they didn't always acknowledge when they opened the whole Sanger Centre. So they thought of a name and it wasn't the custom to name things after living people, it's not been the custom here, but that's changed over the years, so they asked Fred Sanger. Somebody thought of asking him, calling the Sanger Centre, because they were using all his sequencing methods, and that's how they got set up. And in the end, the Sanger Centre was responsible for doing one third of the human genome because by this time, Jim Watson had managed to, had managed to get NIH to set up a genome division in the NIH and they began supplying money for people to involve in the human genome project. And so that was the great adventure. But it all started here, and the... John Sulston eventually published the sequence of the nematode with the first complex organism to have its genome sequenced, so all the great hullabaloo in June 2000... Tony Blair and Bill Clinton appeared, and announced... I've forgotten it all actually, it was such a hullabaloo, a great step... a leap, a great leap for mankind which indeed it was. A lot of the public didn't understand it, and people who wrote about it didn't understand what it could do. They thought you would now be able to solve everything. They hadn't understood this was just a table of gene sequences. They didn't even know what most of the genes are. So after this great hullabaloo, we had to spend some time explaining this was only the beginning.

People began to patent. That was another battle I was in that was began... and which we lost. Bruce Alberts and I... Bruce Alberts was then the Head of the National Academy, and by this time I was President of the Royal Society, wrote to say that people were taking out patents... patents in gene sequences, and patents were being granted by the US Patent Office, so they had examiners who didn't understand what was going on, and the patent has to be not only novel, but you have to say what the function is. It has to be... and you have to show that you can put it to use. There are three characteristics. This had none of them. It was an attempt to appropriate something which was going to happen in the future, and... but that was yet another battle which I think we won, because the Patent Office... although these patents are still lodged, the US Patent Office will not issue just any more patents on just the gene sequence, the idea being, you see, that you own the sequence, somebody finds a use for it or develops a drug from it, or puts it to use, or something like that, and then you claim and say, 'Ah, I own that', you see, like you own a piece of a land which somebody else then exploits. And you find gold in it or whatever. So those were... and to do that, in order to do that, that was... really as President of the Royal Society I did that.

[Q] In 1995, you were elected the President of the Royal Society. Can you tell us how it worked? How it functioned? With relation to affecting Government policy or...
Or being taken no notice of? Which is the other part of the story. Well, my involvement with the Royal Society goes back quite a while. I was elected a Fellow in 1969, and of course I sat on various committees, on national committees, and on the selection committees, as they're called. Sectional committees, I should say, which are basically selection committees in different subjects. But in 1989 I was elected to Council. The Royal Society consists of the President and what are called Officers, the Biological Secretary, the Physical Secretary, the Foreign Secretary, and the Treasurer. These are the five Officers, and I was just elected an ordinary member of Council, of which there are 21, and you serve for either two years or one year, that's in the original Statutes of Charles II, so there have to be 21 at any one time. I was elected, and the way George Porter, who was then the President, decided who would stay on for the second year was simply to add up the number of meetings you had attended. If you... those who attended fewer meetings were thrown off Council and some people were glad to do it. The reason I say is '89 because in '89 the... but the Council makes the decisions and prepares... I found the work quite interesting but the major thing we were doing in 1989/1990 was... global warming.

There was already a strong indication of global warming and in fact, George [Porter] brought his own work on atmospheric chemistry to help explain the depletion of the ozone hole. That was discovered by the British Antarctic Survey, but most people don't distinguish between the depletion of the ozone and global warming, they are two quite separate phenomena. And in fact, George Porter had been involved in getting CFCs carbon... chlorine fluorocarbons... CFCs, what does that stand for? Chlorofluorocarbons, the things they use in propellants, in refrigerators and things like that... some of his photochemistry had explained that. So at the time when I joined we were discussing the evidence for global warming, and I became particularly interested in this, and at the Royal Society, we produced a pamphlet suitably published in a green cover, called The Greenhouse Effect. And what this was argued was that purely on a physical basis if you have gasses like CO2 and methane producing, they reduce the amount of heat that gets dissipated from the earth, and you get... the same energy from the sun keeps falling in, so later on I took to saying the physics is incontrovertible and I think it is. The question is this: there are of course long periods during... which the climate has changed, but by then there was already evidence that the climate was changing much more rapidly than had ever happened before. So we produced this pamphlet on the greenhouse effect. I had a hand in making the corrections, amendations to it, but the... and it was the... and it argued that this would affect, we didn't know how much the man-made contribution was, but clearly from the production of the amount of carbon dioxide, it must be quite serious. And this woke up people to... so-called climatologists, to start calculating and planning, trying to calculate these things. But a long of things weren't named, for example what sinks there were in the deep oceans for carbon dioxide. Many people argue that the carbon dioxide... but already the other sinks for carbon dioxide of course are green trees, green plants and trees. But the trees are being cut down at a great rate in Brazil and Indonesia and places like that, so it was... so this was useful document and through the Royal Society and George Porter, it eventually led to the... setting up of the Inter-Governmental... Panel to study climate change, IGPCC, and that had Americans on it and so on. A lot of these was poo-hooed at first, particularly by the Americans and a figure in all this, who appears later, was a man called FO Seitz who wrote the standard work on solid state physics, I knew his work very well. Distinguished physicist who had been President of the National Academy of the US, which is a very powerful position, and later became Head of the Energy Institute which is a lobby in the United States which is saying that man-made pollution is negligible and that there's no problems, no crisis, so a formidable enemy, a formidable opponent, I don’t mean formidable opponent.

When I became President, it seemed to me that very little was being acted on. This was ten years later. I should say that I was on Council for two years. I hadn't realised that I'd been put on Council because I was offered the Presidency in... to succeed George Porter in 1990. Now in 1990 I'd only been in the lab for a little while, so I turned it down. I didn't know this at the time, but when I said, 'No' I was only the second person to turn it down after [Michael] Faraday. Faraday turned it down because he said it would... I don't remember his words, but the modern word would be: would blow his mind. He wouldn't be safe afterwards, or words of that sort. I think there was a class element to it as well. But at the time I had, of course, had experience by 1990 of four years in the lab and experience of Whitehall, but I... and I had a Nobel Prize, so the... but I decided that I was just setting up the neuroscience and I thought that... I really believed that... that it was more important to be in a lab than it was important to be Head of the Royal Society. That's a kind of... people say, it's a kind of arrogance, you see, to turn down something like that, and I was told... that it was my duty to become President of the Royal Society, because of the need for British science and all that, by various people, and... Duties, other duties... Duty, yes. So George Porter who had engineered this, I hadn't realised this at the time, was most upset.
Anyway, they found Michael Atiyah to succeed, a mathematician, and that turned out to be quite a success because there hadn't been a mathematician President of the Royal Society for a hundred years. The last one was George Stokes, you know, the famous man of Stokes' theorems, Stokes' formulae and all that, that same George Stokes. And I thought that was the end of it, but after Atiyah retired, I was approached again, but by this time... I never thought I would do it, because by this time I was 68, I would be turning 69, and I said, 'I'm too old to do this.' They said, 'Oh no, not at all. Lord Todd, the chemist, he became President when he was 69, and anyway, you have a lot of people who can help you and so on.' I was still Head of the lab, but I had another year to go, because I retired as Head of the lab in 1986 so there was one year, so to speak, between the two, and they said, 'Well, you can have light duties there.' So I became President. I was told very sternly it was my duty. If you've been brought up in the British school, an English school, the word duty... duty's one of those rallying calls like duty, loyalty, endurance, patience, all those kind of virtues that you have... well, either of the Boy Scouts or the public schools, you can't deny the call of duty. I don't think the word is used much nowadays. It was my duty to do it. So I took it on, and I became President in November 30th 1994. The Royal Society year starts in November, because it's St Andrews Day, because of Charles II. And I retired on St Andrews Day 1995 as the President.

Global warming was in my own mind, not least because nothing much had happened, except the publication of a book by John Houghton, who was with a Government Commission on Pollution which involved carbon dioxide, it really was a mixed bag. Later on, this was inherited by... the crystallographer who used to be at Birkbeck... never mind. So there were already... there was some progress in it, but I did take it up again and this happened over a period of years and I set up a committee with the support of Eric Ash who was the Rector of Imperial College to go into climate change. Now, this was quite a... this was now ten years after our pamphlet on the greenhouse effect to have another look at it. And... this one was more specific. It was first of all... to make sure that there was a man-made contribution, to check that, and also what could be done about that. And so, in the end, we produced a pamphlet called, Nuclear energy – the future climate. And the people on it... among the people on it were Mary Archer, who was then a visiting professor at Imperial College, because she's a physical chemist, and with an interest in energy, but I did get... invited somebody from France who was recommended to me, a member of the French Atomic Energy Commission, a physicist, but I knew by this time that France had 78% of its energy coming from nuclear... of its electricity came from nuclear energy and that there had been no adverse incidents. But of course, during this time there had been Five Mile... no, what's the word? Three Mile Island and Jane Fonda and things of that sort. Well... Jane Fonda, she made it her cause. Had she not at all... 'Hanoi Jane' she was called, you remember she went to Hanoi on the side of the Vietnamese. She's around publicising her book now, she's written her life story. She's invited the Royal Society as well, no less. Anyway, that's... so there was a strong feeling against it.
In the meantime, of course, there had been debates about this, and the Friends of the Earth, and Greenpeace, and people opposed this. So this committee had this Frenchman on it. He told us there had been no safety problems. Chernobyl, you see, had happened in... now what was the year that Chernobyl happened, when the Russian reactor blew up and spread this trail of devastation and made, created lots of leukaemia, lots of disease? He said this need never had happened because the Russians built their power stations on the cheap. What they do in France is that they build a concrete platform over the power station, a very deep concrete platform, so if something goes wrong, it's contained within the facility, whereas the Russians didn't have this, so this trail of devastation spread all the way for thousands of miles, the winds took it. But that was the biggest factor. The other factor there was to deal with the disposal of nuclear waste which still hasn't been solved. But we argued that... you know, because in the States there's no problem because you've got deep mines, you can bury them in Nevada, there's lots of spaces. But in England it's rather strapped. France has no problem, because they have got the whole south of France which is pretty well empty and what they believe to be stable geological formations which you have to put it in, because you have to work on a time scale of thousands of years. So what's done in Britain is to put the radioactive waste into... freeze them into, make them into... solidify them into large blocks... and sometimes you can re-process them as well. If you remember, there was a fuss about sending them to Japan. So the ground wasn't all that fruitful, because of nuclear waste, but we did have a committee on disposal of nuclear waste which recommended there was certain places in Britain where they thought was geologically safe where you could deposit these things. That was questioned by some people and was never pursued further than that. In the meantime, the waste is just accumulating, so that is the serious problem. But the view we took is that when you come to public policy you can't always do the best thing, but sometimes you do the least worst thing. There's a word for it, and people who write sociology books... I've forgotten what it is, but there's a word for doing the least worst thing, but that's what I call it in plain English. Which would be to use nuclear energy, and the other, so what we proposed in that document was there would be a carbon tax. In other words, countries would be charged according to the amount of carbon they put into the atmosphere, so many million tons of carbon a year. Of course, the Americans are the most... they are responsible for 20% of the production of carbon dioxide in the whole world.

The situation has got much worse because China and India are industrialising on a great scale, and so we visited China, or one of my colleagues did, to discuss pollution, and indeed I went to China myself in 1997 and discovered Beijing was totally polluted. They already had motor cars in Beijing as the Chinese got prosperous, and they were beginning to think seriously about pollution although they didn't distinguish between global warming and environmental pollution. But we spoke to the Chinese Academy of Sciences. So we produced this document and recommended, and it was important because the nuclear power stations were running down... had limited life time and the question was that we had to produce more, and that's still a serious problem because if it's not... I went to see various Government Ministers when we produced our paper and I found very little interest because unfortunately governments are... as of some years ago it's changed a bit, at least in words by Tony Blair and David King who's an Institute of Scientific Government adviser, and the... you see, they work on a short term basis. It's difficult to have strategy when governments are elected on a short-term basis. How can you do long term planning? It is a real conundrum for western... for societies, for democracies which have elections where the politicians are interested in... of course, in general terms... So actually, I wanted to call... I wanted to call this carbon tax, but my colleagues wouldn't let me called it the Grandchildren Tax, you see, as you're doing it not for currency, but for your grandchildren. Although, nowadays I would say, I'd call it the children tax because the rate at which it's happening... so we produced this document and I think we worked at it and I did... in my speeches if you've ever read them... I think almost every year I refer to global warming, rather like the Elder Cato, you know the man who says, whatever the subject being discussed in the Roman Senate was, Carthage must be destroyed, the implacable enemy of Rome! Unfortunately, the... quite a few of the younger people haven't done Latin or history at school. They don't know who the Elder Cato was, let alone the younger Cato. So I'm not sure... I may have appeared like a bit of an old fuddy-duddy talking about the Elder Cato, but I did mention it every year.

To reflect on that now, we may have made some headway now. At the time, the most important body would have been the US Academy, National Academy, so I approached Bruce Alberts, the then President, and asked him to join me in the statement of the two Academies about the global warming and the importance of taking action now, because it's going on a quite a rate. The rate has advanced. In those days, the evidence we had was from drill holes in the Antarctic ice which went down to about 400,000 years, and showed that there had never been another period of such rapid climatic change. And now the drillings have gone to 600,000, or was it 800,000? There was a paper recently and it's still true, so there there've been long periods at which you've had changes in the climate. You've had the great... people as you know in the eighteenth century roasted oxens on the Thames and things like that, but this is something different, and I think that's now broadly accepted. But Bruce Alberts said, that although they were sympathetic, they couldn't enter into this, for this was the year... end of 1999, beginning of the year 2000, when there was the Presidential election in the States, and Bush was standing, that's the younger Bush, and his opponent was... oh goodness, Albert Gore, and Albert Gore was called an environmentalist and being an environmentalist meant that he believed we should do something about global warming, so Bruce said we cannot take a position on this because it would appear if we supported what is part of the environmentalist lobby, we would be taking a stand in politics, and we don't that. And that's pretty... a pity, because, you see, the US National Academy was set up by Congress, to advise Congress on special issues. The Royal Society is a totally independent body and although we have received money from the Government, we don't have a set amount from the Government. What we do we get money from the Government for various projects or programmes and processes, one by one. There's no foundation money. It's quite unlike the French... the French Academy. It's quite interesting, Voltaire wrote about the French Academy when he was in... he spent four years in... and had letters from England. In the French Academy, the Fellows... the Fellows are paid. In the British Royal Society, you pay a subscription, moreover, if you attend a meeting of the French Academy, you also get an attendance fee, and there's a very small number, so they constitute a very small elite, and there is another second body called Corresponding Members, that's very, very different. So the Royal Society really is independent of the Government and give advice whether you're asked for it or not. That's really what it is.
But I should say that I'm quite encouraged... with recent... in fact this year before the G8 Summit, the Academies of the US, the Royal Society, China, Brazil, I don't remember about India, but I think they must have been in it, all came out and said that global warming had a man-made contribution, a large man-made contribution, and something should be done. And so, the G8 actually came out with it. For the first time ever they discussed the issue and, of course, Tony Blair has been talking about it for some time. So he managed to get it at least discussed at the G8 Summit. So it's a very slow process, and I talk about this because there are probably other issues where it takes a long time for reason to get hold against prejudices or other lobbies, contra-lobbies or whatever. In this case, it's the energy or the petroleum lobby and the big powerful petroleum companies, but there is... of course, we also discuss things like alternatives and during my Presidency we invited Toyota to show us their Prius car which was parked in the forecourt of the Royal Society. The Prius car is partly electric and partly petrol, and so when you run in town it's electric, that avoids all the stops and starts, but if you're doing a continuous ride, driving, you then switch over to the petrol engine, and that was the first of its kind, and I did that deliberately as part of the business of promoting the efficient use of trying to cut down carbon dioxide production. So one way or another, I was involved in it over the years, and of course I regarded that as pretty important. I still think... we really must accelerate, we really must start doing something pretty soon, before it gets too late, and in this country, it's very important because we are losing the experts. I don't think there is anybody left who can build a new nuclear power station, at least there won't be anybody left.

The first GM crops to be made... the first vegetables to be made were tomatoes, they were made by ICI quite a long time ago, and in the early nineties there were tomato paste on sale in British stores made of GM tomatoes, but the point about the GM tomatoes was that they were made for a special purpose. They prolonged the ripening period, and they also... the consistency of the tomato was also less... it was much harder, so you could in fact, it was picked with less damage and there were many other things you could build in. Tomatoes... people had studied what are called quantitative loci in genetics where you have something like the shape of a... or the solidity of tomatoes is governed by about seven different genes. People study these things, they're called quantitative trait loci, T-R-A-I-T, QTLs, this is a branch of genetics where they try to measure the amount of contribution of given genes are to different things. It is now being applied, but it has been studied in plants a great deal, with a great economic incentive in plants. Oddly enough, I discovered there is more done in plants than in humans, but now it's being done in humans.
So now what happened is that the... Monsanto, the American company, originally chemical, had bought Calbiogene one of the American GM plant companies, which were using GM crops, and these were pesticides which they introduced into crops so that you could destroy insects. There were other uses as well, where you... other... other things you could do, where you killed weeds, where you introduced something which stopped a certain pest... what's the word? Something you put on the ground to kill weeds, certain weedkillers, certain weedkillers from acting, so you put in a defence against the weedkiller and you could spray the ground, and kill the weeds. So there were different kinds of GM crops. And the thing about the GM crops is that these are done under very controlled conditions, you understand very much what these are, and indeed conventional breeding where you haven't much control, during my time when I went into this, I think in the middle nineties, the American Department of Agriculture at Beltsville, actually pulled out of production two varieties of potato because they had high... and they were produced by conventional breeding, and they had high alkaloid contents. So you see, these are under control. There are many examples of this.
I used to know a great deal about this through knowing all the details which you have to use in these arguments, and I can't remember them all. So Monsanto launched a publicity campaign in this country for their GM crops. They'd being going in America... they'd been going for ten years in America, without any adverse effects, nobody had seen these things. But this one was in the British press and they began to make it public. You know, for two years this tomato paste was on the shelves and I don't think it was labelled that these were produced by... were genetically modified. But then what happened, there was a campaign against it, including led by a lady at the Open University whose name I've forgotten, and also by... by a geneticist who was the wife of a biochemist called [Árpád] Pusztai, of Hungarian origin, and working in Edinburgh. And this is what really set the cat among the pigeons with us, not a very good analogy. He appeared unknown to anybody in a broadcast in which he said he'd done experiments, this is now in Scotland at one of the crop research stations in which he'd put genetically modified insecticides into potatoes and these were poisonous, you see, because when you fed them to animals, the animals... it destroyed their immune system and made them lose weight, and so on, and the argument became that... and he did similar things on... well, potatoes were the biggest thing of all. So it was argued that somehow by his wife, who said that if you put the gene into a crop somehow its action was going to be different, not just producing the protein product, it was going to be different from simply adding the protein product to the plant. And it turned out that the organic farmers are allowed to use this insecticide called Bacillus thuringiensis which Ken will remember. He once took X-ray photographs of the crystals. This is produced by Bacillus and it is an insecticide, it's part of the... well, it's the food for the bacteria, and so the GM people allowed, permitted them to sprinkle these crystals on, whereas you are not allowed to put the gene into the, into the plant. Now this gene is put in under absolutely simple and controlled conditions. You can also see where it's gone in, where it's... and so on.

I remember once going to a meeting where the Friends of the Earth who were opposing all of this, saying one of their scientific experts... he said, 'Well, you put your gene into the plant and inevitably you get a resistance by the insects.' I said, 'If you sprinkle your leaves of the plant with Bacillus thuringiensis crystals, don't you think the insects would also develop a resistance?' You know, there was a sort of blind... this was a scientist, believe it or not, a so-called scientist. And the things of that sort. So... and indeed it became very unpleasant. If Monsanto had not had this campaign warning of this effect, but then it became not only... the campaign against it also began to involve the anti-capitalists. These were people making a great deal of money, you know, by introducing new varieties and the poor farmers couldn't afford them and so on. And they also did something very stupid. You can put a gene in called the 'terminator gene' into a plant, so that it doesn't produce... the plants will grow in the ordinary way, grow well, but they don't produce any seeds, so it's a terminator, and the idea behind this is that then the farmers who buy this thing would then have to buy their next crop from the suppliers, and I don't think it was ever the intention, but the... so it got a lot of bad publicity and the lady from the Open University began to call these things 'Frankenfoods', but of course she got it wrong because Frankenstein was the creator of the monster, not the monster, but I don't think she knew the story well enough. And so, we actually produced... so I set up a committee for two things, one was a general committee and one was to study the works of [Árpád] Pusztai. Now Pusztai had published very little, nothing had been published in journals, but there were reports which were published in the Institute in which he worked, and it turned out it was just... everything was done in totally uncontrolled conditions. The mice were not on a strict diet, some of the mice were... there were food additives added to the mice, and it turned out there was very little evidence of any disturbance to the immune system. And the weights were irregular because the assistants...
He was a biochemist, and had never conducted any trials with animals at all, and the man who supplied the engineered potato disowned him, but by appearing on television, it made a huge impact. And it was the... I think we were never able to counter that. We published a report, and this report analysed the things as far as we could go. We treated it like a paper with reports, and I set up a committee, they were basically the reviewers and other people who would comment on it would be effectively the editors, and I didn't include just people from the Royal Society, and the paper... this was before he had written the paper for The Lancet, no less, and so when the paper appeared in The Lancet, two of the claims had disappeared. There was a new claim, that the intestinal mucosa of these animals had thickened, and it was already published, and this was done because the editor of The Lancet, whom you may have read about recently with MMR and this lot, is a man who likes to... a young man, a youngish man with a rather distinguished record in medicine, who likes to seek publicity, and he published this paper. It was also pretty... he hadn't gone out to proper referees. Anyway I had the paper refereed myself, by people at the Hammersmith, and it turned out this thickening of the intestinal mucosa was just... the evidence wasn't adequate at all. Anyway, what is the relevance of it? But I'm afraid we've lost that battle on GM crops, because the public are just saying, 'Why do you want it?' Well, the answer why we want it is for the world. If you're going to feed a world of 8 billion people, there's no way in which you are going to be able to do it, and as for the benefits you can have, it's not just pesticides and things of that sort. In the first world, there's the so-called yellow rice, which contains vitamin A, which is already being made in many places, it's made in the Phillipines and in India, and it's the... puts in vitamin A which makes the... oh, we'd better go. Which makes the gene, makes everything yellow, but stops blindness. And there are other ones. Swaminathan in India has been putting in genes from swamp plants which grow up in salty things, he's found what the genes are, he is trying to transplant them into productive plants rather than... so that you could be salt tolerant. So there are many uses of it, but I'm afraid that it's... for the moment, it's a lost cause. What the Friends of the Earth did, of course, was something very clever. They went into these trial plantations, dressed in white de-contamination suits, because you see these deadly genes are in the plants, they'd spring up and contaminate them. That's Melchett and his gang, and they destroyed a lot of valuable trials, but the public was on their side really, because they've been... brainwashed by the Friends of the Earth. And the Friends of the Earth wrote to me and others involved, saying, 'We are watching you.' Literally: we've had individual letters from Friends of the Earth, from the secretary saying that if we... we are taking note of all the things you say and publish, so that when the... I can't remember the exact wording, but when the trials take place of people who suffer disease or harm from the GM crops, we will help finance them to sue you. That's the joys of being a President of the Royal Society.

BSE, of course, properly known as Mad Cow Disease. Well that... did come out of the blue, so to speak, because people were mystified by this appearance of this disease which seemed to affect young people, and moreover the symptoms were similar to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, which was well known and I had known something about because I was once on the committee... we were discussing a group in Edinburgh, an MRC... joint MRC/FRC discussing scrapie in sheep, to which BSE is totally related. But this now affected humans and with humans you have very different symptoms. You not only have the scrapie, you have the weakness on the feet, but you have both dementia occurring and also physical symptoms. And the order in which they appear though is different from classical CJD. So what happened is that the people tendered to go to psychiatrists, because the dementia appeared... the incipient dementia appeared to come first, whereas in classical Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, it's the other way round.
So at the beginning, it wasn't... it took some years before it began to be identified as a... called variant, new variant, nvCJD, and it started to happen in people. At the same time, there was a disease of cattle, which was like scrapie. The animals began to sink on their knees and so on. I don't think they scraped as indeed the sheep do. And it was hard to know what to do. The Government... this was slightly before my time, the government had set up a committee in which there was south... Southwood from Oxford and Epstein who was an expert on the Epstein Barr virus, and they began to trace it to... the human ones ... to the cattle. They appeared at about the same time. What was mystifying was that it seemed to be mostly in young people, and of course the Royal Society was called in. The various medical... there wasn't an Academy of Medical Sciences... the Royal College were... I mean, people were summoned in, but nobody could do anything about it. If there had been a proper Academy of Medical Sciences which did happen after my time, then that would have been the right body to deal with it, but we found ourselves in a position of having to speak scientifically for it, so we really found out quite a lot about it, CJD. As I said, I knew something about CJD, and we had Peter Lachmann who was a medically trained immunologist. He was Biological Secretary at the time... and so... so in the end we... oh, we were asked to give some advice, opinions on it really. The worry was that the... the worry was... was... how bad was, would be the BSE which was really, really flourishing... not flourishing... rampaging in the population, how would it affect the human? And it was a great mystery, a great mystery how humans were affected, and also from eating beef. And so... of course, the science was not well understood.
The nature of the infectious organism appeared to be a protein, an infectious protein, called prion, which had been suggested by Stanley Prusiner. People, people thought PR stood for protein, it also stood for Prusiner, because people didn't believe in a protein... of course, everybody thought that the infectious agent had to contain RNA or DNA, nucleic acid, which carries it. And I must say I myself had heard about scrapie many years before at the time of the... as I say, when we looked at a group in Edinburgh who were studying scrapie, and the... they wanted to shut it down, they wanted to shut down this work on scrapie, because... and this is highly relevant... because the incidence of CJD is one per million per year. This is worldwide. It's not a serious issue in public health. And scrapie, although it's interesting had been studied in Edinburgh, affects sheep and people had been eating infected scrapie meat for centuries and never been affected. So when it was suggested that this could have come from eating cattle who a disease similar to that, it met with great scepticism and people explained to me about the digestive system of the cow being different from that of the sheep and so on, but I never really understood that.

Somehow scientists were blamed for this. The Duke of Edinburgh said to us once, we used to see him fairly regularly because he was Chairman of our committee which was trying to raise money to renew the buildings of the Royal Society, said to me, 'Why didn't you chaps predict it?' As though you could predict something that had never happened before and had had no experience. The editor of The Ecologist... Goldsmith, Zach Goldsmith, talked about the science induced plagues of AIDS and BSE, science induced. Of course, he's an organic farmer, he's still around. That was the kind of thing we were faced with, science induced plagues. Well, first of all, it wasn't sciences who started feeding animal carcasses to other animals, so-called bone meal is what it was called. It was farmers who started breaking up, taking dead carcasses or whatever, or remains of carcasses and turning them into bone meal, and using it as a feed. Of course, they... originally bone meal, but there were bits of meat as well attached to it, and so it was farmers who did it. Then the process became industrialised, and the question is this: why is this being done, because this has been done for about 20 or 30 years, why would it appear now?
Well, that issue has never been settled, but at the time we didn't know. We just thought that it may have come from scrapie via the... because there were 40 million sheep in this country. It's very different from most European countries. There's more sheep per head population than in any other European country, certainly in the United States, and they were other people who thought it came from pesticides or things of that sort. There were all sorts of strands. There was a farmer in Norfolk who gained a lot of publicity on the BBC saying this all came from these phosphorous agents, nerve agents, and so on. And we've found ourselves in the middle of all this, and we tried to make sense of it. So of course in the Royal Society the great thing is you can find a group of people who have some sort of expertise or experience in almost any branch of science, that's the point of the Society. And so we set up a committee headed by Peter Lachmann and so we looked into it. At the same time, there were... studies were set up about cattle. This was a Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, the MAFF as it was called, set up a study of this sort of thing, epidemiologist... Roy Anderson, then at Imperial College, an epidemiologist, and they tried to estimate the severity. Now this is BSE itself, the severity of the disease. And some studies went on. In the end the... we were called in, because they... I was called in personally at one point, because it was clear that the disease took some time to develop and they wanted to know the epidemiology of the disease. So Roy said... he came to me to say that he was trying to get figures from MAF, about the demography of milking herds mostly, milking cattle. I said, 'Why do you want to do that?' He said, 'Well, you could estimate from the proportion of animals of different ages in the population whether the farmers were sending... the first signs of disease, were sending them off to market before...' The government wanted to ban obviously the sale of infected animals, because it was suspected now by this time that it was due to human consumption. But they couldn't get what they wanted, the data. Because you could estimate, you see, from... there would be a shortfall in the number of animals, the five or six year olds. The dairy cow gives milk for about five or six years, and then they send them off for slaughter. But if they were getting scrapie... if they were getting BSE, the farmer would send them off to market earlier, you know, because the farmer's interested in making a living, and this was the practice.
They couldn't get the data from the Ministry of Agriculture. So he asked me to intervene, so I wrote to the Minister... there was a Secretary of State for Agriculture in those days, and various Ministers, and I got sent from one Minister to another, and in the end I couldn't get any data out of them. They said, 'Well, we had the data but it's now in the hands of the Milk Marketing Board.' So I tried to get the Milk Marketing Board, and found that they had been wound up and replaced by something else, you see. It was all... it was just... the government was being very defensive. They refused to do it, but in the end they did start releasing data to Roy Anderson as a result of my letters, and I tried to reach the Secretary of State and failed. I got beaten back by this one... It was about BSE. Apparently, he said, he said indirectly, my Ministers are dealing with this. Eventually the data were leaked bit by bit, but not officially to Roy Anderson, and they were able to make estimates of the size of the BSE and they recommended the slaughter of all infected animals over thirty months. That was based upon statistics and they actually... their predictions worked out quite well.

As far as humans were concerned, well, obviously one had to ban the bone meal, but there was the question of defending British beef, because people weren't buying on the continent. British beef was in great demand. And so one had to explain that the organism is in muscle in beef, not in muscle in beef, but in brains, sweetbreads, things of that sort, various kinds of tissues. There was enough evidence of that. So we published quite a number of things on BSE, trying to educate the public. I must say that in the early days I was a bit suspicious before I was President of the Royal Society of the idea of scrapie being produced by protein. I had really been around and there was a lady called Tikvah Alper... Tikvah Alper who from Durban. She was born in Durban. Her sister was a famous opera singer, and her father was a lawyer in Durban, and she was now at the Hammersmith, and she was studying this. It was rather rare at the time, and the reason I know this is because I was called in by the BBC. This was before the disease became well known, and she had said... and her studies of radiation showed, that there was an organism... ultra violet radiation, another kind of ionic radiation, had to be of a certain size. You see, you bombarded the alpha particles in which you can see the size of the target, and she'd also done UV studies, and found that they were not affected at all. This is studying scrapie. And so, it couldn't be a nucleic acid in various forms. So I was asked... I think Francis was asked to do this, to debate, and Francis wouldn't do it, he asked me if I would do it. And I said, well, I think it's unlikely, and we've never heard of any protein transmitting genetic information and so I was wrong, and Tikvah Alper was right. But this was... she actually has never been mentioned much, but she was very early on supporting it had to be a protein. It's interesting.
And of course, the man who stuck out for it was Prusiner, who later got the Nobel Prize, but already before the end of my time, I'd come to the conclusion that he was right. It was a protein only disease. In fact we made him a Foreign Member of the Royal Society before he got his Nobel Prize, because it was really something new, a protein only... though having said that, protein only, there seemed to be other factors associated with the degree of susceptibility. There was a thing he called 'protein X' and so on. So I learnt... I knew quite a bit about neuro degenerative disease, because we'd done work on Alzheimer's, so I was able to, myself, make some kind of judgement of at least who to appoint to these committees and so on. So the Royal Society is really a pretty good reservoir of advice and we went on afterwards with diseases... this is after my time, with foot and mouth disease, after my time, a kind of policy against foot and mouth. I was called in after my leaving the Royal Society to sit on diseases of livestock, which I found quite interesting. So the... I don't think there's any doubt about it, but there were various political crises on all this, you see, because the government wanted us to say that British beef was safe, that kind of thing.
I appeared on Newsnight. It wasn't... it wasn't Jeremy Paxman, it was the other man, I've forgotten his name now, a kind of minor Paxman figure, and you get asked these questions... can you say that this is absolutely safe? I'd been through that before with GM foods. Of course, you can't say it's absolutely... but you know... it's to the best of our knowledge, is pretty strong and so on. So it was quite an experience appearing on Newsnight and you get picked up by BBC car, whisked into a studio, and then you get whisked out again. Not the kind of thing I was used to. But I think we covered ourselves creditably. We produced a number of quite influential papers at the time. But it's all history now. But it turned out that the predictions about the infectivity, about the spread of new variant CJD in the human population were absolutely spot on. Roy Anderson predicted the number, and the number has been decreasing every year. As soon as the bone meal was... bone meal as it's called... of course it includes other sort of offal, basically it includes offal, was banned from animal consumption, so we had a hand in all that. MAFF itself... MAFF proved pretty useless. They didn't have very good scientific... and they were... the kind of experiments they were doing. We had various meetings at the Royal Society at which we invited people from MAFF and so on, and it was rarely... they were very poorly staffed, poorly advised and so on. This is the time when the Chief Veterinary Officer of MAFF announced to the world in general that British beef is safe, and there was no such thing. It couldn't come from eating meat and so on. It was really... there was a shakeup in MAFF afterwards. They hadn't hired... but because the kind of people who were being recruited into the Civil Service were not exactly the top echelons of science, but it did... this was an interesting exercise in which the government listened to some extent to scientists.

The mystery about young people being infected, I... it's never been settled. I just don't believe that they are especially susceptible. I think it's very simple. If you have a son who has been a student and learns to eat fast food and so on, that's what it is. They eat pies and in pies... you know what they put into pies. They put the lungs, the sweetbreads, the brains, everything, and although I argued this, it's never been pursued or accepted, because you can't go back and start doing experiments. I think it's a matter of their diet. There were all sorts of other side issues, I mean, animals in the zoo began being... getting BSE... antelopes... and things related to cattle and that was fairly easy to explain, because again they were feeding them on bone meal. And particularly the feeding of bone meal was particularly done to ewes... to pregnant cattle because it was... to strengthen them. Farmers did that sort of thing, you know, the way that you... all sorts of practices, so it was quite interesting being in the middle of all this.

Scientifically, I did come to believe the prion hypothesis because I myself knew of an example. I wrote a paper with Robert May, who was then a population biologist, on the subject, and it turned out to an old interest in bacterial flagella. Now bacterial flagella I didn't work on myself, but bacterial flagella were a helical array of protein sub-units just like TMV, and a Japanese school had worked on them and they found that the... well, I won't go into the whole story, but the bacterial flagellum is a hollow cylinder and bacteria use them for propelling through the liquid, and I had studied them because... in fact I studied their structure. How do the waves get created, and I introduced Chris Calladine to this. It is quite an interesting subject in itself. And because... they are a quasi-equivalent, because if the axis of the helix is not straight, it has a helical form and the sub-units can't all be in the same orientation. Therefore, they have to be somewhat different. I'd used that as an argument, in fact, when we did our paper with Caspar that proteins can change their conformation, have more than one conformation. It's something which Max never accepted. He thought, Max Perutz... did I say that he thought that what I told him was a very unlikely story? That would emerge later.
So I knew about bacterial flagella, and I knew something about them. Now, the point about bacterial flagella is that in order for them to grow, and this is highly relevant to, believe it or not, to prion diseases, is that they... above a certain concentration, the protein will begin to condense, it nucleates, you get a little aggregate of nucleates, and it grows. However, what the Japanese school had done was if you start off with a little fragment of a bacterium, a small, short piece... bacterial flagella have very, very long wave forms, you find that the... it starts growing as soon as you add any amount of protein, because the existing short length acts as a seed or a nucleus for... as I've told you, I knew about nucleation and growth, and what the [Sho] Asakura in Japan has shown that if you consider different strains of, say, salmonella, different strains have different helical shapes, different wavelengths and they're characteristic of the strain, because the protein of which the flagellum, of which the flagella are made, has a slightly different protein composition, slightly different. And what he showed was that the... that if you have a seed of one strain and you added the protein, the purified protein of another strain, then... and you seeded the growth, the conformation that the added protein took up was not characteristic of its own characteristic wave form, but characteristic of the seed. So this meant, this meant that a protein that the protein structure could induce a change in the structure of another protein. And I wrote a paper with Bob May, because Eigen, Manfred Eigen had written several papers which were... he hadn't got the right idea. It was published in some new journal, whose name I've forgotten, but I pointed out that this phenomenon, so you had the case where... because the argument was that Prusiner had asked that these different strains of scrapie, and different strains of BSE, all produced by different shapes of the same protein, and so this was the... and so, well the different shapes, but I should say that the susceptibility where we turn to humans does depend upon the polymorphisms in the protein composition. And it turns out that almost all the people who are susceptible to new variant disease have a certain methionine to valine change and the... but the ones which... those are the only ones who are susceptible, so there is something that would harm you, but it is protein conformation that... so in the end, all this was part of convincing me that Prusiner was basically right. Because it was argued at the Royal Society we should make him a Foreign Member, you see, and so later the Nobel Committee obviously accepted this, and gave him a Nobel Prize. So it was an interesting scientific, sort of scientifico-politico-economico... episode which I found myself in.

I'm not a good speaker, but I had to make speeches and I had to go to dinners, because the President gets invited to almost all the Livery Companies, the goldsmiths, the ironmongers, and so on. Some of them have given money to the Royal Society, but I... it was made a bit easier because George Porter arranged that I become a member of a Livery Company called The Salters. The Salters go back a long while. They are one of the twelve great Livery Companies, the Guilds. And they deal in chemistry, because salt was the original chemical in which you preserved food. And it turns out they have a Chemistry Institute, which is a branch. They are mostly composed of bankers, lawyers, rich people in the city, and there's lots of dinners of that sort, but they actually do something useful. The same for the Chemistry Institute. They actually finance chemistry camps, and this is one of the things I was called upon to do, to try to emphasise science education in schools and particularly chemistry, although I broadened it to all science education, because I said, you know, you can't discuss chemistry without all these things. And I was involved on the Association for the Scientific Education, ASE it was called, as President in my own capacity as well, because I was called a chemist, you see, that's my degree. The Nobel Prize was in chemistry. I had a degree in chemistry. So... that was quite interesting. But it made it easier if I went to the grocers for dinner, I could say I was a Salter, you see. I was a stranger, you see, a foreigner and all that to this kind of club land but returning to the Royal Society itself.
The Royal Society was regarded by many people as a stuffy place, and indeed it was. Some people wouldn't go, would never go, they found it stuffy. For example, Alec Broers, who is now Lord Broers, hardly ever went because he found it rather... not forbidding, he was a Fellow, and I know that people from this Lab hardly ever went to any of the functions because they're too busy advancing science, but I don't think they thought much about the stuffiness. But we began to change things, largely because of my wife, my Liebe, my wife. So for example, at soirees and the receptions and things of that sort, they used to serve canapés and little itsy-bitsy things and Liebe changed it and said, well, we'll have a plated meal, you see, and vegetarian and so on. And we changed it. We had a House Committee and we got Olga Kennard on to it, who is a very practical lady. And we changed the caterers and things of that sort, the kitchens, although they did provide lunch and so on, they did all of that. So little things like that changed.
But the main... so on the social side things got a bit freer and easier and by this time... soirees were always... when I'd been on the Council ten years before, for a soiree you had to come in white tie... white tie and tails, with decorations, and this was a great bore. A lot of people didn't have, well, the old generation always had white tie... you couldn't go to a big function, without a white tie and tails. I had one, because for the Nobel Prize you have to wear that, so I had one that still fitted me I was glad to say, and so when I was on Council, already things had begun to change. Most Fellows came... either they didn't come or they came in black tie which was a solecism. That's not the right word. Yes, solecism is where you say the wrong word, but in terms of dress it was a solecism. But it was all put right, because one dinner, at the Royal Society dinner, Prince Philip was a guest, he's a Royal Fellow, and he appeared in a black tie and medals. Now that was contrary to all social practice, because you only wore decorations with a white tie and full regalia. So he was the equivalent to Beau Brummel in his day, he set the fashion. You know, Beau Brummel changed and Brighton changed the fashions. That was a great relief, and so after that... so we did little things like changing the invitations. Instead of white tie, we started gingerly... white tie or black tie. Little things like that. In the end white tie disappeared, we only had black tie, you see. And now, nobody... but it had begun to change when I was on Council, so the Officers all appeared in their white ties, and most of the Fellows came in black ties. So gradually the social thing changed and it was, you know, very much frowned upon to wear decorations with a black tie.

In terms of role of the President, George Porter, who was my predecessor but one, did not have his own secretary. He told me he had to fight to get his own secretary because his secretary was actually the secretary of the Executive Secretary who was a paid official. Who was like a Civil Servant. The attitude of the senior staff of the Society was like civil servants. The President and the Officers were like Ministers, they came and went, and provided no continuity. So they regarded themselves as the keepers and the... of the protocol of the Society, and they organised the meetings and organised the procedures, but George Porter managed to get his own secretary. Michael Atiyah, he was my immediate predecessor, inherited his own secretary, and he helped loosen up things a bit. But when I came, the Executive Secretary, I found that he opened all my letters, read them and passed them on before they came to me, you see, which is what a high Civil Servant would do. Of course, the letters come addressed, sometimes they were personal, sometimes they were scientific, often they were cranky, people still trying to prove Fermat's last theorem, or there was a whole collection which was, Einstein is wrong. So I was asked what I do with these letters. They said, 'Well, we keep them. We have a whole filing cabinet called cranks. And we don't throw anything away just in case they turn out to be right, because some people like to lodge their...' It's a way of lodging something at the Royal Society.
I think I... I must say I didn't honour it always. When I saw something that looked totally cranky, I didn't pass it on. But I found that they also wrote letters, on occasion it was very useful for the Executive Secretary... you see, the Executive Secretary is paid, and he's called the Account Holder, so the Treasury regard him as the important person, as he controls... actually he doesn't control, but he keeps the money. Council decides how it's spent and so on. So he's quite a powerful figure and he corresponds to something like an Under Secretary of the Ministry. He's quite well paid, and indeed they'd... up till then they'd all come from the Civil Service. He'd been in the Cabinet Office for many years, and he... so I gradually... and so then when I came to write my first report on my... this was a performance report at the end of each year. All the staff have an appraisal. He came to me and said, 'Do you want me to write Enid's appraisal'? I said, 'No, I'll write it.' 'Oh', he said, 'I thought you'd want me to do it.' So I said, 'But she's my secretary'. 'I see her every day', he said. He was trying to say, 'She's part of my office, you see'. She's part of my office, and she's just loaned to me, that was the attitude. Gradually this changed and indeed the Assistant Executive Secretary told Liebe... because I was clearly proving a little bit difficult, I had been used to the LMB and places like that. Peter Cooper said to Liebe, look we don't want the President to be active, we want a figurehead here, you see. Well, this was ludicrous by now, because by now we'd got pretty well involved in science policy, and had been for some years, and indeed Lord Todd appointed a staff member, the very first of his kind, and he was several Presidents back, just one member of staff to deal with science policy. They'd never had that before. The policy, such as it was, was made on the hoof. And Michael Atiyah had increased the number of people dealing with science policy and global issues, and I actually strengthened our science policy group, because this was becoming more and more important.

So by the time I came to my last campaign at the Royal Society, it was on stem cells, again... well, stem cells surfaced, I finished on November 30th 2000. Before I left, we had managed to get a Bill through Parliament allowing the use of stem cells. Now this again... this happened only in Britain. Only in Britain are we allowed to... there are a few other countries. In Germany, it's totally forbidden, in the States it's not allowed because Bush will only allow certain cell lines to be used for stem cells, it's all very limited. There are one or two other countries contemplating it. It may be one of the smaller countries, it may have been in Holland that they allow it now. Now this again goes back... it's the same sort of pattern that's happened with global warming. When I was on Council in 1989/90 the issue came up of experimentation with embryos, and I've forgotten how it all surfaced, but people wanted to find out whether you could... you could do research on animals of course, but this would now be on human embryos, and so... we managed to – we produced a paper – it had been debated – this... is all to do with IVF and people like that, and what do you do with cells which have been fertilised and they don't implant, surplus cells they're called, and from which you could produce an embryo, blasocysts and things of that sort, in the early stages of development for implantation into the uterus.
It turned out people were woefully ignorant of this. A member of the House of Lords, a lady member, thought a test tube, we call them test tube babies, she really thought that you actually implanted the ovum, you fertilised it, and you grew it in a test tube, you grew a whole embryo in a test tube, so they hadn't realised they get implanted into the womb, and the ignorance was appalling. But... they set up a commission called the Warnock Commission which was to allow work on this sort of thing, and Anne McLaren who is a very distinguished embryologist... we discussed all this and the French were discussing this and... but they never got anywhere, and so we decided to produce a paper. I was on Council and she suggested we should argue in Parliament with the Warnock Commission, through the Warnock Committee, that experimentation on human embryos should be permitted up to 14 days. But we were looking for a time table... obviously you can't do it on foetuses which are really pretty big, and I realised from listening to the public that most people don't know the difference [between] an embryo and a foetus. They think the embryo is a little homunculus. Ann MacLaren suggested that we choose 14 days, because that's the day in which a primitive streak, the origin of the nervous system, begins to appear, so before that, it was quite interesting discussions, because, you know, Aquinas had said that the soul only enters the body at 40 days. I've forgotten the name of the Pope in 1859. The Pope, of course... there was a new biology, he thought, life begins not at 40 days, but at conception. Of course, he was right, and this changed the teaching of the Catholic Church. So there were all sorts of side issues one had to learn about.

The debates we had at the Royal Society which we asked to... As I said, we were sometimes asked to pronounce on these things. This time we were asked: what was the scientific view? Well, Anne McLaren suggested that you should allow experiments on embryos, and cut off at 14 days because that's when the primitive streak appeared, and that is the first time you have a nervous system, the beginning of a nervous system. So since the biology of the day, since the teachings that meant that nothing before 14 days was anything resembling a... it was a living entity all right, but it didn't have any kind of nervous system, so it couldn't think, it couldn't feel pain, it couldn't do anything of that sort. And I made one small contribution... I was a preferer of Council. I said... now the Royal Society statements were always just typed, and I said, 'Why don't we have a picture?' Never been done before, a picture of the 14-day embryo, and what it is, it looks like a tiny little worm with a line down the middle. And it looks like nothing at all. And so, we actually did a hand drawing, Anne drew it at the end of the paper, and this went to Parliament, to the House of Lords. I think it was an eye-opener to most people who had never done embryology. They really thought... you know, they think there's a little homunculi, they thought that you form a... everything just grows, you see. Well, of course, they should have known better, because even a plant changes with... a plant when it grows, well they've seen that, and of course the farmers and the people with animals would have known this if you have abortions and so on. But the general public didn't know all this.

Towards the end... towards '99, there was a movement to say that stem cells are going to be important, and stem cells would be made. To make stem cells, embryonic stem cells from out of the stem cells, you have to make them from early embryos, from very early embryos, well before 14 days. After two or three days we used to have the blastocyt stage where they are in a cell mass. This is standard embryology which actually I had learnt as a medical student, and from... in a cell mass you can derive cells which all look like each other and which pluripotent, if not totipotent, that is they can turn into any other cell. And so, we were able to get the legislation through because of the Act which allowed experiments in embryos up to 14 days. So towards the end of 2000, I wrote to every member of the House of Commons, I wrote in my official capacity, and we organised some teach-ins in the House of Commons, invited the Lords as well, and so the legislation went through that following year. So this was the first country to legalise the production of embryonic stem cells from embryos, and so the research is permitted. And now that people have licences for it, I think it... I think it illustrates again that this... there was ten years between the Human Fertilisation Embryo Act which set up a committee and this, so you see it takes a long time. It reminds me of global warming which took over ten years to get people moving. So society changes, and changes very slowly. Well, at least on these levels it changes... there are obviously other things that change society, rock groups, mini-skirts, all those kind of things, but I'm talking about issues of... well, I don't know if they are more important, but issues of a different kind of importance.

I think the Royal Society... it does lack something which is it lacks economists and philosophers, although one or two economists have recently been elected. So when you come to things like... issues like population growth, can we beat [Thomas] Malthus? You know Malthus said... that we can never... it we have population growth exponentially producing more food growth annually, and up to now we've always beaten Malthus, and so we did have a discussion in 1998, a discussion meeting. It didn't go under that title, but I had to speak at the beginning. I called it: Can we beat Malthus? Because we have up to now beaten Malthus. The world's population has expanded or the food produced in... produced has kept with it, and this harks back to GM crops and so on, but in order to do this we actually invited economists and so on, one of whom has recently been elected to the Society. So it isn't a... the Royal Society is not, doesn't cover all the learned subjects in the German sense of wissenschaft, which many European Academies have... the sciences, the arts, humanities, sociology, economics, but during my time we had several joint meetings with the British Academy to try get over this, so we had things on ageing, on medicine, on insurance, all of which took place in my time. So I encouraged joint discussions. It started before my time, but I tried to encourage joint discussion with the British Academy and with economists and sociologists and people of that sort.

Well, I'm not a stargazer and I can only think about three to five years ahead. There are people who claim to see into the future. Max wrote a very lovely article in which he talked about people measuring the amount of information in cricks and mega cricks and things like that. So things like that may happen, but I find my experience tells me there are so many unexpected things coming up. Just at a time when we knew a great deal about the human genome, about the DNA, about transcription, in the last three or four years, there's suddenly a whole new class of information contained in RNA, small RNAs of various kinds of which there are three or four classes. There's short interfering RNAs, there's micro RNAs, there's also modulatory RNAs, and it was known for some time that a lot of the DNA was transcribed but didn't seem to be producing proteins, and so now this has been found out. And it came out in fairly indirect ways, so nobody predicted these things, although Francis years ago used to say... you know there are small circles of RNA found in nuclei, and people had reported them, and nobody knew what they were. They thought... they dismissed them as structural, probably involved, and now it turns out.
So you see, nobody... and the information for this came from various sources. One of them was post-transcription gene sciencing in plants where you find that after post-translation, in other words you have already started making the RNA in the protein and it turns out there's a small species of RNA, and a similar thing was found in the worm by Andrew Fire. The plant work was by David Baulcombe. Andy Fire showed that, that if you used double stranded RNA rather than single stranded RNA, you could switch off some gene action. It's a bit surprising that people have been using antisense RNA and there are double strands that work better. And he showed that they were processed in the factor, that's with the short... there was a short interfering RNA produced from the double stranded to produce this. And this was a totally new thing. So it's completely changed the way that we understand development, because many of these things are used in development, so that the... and I don't think this is the last of the surprises in... in molecular biology or biology.
The other thing... it's well known that Rutherford said that atomic energy is bunk... he didn't use the word. Henry Ford said history is bunk... so he said that atomic energy is... getting energy from the atom is impossible, so one learns never to say these things. And I can tell a very simple story from the Lab. In the Lab Hugh Huxley and I were Heads of Structural Studies, and Sydney Brenner and Francis were Head of Cell Biology, and Sydney Brenner of course is a very interesting and inspiring sort of fellow, and likes to plunge into all sorts of things, and Francis of course is a great man and he sometimes acted as a censor of Sydney in the wilder ideas. So between the two of them, they were a pretty powerful combination. So they used to have meetings, once a month, where they discussed large things to do in the future. One of the issues discussed was the long-term future. Hugh said to me, 'We ought to have the same in Structural Studies.' I said, 'Look I can't think long term, I'm only interested in the things I can see three or four years ahead, and by then, things will have changed again. Probably they will have, but I'm not sure.'
Anyway, what was being discussed... we were invited to these meetings. Other divisions began to have them as well, though Fred Sanger wasn't keen on it. You can image Fred was rather a dour type in that sense. He just got on with things, got on with the present. But so Sydney and Francis were discussing whether we should in the Lab... they were going to shut down work on protein synthesis, because that was regarded as classical molecular biology. One of the things they might do in the future was to study animal viruses. Sydney said, 'Oh, I think we should work on animal viruses. Look, we've done bacterial viruses, we've done bacteria, and we've done quite a lot about cells. The animal viruses will be just like bacterial viruses, but only larger writ, just various degrees of complexity, more complex, basically the same principles.' Well, so they decided not to work on animal viruses. There were people starting to do it here, and there were questions, would they recruit people?
But some years later, four years later, split genes were discovered, that the gene... that the precursor mRNA was spliced into a different protein propellant, into a different mRNA, messenger RNA, producing different proteins, so one gene produced multiple proteins. That was a major discovery... for which Philip Sharp and Richard Roberts got the Nobel Prize, representing the two laboratories who did it. There was really a very large number of people who did it. Well, from that, you see that nobody predicted that genes came in pieces, all eukaryotic genes, and you see, you can find things by looking at individual systems. So I encourage, when I'm asked for advice, I encourage people to look at all sorts of things, plants, fungi, fungi is where Tom Cech discovered the catalytic RNA. Altman discovered it in a more classical situation, but the world is full of wonders and we don't know where they are going to turn up, so I don't believe in talking about the future. I think we've got enough things on in the present, and things will emerge, new puzzles will emerge, for example, as in the puzzle that Andy Fire found that double stranded RNA work better than single stranded RNA which was against all the expectations or post-transcriptional gene silencing. And there are other examples which you can look back on in the history of molecular biology.

I suppose the really first influence I had was RW James in Cape Town. He was a... he became an FRS later, rather late, but he was a... first class scientist and he brought the... what you might loosely call 'the English empirical system' and also 'the Cambridge system' into Cape Town, to Cape Town University, and he also... taught me a... not taught me, but we had experiments on optics of an unusual classical kind, and so I learnt about coherence, Birefringence, and things like that, all of which teach you something. And of course, he also introduced me to X-ray crystallography, and that's what a large part of my later work was based upon, X-ray crystallography. I also learned there... I suppose I learned from him that I could do a project and even do things like build apparatus and so on, learn how to measure intensities, all small things but things like that.
And then going into Cambridge, I had very little influence from my Supervisor [Douglas] Hartree didn't really... the subject, and I went to a lot of lectures and sat in on different things, and I learnt quite a lot of mathematics, I learnt more mathematics. But I think the person who influenced me the most was originally Rosalind Franklin, and what she taught me I guess was the importance of tackling important problems, even difficult and long term problems. I say she taught me, it was by example and so I was very lucky to find her. Luck is terribly important in all this. People say you should choose your mentors, but you can't choose your mentors, because you can't just say, 'I want to come and be your disciple.' It doesn't work like that. I was lucky to find an RW James, Reginald William James... in Cape Town, lucky to find Rosalind Franklin at Birkbeck, though I didn't go there... lucky to have a disagreement with Harry Carlisle... you know that was sort of educational... when I learnt.
And then later on, Francis Crick, of course, and he's probably the... I don't know if he's the biggest influence because I'm not like him, but he... I did watch, I think I said earlier, watch how he went about problems and the kind of excitement that he... he had great powers of concentration. He could concentrate for six to eight hours on a subject. I also learnt from him... Newton could do 22 hours, by the way, so he wasn't Newton. But the... that you had to keep things in your mind for a long time, I think I learnt it from him. And one way of keeping things in your mind is to read papers on the subject, even if they're not good papers. Francis used to say to me, he read all these papers on chromatin. I said, 'Look, they're horrible papers.' He said, 'You never know where you might find some kind of slight observation or some anomaly or something of that sort which might help us.' I don't think he ever found one, but what it did was to concentrate your mind on the subject over many weeks, months, and even years.
And I can't think of any... I have, I have sometimes been asked who my scientific heroes are. But that's different, who your scientific heroes are. But if you ask that question as well, Crick would be one of them. And I don't think there's been any others, any other big influences. Bernal I thought could have been an influence, but he never... Bernal, I learnt also... I did learn from Bernal, and from Bernal I learnt what he didn't do, which was to attend to the details. That's also learning. Bernal, although he had suggested many things, he never stuck and looked at the details of any of the processes. He wasn't like that, whereas Francis who had a mind at least, if not greater, than Bernal's actually read all the small print, all the boring stuff, and so on, and not always with much profit.

We married quite young, and she's been a very stabilising influence in my life, because I tend sometimes to follow things which are pretty pointless. I get diverted very easily, often by things non-scientific, and she... well, she's been the companion of my life, of the good and the bad, so I owe her a great debt. She's not a scientist at all, not in any way, although I once gave her a book on crystallography, on patterns, which she didn't read, but she did see that there were nice patterns you could see, trying to explain space groups and so on. But I gave up after a while, and she was also very helpful in, you know, the days when I was teaching at Peterhouse, running a group in the Lab, having two small children, and she was very, very tolerant. No, not overly tolerant, but reminding me of things.
[Q] Sufficiently?
Sufficiently... so I think that's my... my parents, of course. I think that must have influenced me in some way, and I also have them to thank that when I was... gave up doing medicine, they would have thought I was pretty young, and I was then just 16, and they might have intervened to say, 'This is a foolish step to do. If you want to do science, finish medicine first.' That's what a sensible parent would have said. But my father was rather tolerant. I think he had confidence in me. I'd had a very early start in school and life and things like that, I was quite young. So I think he really left me to it. He wasn't a scientist himself, but a businessman, rarely doing business, but... so I think... of course, I owe him a lot and my mother, well, my mother died when I was six years old. My father remarried, but my stepmother was also very, very good. So they were... they allowed me to follow my instincts which I think is terribly important.

Well, science, although it's been the major part of my work, isn't the only thing I'm interested in. I think I did say earlier on I was interested in ancient history and ancient cultures. I mentioned Egyptology. I think the Egyptology had an attraction because it has puzzles in it, deciphering languages and things of that sort, so I guess part of my interest in science is because it does present puzzles and problems to solve. But at least they are problems of great importance, or one hopes of importance, or would lead to important things, although that wasn't the original reason. It was all just pure curiosity.
But I have always been interested in literature. I read a lot as a young man. Durban had a good library, and I... of course, we didn't have all that many books at home. I read... I read, of course, all of the adventure stories and so on, but all along I did read what you might call relatively serious books. When I was at school I read quite a lot of the work, A Dominie's Log and so on, about AS Neill who was the man who started experimental schools and I was quite impressed by that, and we had a small group who thought how different it was from our relatively regime at Durban Boys High School which was run on absolutely fixed lines, but this was a sort of youthful protest. I began reading... I read relatively serious literature. I read a couple of Dickens, George Eliot, because there wasn't a great deal to do in Durban. You did go to the bush, there was the bush, and the beach which I mentioned, but it wasn't a... there wasn't a lot of distraction. I didn't play any sport other than that I did at school, although I played in the afternoons. We played cricket in the local park. But I didn't have any hobbies really, other than making model aeroplanes out of wood and greaseproof paper. So I read a lot, and I read a lot of history mostly, and in more recent years it's mostly been ancient history. I read the classics, translation of Dostoevsky, Turgenev, say, the great Russian classics, and I've read the Germans, I read Thomas Mann, and when I learnt some Germany I read a bit of German poems, Goethe, and Rilke and people like that. I couldn't ever do anything with Holderlin, that was too romantic or too advanced for me, but I was pretty influenced by reading Prometheus by Goethe, Hier sitz ich, forme Menschen, Nach meinem Bilde, you know it at all?
[Q] No.
Oh, you ought to read it. It's one of... the most humanistic poem ever. It's about reaction to the Gotter – Götter, you know, with the gods, and... he likens them to a boy, a random boy, Der Disteln köpft, who knocks off the heads of the thistles, you see. This is... we are at the mercy of these gods who influence our lives and this is a protest by Goethe that this is not so, you see. And this is man exerting himself, it's humanist. Because Prometheus, if you remember, stole fire from the gods and was punished for it. So I could read a bit of that. I couldn't read... I really... I really lacked, because I lacked French and real German. I couldn't really read the European classics in their own language, but I did read in translation. And when I... I read a good deal of ancient history, right throughout.

When my son David, my younger son, had an interest in war games, he had an interest in ancient war games. They used to... I don't know if you know what war games are. You make little soldiers and then you re-fight imaginary battles. You can re-fight the Battle of Waterloo and whether it rains or not, or whether Blucher arrives in time, is done on the fall of a dice. If it rains, of course, you can't use cavalry. It's quite subtle stuff, and quite interesting. And I found that... I would have played it myself if it hadn't been infra dig for the boy to bring his father in to play his war games. So since one of his trials was to see whether the Macedonian phalanx, which was the great... Alexander's great invention, really, a new war machine with long spears and so on, could fight against the Roman legions who had short swords and so on, so he was fighting these battles to prove that, contrary to history, the Macedonian phalanx, or the success of Alexander, could beat the Romans. Well, then the Romans conquered all the Hellenistic Greeks. So I thought he had a birthday present, so I went to... I was passing the... I used to drop into the British Museum quite often when I was at Birkbeck, so I knew the place, and there were coin shops, but I couldn't afford coins, but by this time I had a bit more money, and so I passed a coin shop and I saw some coins... of Alexander the Great. They were bronze coins, which you could buy for £12, £15, £20, very common bronze coins. So I bought him a set of 12 bronze coins. I think I spent about £50, it was quite a lot of money. No more than £50, sorry, about nearly £100. So I gave him the coins, but by this time, he'd totally lost interest.
So I kept the coins, and so after that, I became fascinated by the coins because they represent history, so this was about 1988. It was when Mrs Thatcher reduced the income tax from 50% to 40%, so I suddenly had some more money in my pocket, so I began to... buy cheap coins, historical coins and Greek... of course, I can Latin, the Roman I could read, I still remember quite a lot of Latin. Greek, I never learnt Greek at school but I could read it, of course, and I could translate it, so I landed up being a collector of Greek and Roman coins. The ones I buy... there are auctions at which you can bid for them. These are auctions conducted by post, you simply write down your bid, but the... but also Spink's which is a very famous place have a tray of not so valuable coins where you can rummage around and pick them out, and so I can't afford the coins of Pompey or Caesar... Caesar you can buy, some are very common, but say Pompey... but I know the names of Pompey's generals, you see, and I know the admirals, I know that history pretty well, and so I find the coins and I buy them, and they cost... sometimes they cost as much as £50, which is quite a lot of money.
[Q] And Ptolemy, can you find...?
Oh yes, Ptolemy, I get the Egyptian coins as well. I haven't been able to buy a coin of Cleo... of the Cleopatra with Anthony, because there, of course, you see the public... the coins which are sold for a great lot of money are the ones the public has heard about, Caesar, Anthony and Cleopatra, but there are other Cleopatra's. It was a name, a Greek name, and Anthony I've got a lot of coins of, Anthony and Octavian and so on. And so I enjoy that, and I read, and there's quite a lot of actual hard interest in that, because the question is this, you know: how many coins do you... do you make, do you strike? Because as I've read about the Roman economy and the control of the money supply, you see how they control all that. There are learned articles on that. But again, it's... I always had been a collector. I collected stamps when I was younger, stamps of the British Empire, and so I keep things, so I think the coin collection is what I enjoy most. But it does give me a physical outlet for ancient history. I also collect Jewish coins, of which there are not many. I can read the ancient Hebrew. The Jews had independence under the Maccabeans from the Hellenistic rulers, this is Judas Maccabeus and the revolt. And they struck coins for about a hundred years, and then later again after the first revolt against the Romans. And these coins are quite expensive, but there are not all that many, but you can buy sort of damaged or partly... but you can see the inscription. It is written not in the ordinary Hebrew script, but an ancient Hebrew script which goes back a long while. It's not too difficult to learn if you know Hebrew. But they really... but they are always classified as part of the Greek coins because all these coins grew up either in conflict or in with Greeks and Romans in those days over a period of several hundred years, and episodes of Greek rule and Roman rule. So they regard those as part of Greek coins, so I find those pretty interesting.

I hardly read novels these days. I find that when I... see a new novel, I used to read Iris Murdoch and things like that, and at one point, when a new Iris Murdoch novel came out, I thought I couldn't stand this again, so I'd pick up an old novel and re-read it. And I've read Turgenev and Dostoevsky several times... not so much Tolstoy. Well, yes, Anna Karenina and things like that, so... but I must say, I also watch television quite a bit, and one of my cultural interests... when I was student, I used to go to the B... see B films in Johannesburg. There was a curious system, what they called 'tearoom bioscopes'. Bioscope is the old word for cinema, which comes from America and was imported to South Africa, and you could go into the bioscope and you sat... films were continuous which is something... there weren't fixed performances, and you came in at any time and you paid your... your fare was, you paid a shilling or something of that sort. You got a cup of tea or a drink, and then they took away that, and your saucer was your ticket, and the films went on. So there was... they used to have large diets of Westerns, very old-fashioned Westerns, they were of people almost forgotten now, Roy Rogers and people like that, and I, I used to like those, because they were sort of a light relief from things. And they were very simple. They had... the heroes were in white, the villains were in black, and everybody knew what was what, and you knew what was going to happen in the end. The good guy would win, and would win the girl, but in those days, they didn't kiss the girl. It was... very moral.
But since then I watch more sophisticated Westerns, including the work of John Ford, so I do quite enjoy the cinema, and also we used to go to... when we lived in London, we used to go to plays, not so much music. My wife is musical, we went to a few concerts, but I'm not musical at all, although I like hearing the... you know, the classics, so in my Desert Island Discs, I chose very obvious things, bits of Beethoven, Mozart, and then the lighter things, Gershwin, I didn't choose Jerome Kern but there could have been Jerome Kern and things like that. So I do have other interests, but my life has been basically dominated by, well, by science and the family. And all the other things have been a kind of bonus really, and I'm rather glad that things have worked out.
[Q] Can I ask a sort of 'Desert Island Discs' question? Can I ask you if there was one project you could take with you to a desert island? Which of the scientific projects would you have chosen?
A project? Going back?
[Q] Going back through all of them, which sort of stands out? Which is the highlight, which you've enjoyed most?
Which I've enjoyed most? I think it... I'm not sure, it's like... you know, it were how happy would I be with either fair charmer. What is that in? You know the... game... The Beggars Opera? In The Beggars Opera... How happy would I be with either fair charmer away? I'd be happy with the chromatin if I didn't know about the zinc finger. I'd be happy with the zinc finger if I didn't know about the chromatin. In their different ways, they have been... I suppose the... I suppose the zinc fingers have been in some ways the most satisfying because I really was lucky to stumble upon a most marvellous system which existed, and in which nobody had ever done anything before, so it was totally new, whereas the others I was both building upon what others have done, contributing to others, and so on. So I think the zinc fingers would have to be. And now, of course, it would have been... I would have been happy if it was just to know that you could use it as a research tool, but if it really does produce therapeutic benefits, well, that will be a sort of added bonus. So I think it has to be zinc fingers, and during the course of it, we've solved various puzzles like, you know, how to make six zinc fingers. That's a sort of a technical puzzle, and I've enjoyed doing that, and you know working out the... well, working out the equivalents, how many amino acids does it take to span one base? Turned out to be three, glycine, serine, glycine, for example. Little things on the way, which is you know, bits of research, so I enjoyed that. It wasn't obvious what it would be.
