albert.maysles

Albert Maysles (1926-2015) known for his important documentaries on Muhammad Ali, Jimi Hendrix and The Beatles, pioneered the documentary style known as Direct Cinema. He helped create techniques still widely used in modern documentary production, as well as many of the techniques used in reality TV.

						I guess that every work of art, or almost every- every important work of art, I'd say, is autobiographical. That is, whoever is making the film, there's something of his or her own personality that shapes the film if only for the fact that one tends to choose a subject matter, stuff that, even though you may not be aware of it at the time, later on you say oh, oh, yeah, now that I've seen the film, having just finished it, I'm becoming aware that yeah, that person is very much like my father, for example. Certainly that's true in the case of the film "Salesman", but we'll get back to that and other films that I've engaged myself in making over these many years- 50 years now. I'm the son of immigrants. My mother came from Eastern Europe when she was two and my father seven. 

What was her name?

What's that?

Their full names. What were their names?

My mother's name was Ethel Epstein and she would have preferred that it would be Emma Goldman; that is, Emma, instead of Ethel, but it didn't work out that way. My father was a postal clerk who really should have been a musician. He certainly could play the cornet. And I have his cornet in my possession. My mother was a schoolteacher but she wasn't allowed to practice in Boston where I was brought up because in those days a woman who was married was not allowed to teach in public school, the theory being that somehow that would take away the job from a man who was supposed to be the sole breadwinner. That changed for her when we moved to Brookline just outside of Boston and one of the reasons we moved was that she might find work in Brookline which was an independent town- something like a suburb to Boston. But upon arrival she found out that they had never hired a Jewish teacher so they weren't about to, to hire her. And- but she somehow got an appointment with the superintendent of schools and she managed to become at least a permanent substitute which meant that she didn't get paid for vacations and so forth, and at a lower rate of pay, but at least she had a full year's employment.
					
Well, I should talk a little bit about my mother because she was- and my father. My mother was very important to me in a special way in that she was an ardent civil libertarian and one of her big desires was that she might someday meet Eleanor Roosevelt. And I don't know how she pulled it off but she did and she spent a whole day with her. Many years later, having made my first film in mental hospitals in Russia, a film called "Psychiatry in Russia", I noticed on finishing the film that there was an article in a New York newspaper to the effect that Mrs. Roosevelt was planning to go to Russia in order to look into social services there and among other things she wanted to visit mental hospitals but she had learned that there weren't any mental hospitals in Russia. And so when I saw that I thought oh- I must call her up and tell her- no, it's not true, I'd just made this film. I don't know how I got her phone number but I'm pretty good at getting access to people and so I called her up. She was living in New York on the Upper East Side. And I told her. And she said oh- do you have the film? I said- yes. Oh, I would love to see it. So, okay, I said- I'll bring the film and the projector. And I showed her the film. And I spent the whole day with her, as my mother did. But this time it ended with her saying- well, you know I'm leaving for Russia in three weeks, I'd be glad to have you come along. Well, as those things happen, you know, I had no money, no- no camera, and so I, I couldn't go. Now, with these little video cameras, I surely would have had the means and the determination to go with her. So I missed out on that opportunity. I've missed out, actually, on several major opportunities to get into the life around me or, or to do stories in, in other countries like, for example, the time when, about ten years ago, I got a call from the Rockefeller Foundation and they said that they would like to send me to North Korea to look into making a movie. And I thought- oh, that's great. So plans were all made and the last day or so they said well, anyone else you'd like to bring along with you? We're sending you along with somebody who knows the country and can be your interpreter. I said- oh, well, thinking that my daughter Rebekah- hello- thinking that my daughter Rebekah had been studying photography, among other things, in, in High School. She's only 17 and her photographs were really very good. So I said- oh, I'd like to have a photographer. And they said who would that be? And I said- my daughter; she's a professional. And the quality of her work was professional. And how much should we pay her? So I said- well, you know, the normal fee. I guess it's $500 a day. And so she ended up making $500- that's $5,000. And she did a marvelous job. So I came up with the idea that I should spend some time on returning with- spend some time with an extended family if- just filming as I always do in a very observational fashion and if, if a child went off to see the dentist I would go with that child. If a father and son were going fishing I'd do that; or if the father was attending a Communist Party Meeting; whatever. Just to get to know first-hand and to film first-hand the life of an extended family- cousins, aunts, brothers, so forth. And they agreed to it. And I wrote out the proposal and everyone thought it was fine. Then I came back and then I thought what, am I crazy, who's going to pay for this and who's going to show it? And it just- the whole idea lapsed. And- but that's ten years ago and we would know that much more about this country that we know almost nothing of. And so I feel sorry that I didn't do it although- even telling the story that is made with an open mind and open to whatever political information might come forth- you know? Even that- or any film even, the commercial networks, ABC, CBS, NBC, you know, they wouldn't take it as is, from the way I would make it. They'd, they'd either not accept it at all or just take bits and pieces and put together their own film with their own Cronkite type of narrator. That's something that I wouldn't want to subject my material to.

But getting back to my childhood, let's see, what shall I talk about first of all? It's odd but as I think of my childhood I think of good times and the bad times. The bad times- mind you, 1926 is when I was born so 1932 I was six years old and what are my early memories there?  Well, I remember five years later when I was 11, I remember my brother coming home one morning and saying that he couldn't play with his friend Jamie any more because his mother told Jamie that- no, you can't play with a Jew boy. And so much before that even I was experiencing the anti-Semitism of that time. At the time there was a Catholic priest by the name of Father Coughlin who, every Sunday, would broadcast an hour speech which was broadcast over 435 radio stations and all of it total anti-Semitism. So, on the radio as well as my life I could experience that sort of thing. One of my memories along that line- I used to go to Hebrew School and in order to get there the shortest way I had to cross railway tracks and I remember crossing these railway tracks- You were supposed to walk over a pedestrian bridge but I took the shortcut and it was already dark and as I crossed the railway tracks a man came up from the darkness and flashed his badge and asked me what I was. That meant well, are you Irish or are you Jewish. And I said- well, I'm Jewish. And he said- well, you know you're not supposed to cross these tracks, this is private property. And I'm not going to arrest you now but sometime in the next week or two I'll come to your home and meet your parents. Well, that scared me, not enough so that I didn't continue to cross the tracks but enough to remind me in an official way this time that anti-Semitism was going to be part of my life.

Grandparents, most of them had died by the time I had arrived, but there was both of my grandmothers. And my grandmother on my mother's side was quite Orthodox and so I was the one chosen to accompany her each Saturday to the Synagogue. And as we walked towards the Synagogue I remember having to pass the Catholic Church and she would spit on the sidewalk each time we walked by there. So I wasn't the first one in the family to experience anti-Semitism and I'm sure that there was a very compelling reason for both of my families to leave Eastern Europe.

						I don't know exactly where either one of my parents came from. I know that my mother came from a town called Slutsk. My father came from a town near Chernobyl which is now the Ukraine. At the time it was Austria/Hungary. And in the case of Slutsk- at that time it was part of Poland but it's now part of Belorussia. I would like and do intend to go back to both areas to find out more, and maybe even to find the house where they each were brought up which is not to say I haven't been back to- to that part of the world. I took my son, your brother, Phillip, a couple of years ago to Kiev, to, to make a film about a piece of- a major piece of anti-Semitism. That is the case of Mendel Beilis who was brought to trial in 1913 having endured two years of prison while the government tried to fix a case against him. The case that they tried to fix was the false accusation that has been going on now for some 800 years, totally false, that Jews killed Christian children to take their blood to mix it with Matzos to celebrate Passover. I mean- as ridiculous as that sound is- as that accusation is, people have believed it through the centuries. Martin Luther, the famous originator of Protestantism, was in his older age an ardent anti-Semite and he saw to it that at least two Jews were brought to trial and executed on these false charges. So it's important that the world get to know that this charge is totally false and so I'm making a film of the Mendel Beilis case. A little difficult for me to do because it took place so long ago but there are important remnants of it. In fact, one of the most important is a film that has been made by the Hamas that claims that Jews do this and it is such an effective piece of propaganda, though totally based on untruth, that millions of people now are looking at this film and they can get it through the satellite so I assume that anyone in the world can, can get this film. I have a copy of it myself and that is another reason why I want to make this film. Certainly, having endured- endured a great deal of anti-Semitism myself and having heard the story of the Mendel Beilis case when I was a child, I have a personal interest in setting the facts straight.
					
						When I was about eight or nine the family had a visit from an ancient relative in Russia and he sat me down and told me about the Dreyfuss case and- which I knew something of already. And then he told me about the Beilis case, enough so that I remembered something of it. And so several years back I decided to look more carefully into the case and see if there was a film there and part of my excitement came about when I had heard that there was a woman in the Bronx, the sole surviving child of Mendel Beilis who himself died in 1934. Now 95 years old, Rhea Beilis remembers everything. She was only four at the time but she certainly got to know her father after the trial and to identify with his suffering. And so I have done a good deal of filming of her. As well as two women whose uncle was one of the five attorneys defending Mendel Beilis, and these two women, in their 80s and 90s, they are so identified with and so fond of this civil rights defender, Zarundy, that they- one of them is writing a book about their uncle and both of them know a great deal about the case.
					
						Well, I remember being somewhat puzzled- I don't know just when that began- that my father was, was just a postal clerk because I knew him to, to be a very sensitive person and, I felt much more capable than the kind of demands that were limited as to- with that kind of a job. As I got to know things better I realized that because he was brought up in an entirely Irish neighborhood, in the only Jewish family- his friends were all Irish and amongst the Irish the eventual job is with the Civil Service whether it's as a fireman, a policeman, a postal clerk- and so that, I think, is how he became a postal clerk. But, but he always had such a love for music that when I watched him listening to good music, I received, I think, as best as one could, a music appreciation course and for the rest of my life, by having watched him and his expression as he listened to the music, you know, I've gotten to know and to film all kinds of music.
					
						We had a kind of a ritual where- starting maybe when I was only eight or nine years old we would go to the big closet, and this happened maybe once a year, and my father would pull out parts of this uniform that he wore in the First World War and we would each try the blouse on or the boots, the trousers and so forth. It was a kind of a fun kind of trip. And- but I always noticed that way back in the closet there was a tattered old leather case. What was in it I didn't dare ask because somehow I felt there was some sort of a taboo about it. In any case, maybe when I was ten, I remember that both of our eyes cast a- we cast our eyes on this case so that- and we noticed that each of us was looking at it. And so my father went back into the closet, pulled out the case, opened it, and revealed a cornet which he then put to his lips. And I could see the way he manipulated the valves and from the embouchure of his lips that he really knew how to play this instrument. And- but he didn't play it. And he put it back in the case and back in the closet where it remained. Several years later the subject came up with my mother and she explained that- well, you know, your Uncle Sam plays the violin- Yes, I've, I've heard him play that- And your Uncle Joe plays percussion, and your Uncle George, I forget, played another instrument. And the four of them, the four brothers, would play music together. But then- but then they stopped playing when, when George- brother George died. And that was before I was born. And so out of respect for his brother, he just couldn't- he couldn't play the cornet any more. And so that was that. But when my father died when I was 19, that was the big possession that I got from my father. And I've kept it; it's mounted on the wall of my kitchen, and every morning as I'm having breakfast I cast my eye on that cornet and remember my father that way. And one day when I noticed that the cornet needed to be polished I asked the cleaning woman if she would do so. And a few days later I noticed that it seemed to be much cleaner but rather dull. And I walked over to it. I noticed that it had been scratched and, indeed, she must have dropped it because the front end was smashed in. Well, I took the cornet to my studio to see what to do. I-I didn't want to change it in any way; even repairing it seemed to be a kind of a change. But with my mind still open as to what to do about it, it was at a time when we were finishing a film with Wynton Marsalis- famous trumpeter. And he came in to see the film and as he was about to leave I grabbed the cornet and went to the exit door and I began to explain the story of my father and the cornet. And he took the cornet, and as I could see the way he maneuvered his fingers and from his embouchure, was just like my father. And he, he played for five or ten minutes as everybody in the studio gathered around to hear him play. And that was wonderful. It's the only time I've ever heard it played and played properly. And so- as he left and I went back to my desk I though oh, I've got to tell my mother about this but she had already died. And then I sat down and I thought oh, I've got to tell my brother, but this was after 1987 when my brother died. And so there was no one to tell it to at that time and I just had to cry.
					
						I've gotten so interested in other peoples' stories that I've come up with an idea to do a film or films- to do an unlimited number of films of people telling stories; ordinary people but with extraordinary stories and with extraordinary abilities to tell these stories. And in that proposal I came up with some 40 story ideas. My favorite one would be stories of acts of kindness- and I remember going to see a Shakespearean play. And as my wife and I approached our seats we came across an old friend of ours who said oh, the curtain is about to go up but I think I have enough time to tell you my Iphigenia story. And of course there's an Iphigenia character in this Shakespearean play but also there's an Iphigenia Sulzberger of the New York Times and she, he told us, used to, in her 80s, she used to walk along Madison Avenue in the 70s and 80s and one time as she- as she walked along, she had already set it up so that if she had to use the John at any particular moment she could go into the drugstore or a flower shop or the grocery store, whatever. And being in her 80s and not having full, full control of her bladder, one day as she was passing the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Home she rushed in, used the facility, and as she came out a man with a book asked her for her name and address and she didn't know what it was for but gave it. And then a week later she got a letter from the estate of a Mrs. Jackson, and this letter stated that it was the desire of Mrs. Jackson that anyone kind enough to attend memorial services be rewarded, and enclosed a cheque for $25,000- not exactly that she needed it but certainly this was an extraordinary act of kindness. And so I intended that if I got the okay to make this series, that I would go to Madison Avenue in a taxi and film the route of this woman as she walked along the street and, and telling that story as that visual would be taken, finally arriving at the, the funeral home in the conclusion of the story. Lots of stories that I put in this proposal, stories from my own experience, and most of them stories that Sara and Rebekah know very well, not because they read the proposal but because when they were very, very young I would tell them stories from my childhood- stories that crossed into these various subject matters.
					
						I was in big trouble on a number of occasions because starting when I was only four or five years old in Kindergarten, something basic in my understanding about government and, and social relations forbid me from saluting the flag. And at that time, when I was four or five, which is, say, around 1930 or so, the requirement was to pledge allegiance by extending your arm forward like this. It was only several years later that the authorities figured out, well, this is a little bit incorrect because of the way it was done in, in Hitler Germany. And so they corrected it and pulled the- so that now and, and later on you pledge allegiance by holding your hand to your chest. But whether it was out here or down here it was still, I felt, an unnecessary kind of act of super-patriotism. And saluting a flag and- a piece of fabric, you know- I thought that I could be a better citizen by really being one than identifying myself with a, with an object. I don't know that I can explain it that way, but anyway I ran into trouble every time I would move on to another grade of school. So in the first grade, the teacher sent me to the Principal and I had to explain things to the Principal. And no matter what he said I was not going to salute the flag, and he recognized that early on. And, and then each year I went through the same thing. Each new teacher had to be informed- from my being the only one that would refuse to pledge allegiance- that I wasn't about to do it. And so I got away with it. But many years later, which is to say maybe five years ago, I was helping someone make a film in Sing Sing- the famous prison not so far from New York. And I was accompanied by a writer who took me to Sing Sing because he was doing a special thing with a group of some 15 prisoners who were all graduates of college but got their degree from studying those four years in prison. And they were typical of that prison population- black, Puerto Ricans, pretty much. And so the thing was that they were asked to write something autobiographical. And then, that each person would get up and talk about it. Well, one of these prisoners, a black guy, got up and told the story of how he refused to salute the flag. And for reasons that went even beyond mine; because he felt that the country wasn't quite worth that kind of devotion as long as there was so much anti-black prejudice. And he said that his, in his experience if he refused to salute the flag, he was sent to the Principal, the Principal gave him a note to give his father. He gave the note to his father and his father beat him up so badly that he ended up in the hospital for eight days. And- but, of course, he couldn't talk about how it had happened because he didn't want to get his father in trouble. Well, when I told him my story, we connected so- so beautifully and we remain good friends to this day.
					
						Hardly a week would go by when I was a kid when there wasn't some Irish kid that would say I'll meet you outside- outside the school, in the schoolyard. And, of course, that meant a challenge to have a fight. And I always took the challenge. And I can't say that I never lost a fight but I can't remember having lost a fight and fights were pretty evenly matched. But one day somebody challenged me to a fight, we- and we fought in the school-yard at the end of the school day. And, as always, there'd be a ring of kids around us- Irish kids cheering for the Irish kid and the Jewish kids cheering for the Jewish kid. And I just took it as a routine sort of thing. I didn't think much about it. And when the fighting was over- and it was a severe battle- we didn't hurt each other but we landed a bunch of pretty strong punches. As I left I went through the ring and there I saw this little kid, only five- I had to be about ten- and he's crying. And it's my brother. So I hold his little hand and the two of us walk home the way we always did. But he couldn't stop crying. And I don't know, as I look back on it now, I'm not sure that I tried to stop his crying because, because with all that crying I felt the kind of love that I- no matter what he would have said, assuring me of his love, that act of crying, you know, that meant, that meant that he really loved me a great deal. And that devotion that we had for each other persisted all the way through our lives so that we became very good, in our work as well, devoted to each other and devoted to the films that we made. We made a motorcycle trip from Germany where we purchased, at great discount, a BMW motorcycle. We got the discount because we were about to take a motorcycle trip into Eastern Europe- Hungary and Russia- and so, at a time in 1957 when very few people had that opportunity. And I remember very well that there were days when we traveled such long stretches, maybe two or three hundred miles- exhausting. So that as each driver got very tired we changed positions and in changing positions the man in back would put his arms around the driver and put his head against the driver's shoulder by the neck, and the driver would take one hand off the handlebar and hold those two hands together so that the man in back wouldn't fall off. That's my memory of how we traveled and how, in a metaphorical way, we were devoted to each other's good health.
					
						I should- I should talk about how I started out in photography and then lead up to the first film and so forth. When I was a child, I couldn't afford a camera except that somehow I heard that you could buy a brand new camera in a hardware store around the corner for 35 cents. Now how I got 35 cents is- I don't know because that was a lot of money too. But I bought the camera and started taking pictures with this tiny camera that used Univex 00 Film which had to be extremely inexpensive as well, even for- even for that time. And-

What did you take pictures of? Do you remember?

I took family pictures. I must have them somewhere. That's- I think almost all- everything was just family pictures. And then at some point, I think I was in High School by that time, a distant relative offered me a much much more sophisticated camera for 16 dollars. And somehow- I used to around washing peoples' windows and I'd earn 50 cents if I shoveled somebody's garageway- of snow. I had enough so that I could buy the camera and I took pictures with that. And I- and I- with that kind of equipment I then developed my own pictures.
					
						The dark room- the dark room was, was the bathroom. But I had to make it completely dark which meant not just the shades but covering the whole window- the whole operation in getting the dark room dark enough. And I was a perfectionist in that respect and it took maybe an hour. And sealing the door and so forth. But by the time I was sealed in, there was hardly enough oxygen to- for me to survive.

Wasn't there only one bathroom in the house, too?

But somehow or other, without passing out, I did my work and then- and then also, of course, the rest of the family were knocking on the door, clamoring to use the, the toilet. So with all this resistance somehow or other I managed to, to do my work. And- and I have some of those photographs somewhere.
					
						Obviously I liked taking pictures but I had, maybe very unrealistic but certainly a very strong urge to do something great, and still photography didn't seem to me to have that kind of aspirational quality to it. But I- I liked it very much. And when I was 12, I think, I was very earnestly studying, you know, in the little public library in Brookline Massachusetts when I got kind of bored and I proceeded to walk around looking at books on the shelves. And I came across this title that intrigued me. The title was "Architects of Ideas: The Great Theorists of Mankind". And it was, I discovered, written in such a way that a layman could understand who these theorists were and what their theories were. So I opened the book and I ran across some sixteen names, each one a chapter devoted to that person- names that I'd never heard before but as I discovered their stories I wanted to be one of them. One of them was Copernicus; there was Plato; there was Bruno; Galileo; Freud; Marx; Pasteur; Boas, who was the originator of the science of Anthropology; Lavoisier who invented chemistry in the 18th century, I believe. Sixteen of these people. Darwin, Charles Darwin. I'd never heard of him but he had this interesting theory of evolution, which defied the church. The writer was somewhat left wing which I'm sure was to influence me.
					
						Darwin particularly fascinated me and- in search for the missing link, that aspect. So that the last year of High School when I was asked for a quotation for the year book, I was asked what my ambition was and so I said I would like to find the missing link. Well, years later someone commenting on my work as a filmmaker said that the missing link for me was connecting up with a movie camera and reality. Reality in filmmaking was the missing link. And I think that that can be said to be true.
					
						Getting back to this storytelling to my children of times when I got into trouble, some years ago, which is to say 1959, when two colleagues of mine, Pennebaker and Leacock and I were in Moscow filming Leonard Bernstein's performances, because I had already been to Russia five years- four years before, I was taken to be the expert and so when we talked one day of what we might do that might be unusual, I said let's- let's get on a train and get out of Moscow and just get to the- get off the train the first village that we come to and- Of course this was completely illegal. You could only be in, in Moscow. So we got on the train. We got off the train. And as we were walking through this little village we heard some conversation going on behind a gate. So I said let's see what's going on. So we opened the gate and it was a military barracks. And as we wandered in, it wasn't a moment had passed until, until we were brought to the Commanding Officer who was really quite disturbed that these Americans, who shouldn't be in this- outside of Moscow to begin with- are in his little fortress, right? And so he sat us down and was about to make calls that I think would have sent us back but with a bunch of soldiers accompanying us. But we were really in trouble. And during a moment of pause I suddenly pulled together what became a magic word- the word for please is [unclear]. And so I pronounced it as best I could and I offered my hand. As I said it we shook hands and, operating on the psychology that he was just as happy to get rid of us as we were to get the hell out of there, he put us on the next train and we got out of the trouble that we could have otherwise gotten into. We- the kids appreciated that story. When Ricky and Penny and I get together once in a while we tell ourselves and other people of the close scrap that we got into with the authorities.
					
						I first got into filmmaking in an unusual way. It was 1955 and I was teaching Psychology at Boston University. In fact it was my third year of teaching. And I had a summer vacation coming up and the year before, having traveled all over Europe on a motorcycle. I thought- wouldn't it be interesting to go beyond that and somehow or other go to Russia- totally unknown person to person sort of country where all the news was really speculation as to what's going on behind the Kremlin- all political facts and theories. And I wanted to meet up with ordinary people and so I got a visa, a month visa, as a tourist which was easy to do although most people at that time thought well, who's going to give an American a visa to go to Russia when it's such a- when the Cold War is still on and so forth. Though that was easy. And- but then I thought okay, what an opportunity to do something that I knew something about. Maybe I could get into mental hospitals. I had already worked in a mental hospital. I knew something about mental hospitals. I was a psychologist; had done research at the Massachusetts General Hospital on hypnosis and sleep. And so with that kind of familiarity with that piece of- of life, I thought okay, maybe I can get into the hospitals. I think that not being a writer, maybe I could take photographs should I have the opportunity to make that kind of visit. And so I hitchhiked to New York, went to Life Magazine with a batch of professional photographs taken in hospitals, photographs that were taken by a professional friend of mine. And I presented those pictures as my own but that didn't help because I only went- got so far as to their saying okay, when you come back with your photographs we'd like to see them. But that wasn't enough to sponsor my trip in any way. And so, having left Time and Life I was walking down the street and I saw a sign that said CBS and so I walked in and I asked if I could see one of their famous guys, Edward R. Murrow. And they asked- well, why do you want to see him?  Because I'm a psychologist and I'm planning to visit mental hospitals. They didn't question me any further and I showed them my passport and such, and they said but Mr. Murrow is on vacation; you should see the head of the news department. So it wasn't long before I was given a 16mm wind up movie camera and a roll of film and was told look, you're flying out of New York a week from now on your way to Helsinki and then Moscow, on your visit to New York allow for three hours before going to the airport and we'll process this roll of film that you would have shot something on, right. And we'll project it and give you a critique. That was my training.
					
						And- and so I got to Russia but still without any guarantee that I could get into a mental hospital. Two days after I arrived, I met a correspondent from the Baltimore Afro American-  His name was Bill Worthy and he also was a stringer from CBS so he kind of knew the ropes. And I told him of my desire to visit mental hospitals and he said- Well, two days from now I'm going to the Romanian Embassy; there's a reception there where- I think it might be interesting for you to go there. Maybe you'll meet somebody that can help you out. And, he said- I'll try to get you an invitation as well. But he couldn't get the invitation but he said well, come along anyway. And so when we got to the Romanian Embassy which, of course, had half a dozen KGB guys at the door, he presented his invitation and they asked for his passport, and he got through okay. And, without anybody noticing, he slipped his invitation back to me and then I showed it and my passport and they noticed that the names were different. And it turned out that everybody made a joke of it and the KGB guy said, you know- waved me on. And all this without any words because neither one of us could speak Russian. When we got inside, there were plenty of interpreters, right, and the first person I met was the American Ambassador. And then I met all those people that were so familiar by name to Americans: Malenkov, who was the natural heir to Stalin who had died only two years before. He was being ousted. There was Mikoyan. There was Kaganovich. There was Pervukhin who also in the Politburo- the highest ranking group under Stalin. And Pervukhin was very curious. Malenkov was so curious that he asked me, you know- what are you doing here. And I said- I'm a psychologist and I'm hoping to visit mental hospitals. And I suppose because of the kind of paranoia that he was experiencing as all these other guys were trying to get rid of him- his comment was: we always think the other person is crazy. And- but Pervukhin came back to me with the phone number and he said- call this number and you're all set. It was for a Dr  Babion who was the Head of Psychiatry for the whole Soviet Union. And so the next day I called Dr Babion and I was on my way to making my movie.
					
						I mean, everybody in the hospital knew that I somehow hadn't sneaked in, that I was an official guest and that I was- it was okay for me to film so it was okay for them to be filmed. And- The camera was- only ran for less than a minute before you had to wind it, you know, and, and could take a roll of film that was only three minutes long- all kinds of limitations. And it was a noisy camera and all that, but still I managed to get some very interesting footage, enough so that when I came back to New York the deal was that CBS would process that material and for whatever they used they would pay me a dollar for every foot which of course is ridiculously little. But for my first film opportunity it was great for me. And they used 14 feet of film, which was about half a minute, and so I got my $14. But I also got the rest of the deal, which was fine, which was, whatever I shot would revert to me and I could do whatever I wanted with it. So, living in Boston at that time, I went to the station WGBH which is an N.E.T- now a PBS station and I said- look, I've got this interesting material. All I would like to ask of you is that you let me use your equipment so that I can edit it and I'll end up with a film that we can show on your station. So that was the deal. And as I was editing it they had visitors one day from Smith Kline and French, a pharmaceutical company, that's very interested, of course, in products that are for psychiatrists and if they could do something special for psychiatrists they would want to do it. Well, this special would be to make 50 prints of my film once it was finished and they would pay me $2,000- much more than the 14 of course, right- $2,000 for this privilege of making the prints and using them. And so my trip, which cost me $1,700, was paid for with a $300 bonus. And of course I have the film as well. That was my first experience.
					
						I was naive enough to think, well- that CBS would have something very small where I could shoot sync sound, and the camera would be quiet and all that, but none of that stuff existed at that time for anybody. And it wasn't until five years later when I met up with three guys who had actually more experience than myself and one of them, Bob Drew, was a Life Magazine picture editor who had gotten a grant to study what he felt would be a new form of documentary filmmaking, namely taking the idea of the Life Magazine photographer and the correspondent and instead having a photographer using a movie camera accompanied by a correspondent who was adept at taking sound with a sound recorder. And those two people, that team, could go and film anything. What remained was the financing for the development of this special kind of equipment- didn't exist for anybody. And so he got a grant of $1 million to do this and the equipment was just about ready to be put into practice when I met these three guys. And I became the next member of that team and our first film that we made together was a film called "Primary"- the primary election campaign between Kennedy and Humphrey. This was 1960, and the equipment allowed us to practice a new kind of documentary filmmaking where we didn't need lights or, if we needed lights we could use lights that were very affordable and battery operated. But, more important than that, we would have a camera that could be used without a tripod. You'd hold it on your shoulder, the tape recorder would be separate from the camera; you weren't connected with an umbilical cord. That could be done away with because of a new device- a watch that was electronic- that would be part of the camera attached in such a fashion through transformers and such to the motor that it would keep the motor at a constant speed. And then in the tape recorder a similar device, another watch, quite separate of course from the camera, would control the speed of the tape recorder. And things like that allowed us to make films in an entirely different way. That film was remarkable because of the approach that we used. We didn't have to narrate the film; we didn't have to use tripods. The film magazine held enough film to run for ten minutes without stopping or without reloading. But, more importantly, more importantly we felt that we didn't need a narrator or a host or music or anything artificial to add to what we were getting because what we were getting was more important than anything than we could add to it. And with that experience I felt that I was on my way to doing something great.
					
						The way I got access to Cuba, knowing not any more about Cuba than most people, I wanted to find out things for myself but in that process be filming at the same time. So when I got to Havana Airport, I got off the plane, jumped into a cab, turned to the cab driver and said- Where's Fidel? And he said, Oh, he's addressing a women's group in an auditorium. I said- Take me there. So he takes me there. I walk into the auditorium, get as close as I can to Fidel which is to say not so close, maybe 20 or 30 feet away. But having a camera that could take an extremely telephoto lens that would bring me very close to him which I wanted to- where I wanted to be. I put the lens on the camera and as I was carrying away this camera up to my shoulder, as he was talking quite deliberately and forcefully, the way he was known to address people, he happened to look in my direction and we connected with our eyes in such a way that I knew that it was okay to continue. I got the camera up on my shoulder and I could see through this telephoto lens that I'd be so close that I'd be actually just a little bit within his face. And as he spoke I was able to move from one part of his face to another and to capture every moment with exactly where I should be, more on his eyes or his mouth or a silhouette, or whatever. And it became, I don't know, probably a minute long in the film. And I don't know that I could ever do any better than that; except that I remember a number of scenes with him that really were quite strong. A scene where we had spent the whole day travelling around, just Fidel and myself and the driver, and we had reached the point where I think it may have been three o'clock in the morning and Fidel was getting kind of hungry. He said let's get something- he said let's get something to eat. So we go to a restaurant. And he's not content to just sit in a regular part of the restaurant. He will go to the back room and he talks to the cook and orders exactly the food he wants. Then he notices that there's a telephone on the wall. He goes over to the telephone, takes it off- takes the receiver off, and walks through the door next to it. But I can hear him talking, but more importantly, not only am I recording his conversation, which I don't understand but which I think must be kind of interesting, I'm filming the cord that goes from the receiver to the phone on the- installation on the wall. And it's responding almost like a psycho-physiological kind of study of his emotions because when he gets kind of worked up the cable shows some tension, and then when there's silence it relaxes and so forth. So, that way I'm getting kind of an internal visit into his mind. And- but I'm just praying that there'll be enough film, as I'm continuing to shoot, so that when he comes out I'll get him also. And, sure enough, there was enough film and I got that wonderful shot in its entirety. On another occasion, I only wish I could have brought my camera into the scene but it wasn't appropriate. It was an event that was taking place at the Chinese Embassy at their reception. He invited me during the day and I- of course I accepted the invitation. During the course of that evening I was standing next to him, shoulder to shoulder, and a messenger comes rushing in, hands him a telegram, he opens the telegram and asks me, having read it, he says shall I translate it for you. I said well, please do.
					
So he reads the telegram and then asks if I'd like the translation. Of course I say- please. Your State Department has just broken off relations with Cuba. Well, as these things go, you know, you make a film and there's no end to your relationship with the people who are in the film. And so the film was made, you know, almost 50 years ago, but I still remember Fidel and he might remember me because of that scene, perhaps, more than anything else. Anyway, I've written him a letter describing that scene and saying that I'd like to come back to Cuba and to spend more time with him; and of course this time without having to fear that the camera is going to run out because I'll have a little tape that'll run for an hour without- without having to stop to reload, and a camera that'll be so sensitive to light- the one I now possess- that I won't have to use any lights. I'll be- and I'll even be able to be alone with Fidel when that opportunity comes. When- hopefully I'm with him when he gets that other telegram saying that Mr. Kerry has changed relations with Cuba to the effect that it's okay, that we'll renew relations with Cuba, as we should have done long ago.

						Okay, so I made this- I made this film on my own, "Psychiatry in Russia", edited it, all that stuff, which was my basic training. And then the experience in helping to make "Primary". And then a year or so later, having made this film in Cuba with these same people, having also helped out in a film that was made about the race driver, Eddie Sachs, and perhaps several other projects, I decided at that time that it would be best that I go out on my own with my brother, David. And so we made a film called "Showman".
					
						Between "Psychiatry in Russia" and my experience with Drew, Pennebaker and Leacock in "Primary", I know that at least one film I helped to make; a film of the travels of St Paul through Turkey and Greece. I was the cameraman on that. And when we got finished filming in Turkey, including places like Tarsus where St Paul was born and also going out and filming all the way East of Mount Ararat, a tourist promoting film that we made for the Turkish Government, I thought- in sort of some kind of crazy romantic way it would be interesting, exciting, to swim the Hellespont the way Lord Byron had done centuries before. And so when we got to Canakkale on the North West Coast of Turkey I jumped into the water and- in no way a skilful swimmer but a very determined one- I swam the Hellespont and Charlie Sharp, the guy that I was working with, he handled the camera from a rowboat with a Naval Officer from the Turkish Government and filmed me.
					
So in 1961 or so when I left Drew Associates I got in touch with a guy who was making films independently and getting them shown on television. He was very skilful at that. Making films of- which were-  Making films that were portraits of-  Let's see- making films of portraits of interesting Americans. And I was asked if I would like to participate and to think up who it might be that I would like to film. So a friend of my brother's and I knew this guy Joe Levine who was a movie distributor, about to become famous because he was about to make a film with Sophia Loren and this would be a big moment in his career. With that sort of thing in mind we offered Mr. Wolper the distributor and the financier for the film- this opportunity but he wasn't interested and- Because we'd gone so far as to get all excited about filming this guy we went ahead and just made the film at our own expense. And it's a film that still hasn't been shown on television. If we can't get it shown then we'll put it on DVD with a number of other films that are wonderful films: the film of Muhammad Ali, for example, preparing for his last fight; and several others. A film of Orson Welles whom we met in 1963 not long after completing the film of "Showman", right?  These are all films that should be shown and which will get shown on DVD and possibly on the Internet as well and perhaps even on PBS.

						I- I don't know what the percentage is but I mean not every brother/brother relationship works out in a professional fashion. But, but my brother and I had this unusually close relationship where, especially because we believed so completely in what we were doing as filmmakers, that that always came first. And also because we specialized, I would operate the camera, my brother would operate the sound, and the two of us, my brother as well as I, would, would be responsible for the film and be responsible for our relationship with the people that we were filming. So it was a completely joint effort that we both shared, where we both shared the responsibilities and the satisfaction of doing something very good. You can't beat that for a worthwhile and productive relationship. We really saw eye to eye with just about everything. He would also take on the function of supervising the editing, and we were very lucky in having some of the very best editors like Charlotte Zwerin certainly was one of them. You can't do any better than she as an editor. And we always felt too that the way people were and are still credited in documentaries is not really fair to one person or another. And we were determined to represent what each person did fully so that Charlotte got equal credit as a filmmaker, equal credit with the equal credit that my brother and I shared. So in those films there was the three of us. Editing is very important, the person behind the camera is very important, the producer, my brother, who shared every moment in the, in the making of the film- we were all represented properly in the credits. It was not a one-man operation. It was not a one-man operation and we didn't want it to be represented as such in the credits.
					
						So, on this trip to Africa, the purpose was to make a film of the Under Secretary of State for African Affairs, newly appointed, with the JFK Administration which had just come in. The idea was to follow him around as he went from one country to another, learning directly just what it was all about in each country. So we were to start out in Ethiopia and I arrived a week or so early in Ethiopia. And somehow, I don't know how it was, I got an appointment to see the top guy there, and so I entered his office; on the floor was a rug with an enormous Star of David. And then as I passed this rug, I came to his desk and there was this little guy sitting behind the desk with a military cap on and a chest covered with ribbons and medals and so forth. And we just stared at each other. This went on, I don't know, for at least five minutes. And I didn't feel uncomfortable and I don't think he did except there was a moment in which I think he felt a little insecure. And that was it. And this was Haile Selassie the Emperor. The lion of Judah. And many years went by and then a couple of years ago I happened to run across a biography of the Emperor Haile Selassie, page 190, I believe, spoke of the fact that the one thing that was forbidden in Ethiopia at that time was that any citizen cast his eye upon the Emperor. And that explained suddenly why it was that he was so engaged and so fascinated with the opportunity to look somebody else in the eye because- he could do that because I was from another country. And then- and then in those intervening years my son, who is now 26 and who was at that time six years old, he came home one day with a pastel, a drawing. It suddenly- I recognised, as abstract as the face was, it had a crown made of the Star of David, a man with a beard, little shoulders indicating that he was kind of small, right, and vulnerable; and with the look in those eyes which was exactly and only precisely the look that Haile Selassie gave me. And there's no way that I can track it down except to think that somehow or other something genetic and unexplainable otherwise was taking place. And there have been connections like that with my son especially when he was that young. At the same time I remember when he was six or so, I remember going to Detroit to do some commercial work and my brother had to arrive several days later. When he arrived he said that he had this extraordinary experience on a plane talking with a woman, a nun, who had been a nun for 17 years and who had been working with people of the Holocaust and such who- where they were being helped by Christians. And she gave my brother some literature including a book, and my brother gave me the book, which I then read on the way back to New York. And the book was by Elie Weisel and it was called "Night". I arrived home, opened the door and sat down, and my son, who had just made this sketch, handed it to me. I looked at it and it was a sketch that was drawn with a marker. And I said how was it you used a marker?  And he said oh, it was night. Well, the name of the book that Elie Weisel has written was "Night", about the Holocaust, of course.
					
						So, I looked at the drawing and at the top of the drawing was a black cloud and just below that three enormous Stars of David in the form of kites. And then below that a whole string of people, each person crossed out, and below these people railway tracks. Well, that's when he was six.
					
						I wrestled with the idea and, of course, there was this other factor too that I was beginning to work with my brother and- but I wasn't quite able to make up my mind until I spoke with a young woman who was a Scientologist, of all things, or something like that- something that I didn't and don't particularly believe in- but she said you've got to ask yourself just one question, and that is, whatever you decide upon, will you be your own agent? And I thought oh, that's a good question. And I, and I asked myself that and I thought no, I won't be because, because as much as Drew and I shared in common this whole new way of making movies, I still wouldn't be able to do exactly what I wanted to do. I had much greater interest in filming ordinary people in ordinary situations that, that had their own drama but weren't of a life and death, necessarily, or political nature. And, and Bob was obsessed with- oh, situations- life and death and political situations. And so with that standard- would I be my own agent- I discovered no; I had to go out on my own, and with my brother. And so it was not long after that that we made our first film together which was "Showman". That was 1962. In 1964 I remember answering the phone. It was a call from Granada Television in England and they said on the phone that The Beatles would be arriving in two hours at what was then Idlewild airport. It's now JFK. They would be arriving in two hours: would you like to make a film of them?  I put my hand over the phone and I turned to my brother, David, and I said- who are The Beatles?  Are they any good?  And fortunately he knew. He got all excited. We both got on the phone. We made a deal and rushed out to the airport. By this time I had my own camera that I'd built myself and so we had all the equipment and the film ready. And got out to the airport in time to see this little fleck in the sky become the plane that landed with The Beatles. And we spent the next five or six days, day and night, behind the scenes with The Beatles. Enough of, of extraordinarily good footage to, to make the first film of The Beatles. It was, it was to be called "What's Happening! The Beatles in the USA." So that was- that was the first music film that my brother and I had made on our own.
					
						We later on made a number of music films, getting into each project in a different way. In 1969 we made a film that came to be called "Gimme Shelter" with the Rolling Stones. We got into making that film when the Stones were making their first tour of America. They were already in Los Angeles before they'd come to New York. And my brother and I got a call from Haskell Wexler, the famous cinematographer and, on his own, a very good filmmaker as well. And apparently he had been talking to the Stones but had not made a deal to make the film and so he was calling us to tell us that we might want to meet them and with the possibility of making a film; that they would be arriving the next day at the Plaza Hotel in New York. So we went to the Plaza Hotel, knocked on their door, started chatting with them. Neither one of us really knew them or their music but from what Haskell had spoken of them they sounded quite interesting and- interesting enough so that on meeting them we found out that the next evening they would be performing in Baltimore, which would give us a chance, if we went to Baltimore, to- to sit in on their performance. And we did. And of course we agreed that this would be terrific subject matter. But we didn't want to just make a concert film and so when we returned and started filming them in Madison Square Garden- two days of that- we were convinced that if we stuck with them there would be more than just a concert film. And so what eventuated over the next few days was that- was a trip with them to Muscle Shoals in Alabama where they recorded some of their music which we filmed as they were recording it, and at Altamont, the famous Rock Concert where some 300,000 young people attended, many of them on drugs, attended by- a concert attended by a number of Hell's Angels- Just about everything turned in a direction completely the opposite from- what we experienced with The Beatles, who were just these innocent guys, up and coming, full of enthusiasm and, and everything positive about their experience. But things turned sour with violence and bad drugs and finally there was a moment where a Hell's Angel, bearing a knife, and a black young man by the name of Hunter- Meredith Hunter- the Hell's Angel wielding this knife, came down on Meredith Hunter, killing him. And it's not something that we could have prevented and said- and so while I was on the stage and not- and not able to see the, the murder which took place just to the left of the stage and out of my view, my brother fortunately was on a truck with another camera person at that time and was able to film that event. So it became a turning point in the film itself.
					
When we, when we finished that day of filming at Altamont- and some months later as we were editing the film, we- well- first of all- well, several- a week or so after we made the film we, we thought it would be interesting to show the footage which the Stones had asked to see anyway- footage including the footage of the killing, show it to them with their permission to film them as they watched it. So we had their reaction to the event and could include that in the film- a very important thing. And then- and then we thought, still not knowing exactly how the film would be edited, it might be interesting to go back to Los Angeles having got permission from the police and the Hell's Angels on separate occasions at the police station and at the Hell's Angels' home to film each group watching the footage of the killing. And, and so both the police and the Hell's Angels agreed to that. So we came out and we filmed the Hell's Angels- we filmed the police. That was very interesting- their, their reaction to the material.  What was their reaction?  It's hard for me to remember right now but it was typical of what a police person with that kind of mentality- the, the kind of responses that we got. And then when we get- got to film the Hell's Angels we set up the projector and as about- we were about to, to film them they said no, we don't want it to film but we're going to see the stuff. So we had to show it to them. And we couldn't get that part of it. So that- as it turned out we didn't need that footage anyway but-  What was their reaction?  Their reaction was to demand that- a million dollars from us. They considered themselves life actors, as they, as they described it. And- but as is the custom with documentary filmmakers we don't reward the people that we film because, because it's filming their life rather than performing for us. There are occasions when one strays from that one way or another but we certainly didn't have the million dollars nor do we still have that from the film.

						As we were about to leave my brother got caught in a conversation with them and they began to beat up on him. Not from anything he'd said but- just what it was I don't know. It wasn't anything rational. And I got into a conversation with one of the Hell's Angels who had a, had a very neat jacket- leather jacket- which I envied. And I said where did you get the jacket. He said- oh, my girlfriend made it for me. And he said- but maybe she can make one for you if you'll give me your address. And with the news that I'd already had about my brother's being beaten I, I was quite hesitant to, to give him my address. And so we left it at that and, and left as quickly as we could.
					
I think the one thing that comes up in the minds of the public and in the minds of many a documentary filmmaker too, is- just how far in the lives of a person do you go in filming them. Where- where you don't so- get so close to their vulnerabilities that that you begin to hurt them, that you should in fact stop filming. And both my brother and I were sensitive to that kind of problem. And so I can't remember anybody coming to us after the film was made, having seen it, and said well you shouldn't have filmed me, because we have been very careful. But at the same time a number of critics, in seeing a film of ours where we really do get to, to be in, in a realm of their profound- well, when we get to be very much into the personality of the person and, and so many a critic has felt that- oh, we've gone too far. And, and so when we made "Salesman" Walter Goodman, who was a distinguished reviewer for the New York Times, was very much offended that when we made- No, it wasn't "Salesman" that he was offended by, it was "Grey Gardens"; when we made that film which was of two women, a mother and a daughter- mother 80, daughter 60; two women who were eccentrics living in a decaying old mansion in East Hampton; two women, mother and daughter, who were the aunt and cousin of Jackie Onassis. We, we met these two women through Lee Radziwill, Jackie's sister, and right away when we met the daughter we could see that it was an interesting situation and one that we would want to film.

But when Walter Goodman saw the film he saw two eccentrics- he saw a film where you really got to know just about everything about this strange relationship- this mother / daughter relationship- to the point where he felt that, without saying so specifically because by saying so he would offend the two women and he was trying to say how offensive we were in depicting these two women- underlying it all he felt that they were too crazy to be filmed. And they, they weren't crazy. They were eccentric. And in fact when the two women saw the film they liked it very much. And in spite of the fact that Mr Goodman, at the end of his piece, described us as people who should be disgusted for having made this film, the film itself is- is a very bold and incisive attempt to depict the most profound human relationship which even literature has neglected to, to describe- the mother / daughter relationship- so that it's a very significant film in film history. And again, the daughter told us when she came back from visiting her mother- as her mother was dying in the hospital- she told us that in those last moments she turned to her mother and asked if there was something more she wanted to say and her mother said- there's nothing more to say. It's all in the film. So that we had done a great service for these two women and to their dying day, for both of them- the daughter only died about a year ago- we've kept up a respectful and loving relationship. To the extent that where we've come out with a DVD of the film and one of my daughters, Sara, is putting together a scrap book made up of letters that the daughter Edie and I had exchanged with each other, telephone conversations, photographs from their life all those years before they met my brother and myself, and on and on; outs from the film. Just the other day I got a call from one of the people in the film, this young man called Jerry, and I haven't heard from him for the 30 years now since the film was made, but he called me the other day to say that he'd like to get together for sentimental reasons and that he was a cab driver here in New York. So I'm calling him back, recording the conversation, and I hope that I can join him in his cab and we can continue our friendship with my camera in hand so that that sort of thing, plus a number of other things, will be in the DVD that will be attached to the scrapbook once it's published.

						I could go on in some great detail about my misfortune- and that of so many documentary filmmakers misfortune- of having such a difficult time getting one's film shown on television. In the case of "Salesman", which I'll talk about, it took over 30 years before we finally got it on PBS; 25 years before "Grey Gardens" could get shown on the Sundance Channel. But in one way or another we were able to get both films shown in movie theatres, first at our own expense and then being able to show them at a number of art houses.
					
						One day we had a group of friends for dinner and I happened to notice that my infant shoes, which are in the bookcase in the dining room- the kitchen area- I happened to notice that there seemed to be some piece of paper or something sticking out. So I pulled the shoe forth and I pulled out this piece of paper and I read it and I was so astounded by it that I thought I should read it to all of our friends at the table. And it just so happened that my son Phillip and my daughter Rebekah were in that room at that time. And so I read it. And it, it went something like this: it turned out to be something that my son had written, a show and tell for a school. He'd brought the shoes to school and wrote this little story about them that he invented. And the story began as I read it: these shoes are 237 years old. They went from rich to poor people, from poor to famous people- or maybe from famous to poor people. These shoes are 237 years old. They belonged to Rabbi Maysles who was, you know, some six or eight generations back from my, my father. And- and went from one generation to another, he wrote. So finally came to my grandfather, Phillip, and these shoes, at 237 years old, they, they have been in Synagogues, they've been- they've been- where else did he say?  In Synagogues, in concentration camps, they've been all over Poland and Germany, crossing borders. What else did he say? It was- it became- it became a kind of a history of, of Jewish life and persecution. And he was just a kid then. And I turned to Phillip and I said- did you write that?  And this was at a time when his older sister, Rebekah was having great difficulty in school and couldn't write very well. And he said- no, Rebekah did it. I said- Rebekah, did you, did you write this?  And she said yeah. And a couple of years went by, and on another occasion I read the piece that he had written, and by that time Rebekah had perfected her language and was really becoming an excellent student, and it was that time when Phillip said- by the way, it's I that- that wrote it. He had extended his generosity to his sister when she really needed it.
					
Well, when we- when we were making the film of The Beatles we made a deal with Granada Television that they would make their film, we would make ours, and our film we'd have complete rights to show in America and they would have complete rights to show it in England, and the rest of the world we'd share 50/50. But the problem was that they could show it in England without any problem because you didn't need releases there and we didn't have a release- and we didn't have a release from The Beatles because The Beatles had already negotiated with United Artists, I believe, in the production that was about to take place of "A Hard Day's Night", and they didn't want to give us a release so we couldn't show the film. And then, many years later, I think it was in 1991 that The Beatles decided that they would try to negotiate a deal with Granada Television and with us so that they could go ahead and get the film shown. So without getting our own release we, we submitted to a deal with, with Apple. And then they came back to us and asked us to make some changes which they thought would make the film more commercial. We didn't like that to happen but they asked us to make the changes and, and paid us for doing so. So with those changes which, which essentially were dropping out certain things that we felt so precious to the film and adding more music to it in the form of the performance that they did on television for "The Ed Sullivan Show"- Anyway, came out on a DVD and that was in 1991 so that's 13 or 14 years ago. And recently they wanted to make another DVD and they did, incorporating some of the original footage that had been left out, and then celebrating the 40th anniversary of The Beatles' first arrival in America, they asked me to, to join them on a press junket that would take me to England and to New York at the Plaza Hotel where The Beatles first came and stayed and also to Los Angeles. So I took my, my daughter Sara with me to Los Angeles and we met up with, with Ringo, whom I hadn't seen in 40 years, and we spent a lovely evening chatting with him in his home in Beverly Hills. Which is, of course, another way of saying that when you make a film and you maintain a good relationship, based on having had a good relationship with them and making a good film of, of people, that- that the relationship goes on. And in fact two years ago I got a call from Paul McCartney who was about to launch a, an evening program at Madison Square Garden with a bunch of other rock'n'roll stars- this was two weeks before that event took place- he called up to say- let's do another film. And so I spent those two weeks filming Paul and his- and his girlfriend at that time whom he later married, in preparation for the event at Madison Square Garden. And then I was there also in the dressing room with him all that evening as various celebrities came in to welcome him and to chat with, with him. And that film is just about finished. Unfortunately on that press junket I didn't get to see George Harrison because he had already gone, but I did meet his wife and she was- she was just delightful and I'm so happy that I met her, who was really, and to this day, is a wonderful representation indirectly of her husband.

						See, there's no- there's no way to show these little pieces. A half hour film of Muhammad Ali- a half hour is kind of- it's not enough for most television. It should be an hour. And, and commercial television isn't interesting in making a show of anything that's other than their own. They do their own stuff and the hell with everybody else; which is really a major fault in mass communications. There are lots of people all excited, and properly so, getting involved in making a documentary of goodness knows what- but, but many- on many subjects that- that the public would respond to and would need- and, and with information that they would need to know for many reasons: know about health, know about politics, know about the world around them. I personally think that we never would have gotten into this Iraq War if there'd been- I don't know exactly what the film would be, but there's a documentary film that, had it been made, would have informed people that so much of what we were about to be told was not true and the government couldn't have stepped into Iraq with the public knowing that. So, there's an importance to what a documentary filmmaker can make beyond just making something- excuse me- beyond making something that's just entertaining. In fact, I've come to think that the word entertainment has taken on such a bad connotation because- not, not that the word is bad, except that if you look it up in the dictionary you see that it has two definitions. The first one is the one that most entertainment goes by- a diversion. How much more enlightening, how much more beneficial, how much more of good can be done, where entertainment would be of the second definition rather than the first. The second definition is that entertainment is an engagement: an engagement, in the case of documentary filming, an engagement with real life. An engagement where, for example, you see a film and you get to know somebody that, that it's beneficial to know; a person who's doing good things, not killing somebody, as is the subject matter of so much mass communication, but being of a generous sort, doing something that you never would have known of otherwise except that- oh, my goodness, I just saw this, what a wonderful person, I, I want my kids to see this film. How many times can a parent, having seen something on television, come away saying- oh, this would be great for my kids to see it, or my friends? Very little. Very little of desire to do that unless a parent is, is committed, or some kind of diversion. And so I've made some films that are anything but a diversion. I've made three films for HBO which is a kind of oasis in the mass media where, on HBO, at least a dozen very good documentaries are, are shown every year. I made a film on abortion where you got both sides of the issue. A film on hospice care where you got to know people who were dying- to, to witness that experience. But dying with the care of hospice workers who helped them go through that terrible period. I've come to think that, that the near death experience is such a revealing one of, of people at their most human. And I think it's true, but a film doesn't necessarily have to take place at that time in another person's life in order to, to get an understanding of what it is to be a person- a human being. And so, so I've come up with the expression: the near life experience. And I think a good documentary gets you that closer- that much close to the real person that, that it's a, a living, dramatic, wholesome experience that, that enlightens you as it entertains you. And, and I've made films that serve that purpose.
					
						The film "Salesman" is a film which was noted by Norman Mailer as a film that probably tells more about America than any other film. And, and when you come to think of it, four door-to-door bible salesmen knocking on, at random, on the doors of people, women who happen to be home during the day, housewives, the interaction between the salesman who is, who is prepared to say the right thing and, and answer every question so as to make a sale, right, and the housewife who, who is an innocent person, most times eager to help the guy out but at the same time falling victim to buying something that she otherwise wouldn't have bought or even needed. Because the bible in this case is a book that is sold for the illustrations, for the quality of the binding and so forth, and not really for, for the spiritual value. And so that in that film it all kind of comes together; an understanding of what's going on in our culture. The buying, the selling, the, the salesperson who is a- who is a, what shall I say, a symbol of the capitalist system in that- in that he's out on his own and when he knocks on that door, if he makes a sale or he doesn't it's up to him. It's the epitome of the rugged individualist that's always been the key character in Capitalist society. So that at the same time the main character who emerges in the film, Paul Brennan, is somebody that, as a fellow human being, you just have to connect with even though he's not- and maybe because- not successful as a salesperson- and maybe because he's not successful as a salesperson but is much more successful as a human being than his fellow salespeople. Right?  Those ironies and paradoxes represented in the life of this man, you, you really connect with this person so much so that when we finished the film we weren't able to get it on television. Programmers who would see the film thought it was too depressing. They weren't used to a film- in this case, a revolutionary film- the first documentary to be not just a feature length film but a feature because, because of the drama represented in the life, especially of this Paul Brennan, the main character. Right? So it couldn't get shown on television, not for over 30 years of trying to get it on television. We finally got it on PBS.
					
						1956, the year after I made my first trip to Russia, I was determined to return and through one of my brother's contacts I met a guy who was a publicity director for the Vespa Motor Scooter Company and I thought- oh, well, if I could get a motor scooter then I'd like to ride it all the way through Eastern Europe into Russia. And so he arranged so that if that were the case, if I were to do that, then all I would have to do is to go to Genoa, Italy, at the factory, and he'd have arranged for me to pick up one, free, and off I would go. But I was really short of cash, certainly not enough to make the trip, and my brother, the week before I left, my brother said- what, are you crazy, you don't have any money. How much money do you have?  So I checked through my wallet and so forth and I had $7. And you're going to Russia on a motor scooter?  Oh, I don't know, I'll get it. Well, and I think it was just the very next day I got a call from a woman who had heard of my teaching at, at Boston University and heard that I had been to Russia the year before, and she was going to go to Russia with a group who were studying social services in Russia and she wanted to get whatever tips she could. So I said- well, let's have lunch. So during that lunch I said, that- how are you going?  She said- oh, I'm going by, with this group. And I said- well, I'm going but- and I'm going by motor scooter but I'm a little short of money. She said- oh, well, if we went- don't worry about that, I just inherited $125,000. So off we went, the two of us, on the motor scooter. I had already had, you know, a lot of experience riding a motor cycle all over east- all over Western Europe in 1954. So I certainly could ride it, but at one point when we were still in Italy we- she got curious and thought that she'd like to drive it. Of course, we were all loaded up with whatever we had to travel with and shortly after we got on the road with her we crashed into a fruit stand which somehow or other we got through all right. And, and we made it all the way into Russia. When we got to, to the border of the Soviet Union we were required to put the motor scooter on a train. They weren't about to just let us roam around at random. And that took us to Kiev. And- but when I got to Kiev I decided to strike out on my own to see what it was like in the countryside. And I remember that I ran out of gas and all- of course, all the trucks were owned by the government so that an official truck was in- I flagged down. And the guys were only too happy to help out and fill up my gas tank and the extra tank that I carried with me and so that foray into the countryside was kind of nice. I came back to Kiev to stay, to stay longer.
					
						The next year, 57, my brother and I thought that we'd do a similar sort of trip but this time with a- with a motor cycle. A bigger one. And we got to England and it was some holiday so we couldn't go to the motor cycle company to try to get a free motor cycle and so we went on to, to Germany, to Munich, to the BMW factory, and I remember- oh, they couldn't give us one but they were struck by the fact that such a trip would be good publicity for the motor cycle. And so they charged us only $300 for a motor cycle that must have been worth several thousand. At least now I think it's about $15,000 for such a vehicle. And anyway, off we went. This time we had no difficulty getting into the Soviet Union and it was very helpful that we had not only ordinary visas for Russia but it was at a time when there was a Communist Youth get-together. You didn't have to be a communist but it was sponsored by the Communist Party and they welcomed youths from all over the world. There were very, very few Americans that dared to defy the, the, the unofficial ban that the State Department put on going there. I mean, they'd still go but the State Department wasn't particularly keen on having Americans go there. So when we got to, to Hungary, because it brought- we had this Youth Festival thing in mind, you know, it made the- there was sort of a stamp of approval that got us through more easily. I remember- I remember when we got there, there were, of course, Russians from all over the Soviet Union there, and there was a party that they gave the American Delegation, which- I don't know, there were very few people. But a party where they, they gave a prize from each- from several of the Soviet Republics, and one of them was this beautiful Siberian rug which we won. And this fellow American, Larry Moyer who's become a great friend of mine over the years, and a very funny comic from, from Brooklyn, complete with the appropriate Brooklyn accent- when he saw that we got the rug, which had an inscription in Russian which of course none of us understood, Larry said- well, you see that inscription, you may have some difficulty when you get to the customs in America because the translation of it reads- and I'll translate it for you- it reads: thanks for the blueprints. And, of course, he was joking. To this day I don't know what it said. It could be- it could be that it said that but- for all I'd know.
					
						When I was in high school I was very ambitious. I thought that maybe I'd be another Darwin, or somebody of that sort, and possibly find the missing link. What I didn't know was that in my studies of psychology, which I took very seriously, that it would eventually bring me to the missing link that I might have been looking for, that is a connection- a special connection with reality that the movie camera, held in my hand could, could give me. By recording reality with such authenticity that people could experience what I experienced through the people that I'd be filming, and also they would get the experience itself. And that, to me, is of- is of a major tool in, in understanding the world around us. And I still am very much inspired by that notion, that through giving people an understanding of the real world, that they might be all the more prone to be better neighbors with people that they would never otherwise have met, and people of every walk of life in every status. When we made "Salesman" we had exactly that in mind- making a film of ordinary people, many of them people that we filmed as we met them. Because in "Salesman" the bible salesman would knock on a door and right away we'd be filming. Now, people have told me that although that film was made in 1968, that nowadays you couldn't do that sort of thing. People are more sophisticated about cameras and more savvy and more, more prone to distrust somebody with a camera in their hands. I don't think that's so. I think that- and certainly from my studies in psychology, I've, I've come to learn that it is possible to get access to people, all the more easily so when you consider that people really would like to be filmed if they trust you. And if you can be trusted, if you're confident of that- of that trust that you deserve, that people pick up on that through the way you look at them and through the empathy that you may give them. So that it's such a basic need that people have, that attention be paid to them, that they be recognized for whom they really are- no better, no worse, no different- that if you have that confidence, that people really would like to be filmed. And if you really feel that you deserve that kind of responsibility, and are quite eager to take that responsibility of treating people fairly, with the feeling that- and the confidence that you can make an authentic and truthful account of what you witness, then you've got everything going for you. Well, anyway, people picked up on that right away, even at the door, and there were very few people- very few women- that, if they would allow the salesman in, that they wouldn't allow us in. Some might say we had a score of 80% or 90%. I remember one woman just wasn't ready to be filmed because her hair wasn't done right. You had that sort of thing but otherwise-  And, and I don't recall that anybody, once the film came out, got hold of us to say oh, I don't want to be in that film. They were dealt fairly. And that's been true of, of all the films that I've made.
					
						News is always coming in from all kinds of sources of films that I've made. And I, I've made so many films- over three dozen of them- that just last night when I was at a party of the National Arts Club I met a man by the name of Van Doren; and his father, Mark Van Doren, was a famous poet. And he and another famous poet by the name of Archibald MacLeish, in the 60s, they were subjects of a film that my brother and I made of just the two of them. But I, I had forgotten all about that until last night when I met the son- Van Doren's son- who has a copy of the film and, and so I'm going to get it from him, make a copy for myself, and make a DVD for him so that- you know, it goes on. You know ? One of the scenes that I remember was that the two of them in the country house of MacLeish outside of Boston. The two of them took a swim. And I went- it was one of those summer days that we were filming. And they swam in the nude. And as they came out I was filming and it only occurred to me just last night that it never occurred to me at the time, that- to be surprised that they didn't ask, well, how did you film me because I don't want to be-  they just took it for granted that I would film them above the waist. And thinking back on it, of course, that's the way I did film it.
					
						I guess that part of my passion, part of my fascination with trains may come from a personal experience that I had. When I was 17 years old the war was on, it was 1944, and I was about to go off to war. And there were a bunch of kids my age, all of us only 17, on the train, waiting for the train to move out. And as we waited we, as kids will do, we joked around, having a great fun of meeting one another. And, and as I was still laughing about a joke the train began to move and I looked out the window and there was my family- my father, my mother, my kid brother and my older sister. They were just looking in, they couldn't see me, but they were looking at the train as it was going out. And I'll never forget that look, the look that said- oh my God, he may never come back. And it happened so fast that they were gone from my view before I could catch up with that emotion. And so in completing that gestalt that I'm always doing- I'm trying to catch up with that emotion as I see in my mind's eye my family just looking ahead in that, with that fear and that terrible feeling that this might be the last time they might see me. And, who knows, there may be the opportunity to film something like that, and certainly if something like that were to become evident in my travelling I sure will get it because I'm prepared for it.
					
						There was a time when I was on the train, filming my train film, and I was chatting with a woman about her life. And she was telling me interesting stories but she didn't want to be filmed and so I thought that was okay. But the stories were so good that at one point I thought she was about to tell me- I thought that she was about to tell me a key story of her life- the most important story of all. And I wanted so much to film it but I knew that I shouldn't even ask. But I thought for a moment that my video camera was right on the table and that if I turned it on I would certainly get her voice. And the way it was positioned I would get her hands as well. And so I turned the camera on and she proceeded to tell me the story of how, when her child was three years old, she took this child into the park and he began to behave so badly that she found herself over-disciplining the child. And she didn't like that. So she decided that she would let the child behave as he was and she would, she would walk away. And as she walked away she heard this crash and she turned back and this child was run over by a car. That little story which must be the most important story in her life as she told- and I got it- and I got it with due respect to her. And I'm sure that there's no way of identifying her as, as the author of that story. And it's a story that I think she would appreciate having been told, but having been told only that way, without her telling it with her face. So there's a way to get all of these things and to get them respectfully.
					
						When I was in Russia, on one of my trips, I took the train across Russia almost to the Chinese border. And as we were going back to Moscow I saw a compartment; it appeared to have a family in it. And I knocked on the window, and as I came into the compartment one of the two children, who turned out to be the nephew and the other one the niece of the aunt and uncle who were accompanying them, she gave me this little photograph. And then they proceeded to tell me that they were on this train ride because these two children had  just lost their mother who'd been killed by their father, and their aunt and uncle were taking them to the Ukraine to take care of them. And the photograph was of their mother in her coffin. So I filmed all of that. And, since many years have gone by it'll be all the more interesting now that I get- getting financing for the film, to go to the Ukraine to find out what happened and to see how these kids were doing.
					
						There's a book that George Orwell wrote about the Civil War- the Spanish Civil War in the 30s. And there's a scene in that book where a train is pulling into the station and it's loaded with recruits that are on their way to the war- to the front. But there's a moment where there's a train coming back from that front loaded with wounded. And as the two trains pause there's got to be some kind of connection for those who see from one train to the other. I dunno- My mind is open to something like that. Or maybe something quite different from that but having that piece of knowledge of what one can get about trains inspires me all the more to keep my mind open.
					
						In 1961- the adviser who was killed in ambush- the American adviser- in Vietnam. This was before the war but at a time when we were beginning to get involved in that, in that war. And so when I heard that this man's body was being sent first to New Orleans and then on to Tuscaloosa, Alabama, I decided, along with another person I was associated with who would take sound, I decided to go to New Orleans in time for the arrival of the body. And so, knowing that his, the body was going to be put on the train, we got inside the baggage car of the train, where the door was still open, and started filming as the coffin was brought up and into the baggage car. And as I got that shot you could see in the distance another train with people walking through it, of course totally oblivious to this event which was the early beginnings of the, of the war. And so I filmed the journey of the body with people paying no attention to it, all of which was relevant to the story that might develop. Finally we got to Tuscaloosa and I could hear, just outside the train, the voices of the people from the funeral parlor and they were talking about how- yeah, it's just like North Korea all over again. Bodies are coming back. And then the door opened and I could see in the distance the family standing under a lamppost with a gentle amount of light coming through the fog. I later joined with them, and spent a day with them before the funeral itself, and, all the time filming. And I remember as the body was going underground I panned over to a group of young people who, oblivious to the importance of what was going on, were talking about the party that they would go to the next night. Well, having shot all that stuff, the idea was to be for me to return to Vietnam where this man had been killed and find and stay with his replacement and complete the story. All of which, had the film ever been made, perhaps would have given us, if the film got shown, given us all more information as to what might happen and perhaps would have helped to have- keep us from getting into that quagmire. Well, I mean, right now I'm thinking- my goodness, if only we knew more about what's going on there in Iraq we would get the hell out of there. And if more- if we only knew more much earlier on we never would have gotten in there. And- but we don't know that much because there's not a documentary that's telling us what's going on there. I was so disturbed when the war began in Iraq that- and it began as we remember seeing on television with the bombing of Baghdad. We remember perhaps the scenes of the dark profiles of the buildings with the flashes of light behind which told us that the city was being bombed but at no time after that, the day after or the month after that or the years after that, did we have a single daylight photograph looking down on the city to see what damage has been done. Even a photograph- let alone a film, you know, unless that- until that documentary film is made showing clearly what's happening to people being killed and wounded and so forth, we won't know what it's all about. Sometimes, sometimes somebody comes up with a book that tells it all so beautifully. There was a book written after the First World War. It was called- it was called "All Quiet on the Western Front" and I read that book to my kids and they cried a great deal, and they're not about to go easily off to war. But it's one of the few instances where the film that was made was as good as the book. And I believe that just about any book of something that's going on, if the film is being made and made very well of what's going on, right, and it's an interesting story, with- of interesting people, that the film will be an even if not a better match for it. At least, that's the kind of competitive goal that I would like to try to achieve.
					
For my train film, what I planned to do is to go to Paris to the famous Gare de Lyon- the train station where the trains leave for the South to Lyon and further on- and I wanna go there because it's a big train station with a number of platforms. And there's a beautiful view of all the trains coming and going, people arriving and people saying goodbye. There's a view from the restaurant above it- this is the famous Blue Train Restaurant- and I want to sit in that restaurant, look through the window onto the view of the platforms and the trains and the people, and, and shoot a continuous shot that'll go the full length of the first movement of Mahler's Resurrection Symphony. That music gives one the feeling of life and death; of the whole story of humankind, if you will. At least, as I feel that it does. And people who comment likewise. With that music and that view I want to start the film. And then when I roam through the trains in different countries and find people- where there's a story that takes place when they get off the train, I want those stories to be so spontaneous and so powerful, so entertaining as engagements, that- or, as I like to put it- and I haven't gotten this kind of story yet but I will, I'm sure, I'd like to put it that somebody like Borges or Tolstoy, if given the opportunity to see that story on film, would put down his pen or pencil and say- yeah, that's what I should be doing. And the curious thing is, and what makes it such an ambitious program for myself, is that we have all heard so many times of people who've produced films based on a book and the comment almost always has been- well, the movie was good but the book was so much better. I want to reverse that, so that people, when they see these short stories, will say- my God, I've read short stories but nothing as powerful as that. And something that I experienced on one of my research trips that I think would be such a powerful story was an experience that I had in Indiana, I believe, when, as I looked out the window onto the platform in the train station I saw a group of three people. There was what appeared to be a couple and a third person, a woman, and they seemed to be quite happy. I don't know what it was that made them so happy because I couldn't hear what they were saying, of course, as I sat looking through the window. But as the train pulled out I took my walk through the train and that third person I saw sitting alone, and crying, and I asked if I could join her. And she very much welcomed me. And as she continued to cry her first words were: I still can't make up my mind; which led me to be quite curious as to what was going on. And she proceeded to tell me- you know, she said, it's so difficult when you're married to a man, as many women are, who keeps changing jobs, and sometimes that means leaving friends behind and moving on to another town. Well, I'm on the train to meet up with my husband who, some three hours from now on the train, where he'll be at this town, where he's putting the final touches on a house that we're moving into. And then she went back to crying again and saying- but I still can't make up my mind, she said- because the couple that I left behind, our best friends, he's the one that I really love. Well, it's hard to put together a story like that, that you imagine-  It's hard to imagine such a story. But if you did it, it would be very hard to put it forth as convincingly as what I witnessed where that woman, who went through it all, told me all about it.

						So, my brother and I were at Cannes on an assignment for some big production company to film interviews with famous directors who were there to promote their films. I remember filming Roman Polanski and, and his wife who was the most beautiful woman I've ever met. The most graceful. And I filmed her dancing. I remember that. So I must try to find that footage. Either we have it or the Film Company must have a copy of it. One day in Cannes somebody happened to mention to us that Orson Welles was in Cannes but he was some 20 miles out of the town in a bar room talking to some people and if we went out there we might get an opportunity to meet him. So we drove out and when we got there and introduced ourselves- I don't think he'd seen any of our films but he knew who we were and how we worked. And almost right away he said- well where are you going from here?  I said- oh, we're going back to New York. Well, instead, why don't you stop off in Madrid for a week? So we spent a week in Madrid with Orson Welles going to bull fights, restaurants. But not, maybe the first or the second day he began to talk about a film that we should make together about people who go to bull fights. And anything that he would want to do- and where we would be involved in making it with him, y'know, sounded exciting to us. So, so we filmed him talking about this film that we'd make and we ended up with this wonderful little ten minute piece which has yet to be put out and we're hoping to include it with some other films on a DVD that we'll market: a film of Muhammad Ali preparing for his last fight; a film of a young American dancing with the Bolshoi Ballet; all kinds of stuff. Pieces of films- entire short films that could be put forth on DVD. The other famous and very talented film director was Jean-Luc Godard. I had met Bob A. Schroeder who was a film producer and, and film director to be. I'd met him in New York at a time when he was about to, to leave but had to spend a little more time in New York and I invited him to stay at my apartment. And it wasn't long before I learned of a film that he was about to make- a film which would be called "Paris vu Par" which is- in English means "Paris As Seen By"-  Well, it's Paris as seen by a number of famous French film directors, and each one would contribute a short 10-15 minute piece that would be part of this collection of Paris stories that would be in this film. One of- one of the objectives of the film was that it would all be- everything would be shot at 16mm which was kind of unheard of for a theatrical film, which it would be. But he wanted to promote the notion that the theatres would incorporate a 16mm projector in their theatres by having to show it that way with this film. And so one day he said- you know, one of the directors is Jean-Luc Godard and, he said- you guys would be great working together; what if I called up Jean-Luc and suggested that you come to be part of the filmmaking- that you would shoot his little story? And I said well, that'd be great. And so he called Jean-Luc and he said- yeah, send him over tomorrow because everything is all set. So I got there with my camera and the idea was- and a revolutionary idea at that- that this piece of fiction would be shot in such a way where the actors would all know exactly what they were to do, and the scene would be lit, all set, and I would walk in at that time and film it the way I would a documentary, just discovering from moment to moment exactly what was going on as I was filming it. And so I think I only shot maybe two or three rolls of film, so that's a half an hour, so just about everything that I shot was used because, because each shot had a continuity that the editor wouldn't, wouldn't want to interrupt. It was so smooth and so- and so- great. You know, when you- when you have the opportunity in a fiction film to, to choose your shots from moment to moment, you do all kinds of things that, that take away at times the feeling of really being there. But, but when the camera continues to, to move with the, with the action, you feel that you're seeing everything that you would if you were there with your- with your own eyes. Anyway, it came across just beautifully and, and convincingly. It was a kind of a filmmaking that was similar to that of- oh, who's that?  "Shadows." 

Cassavetes

Yes, similar, similar to-  it was a kind of filmmaking similar to Cassavetes but went one step beyond.
					
						In the mid 60s my brother and I were asked to come to, to Ireland to make a film about a film that was being made there. A film called "Young Cassidy" and it was the story of Sean O'Casey, the famous Irish playwright. And as we were making this film about the film, we met an actress who was in the film but was very special because she was the daughter of Sean O'Casey who was still alive at that time, right? He wasn't in the film but she played a part in it. And we learned from her that she would love to, at some point, make a film of her father. She adored him, as all of Ireland adored him as well. And so with that acquaintance- acquaintanceship- I think the next year or so-  No, it wasn't that-  It was sometime after that that Shivaun was in New York and I filmed her and her mother. Her mother was 90 years old. And they talked beautifully about their father and, and that and some other scenes that I shot of people in Ireland made up the bulk of the film. There was some extraordinarily good archival footage as well. And the film's just about finished now. And- it's odd, I've learned from Irish Americans that somehow, Irish Americans have lost their cultural contact with, with Ireland. And I think, among other things, I think this, this film will be of great pride and a connective to the old country for many an Irish person who has, in great part, lost his or her roots.
					
A major film production company called upon us to make a little film of Salvador Dal because he was some sort of contributor to a big Hollywood film that they were trying to promote. A film... I think it was called Fantastic Journey. A good deal of the film took place inside the human body. And so we filmed Salvador Dal in his hotel room at the St Regis Hotel in New York. And it's kind of a funny film because Salvador Dal is so strange. And I think one of the people in the film... I think, because otherwise I don't know why she would find herself with Salvador Dal... one of the most famous models and most beautiful women, Raquel Welch, in a bathing suit or something of that sort. She's in the film. And that's quite a... quite a little added attraction.
[Q] What's she doing in it? 
I think she's posing for Salvador Dal. You had to see a touch of that film to get some of his quirkiness.

						On a much larger scale we've made half hour, one hour films, of various Christo projects. The first one, in 1972 I believe, was a film called "Valley Curtain." Christo does big environmental projects; I guess that's what you might call them. What he does is he makes drawings of the- of the project before they actually take place and his drawings he sells. He gets enough for the sale of the drawings that he, that he can put millions of dollars into these big environmental projects. The first one that we filmed was called "The Valley Curtain." It was sort of like the bottom of a bikini, stretching fabric 300 feet high across the valley space between two mountains. And one of the high points of the film is that the workers, as the project was coming to an end, they finally understand what it's all about. And their understanding is so sophisticated and so complete that they become, in a very real sense, appreciators of art where, where really they knew nothing about that sort of thing before they began working on the project. And another project took place several years later. A project called "The Running Fence." A fence 24 miles long and 18 feet high, out of white fabric, going across hills and vales in California, starting in the sea and going back into the- east into the, into the country- to the countryside. Of course, the irony, which is so much a basic part of the whole project, is that, that a fence, beautifully made like that out of fabric, like other fences, it would seem to divide people and keep them apart from one another. But this, as a work of art, brought millions of people to see it and to talk about it and to think and discuss about art itself. And so it became a device of art to bring people together in a very artful fashion. There were some 17 get-togethers of various government agencies, try- deciding on whether to allow the project to take place that we filmed. And so the Christos couldn't get started on doing it until all these hearings took place. And as more than one person has commented on seeing the film, the film is a most perfect example of what democracy is all about. It's interesting that starting out with a very simple concept and believing it to the extent that these two people- Christo and his wife Jeanne-Claude- to the extent that they put their- all their savings and all their time into these projects, with their total belief which contradicts many a skeptic, y'know, that it's the right thing to do. I've often thought that if there were 50 or 100 such people doing their own thing in areas of art and politics, in medicine, in education and so forth, the world would be just enormously much better off for it. So it's quite some accomplishment to have made these films which broadcast the good work of these people.
					
Another film took place in Biscayne Bay just outside of Miami and I think it was 11 islands in Biscayne Bay that were surrounded by the pink fabric floating very gently on the surface of the water. And until you've gone up in the helicopter, as I did with Christo, I couldn't quite fully appreciate the beauty of the project. But once up there with my camera in hand I got so excited I almost fell out of the helicopter. But it's another one of those splendid achievements. Then there was the Pont Neuf- the oldest bridge in Paris. That particular project is so interesting because he had his- he had to get the approval of two major politicians who disagreed with one another and weren't quite ready to take the political chance of supporting the project- Mitterrand and Chirac. And so they were a very important part of the project. Also it was the first time in our filming of the Christos where you really get to know how it is that they- these two people- got to meet one another. Christo from Bulgaria- not leaving Bulgaria until 1956- and, and there's quite a story as to how he got out of Bulgaria- and then meeting up with Jeanne-Claude's mother whom he did a portrait of because he was doing portraits at that time to survive. And then- and then meeting up with and joining in marriage with Jeanne-Claude whose father was a famous general under de Gaulle in the Second World War and whose father could help them make contacts with members of the government. Among other things we got to learn that not only were they born in the same year but also in the same month and the same day, so that in some peculiar way it was almost destined that they get together. And, and I think one must feel very thankful that they made this partnership because the projects and the films that came out of them were so important and so beautiful. Another film was "The Umbrellas." That took place in both Japan and California with thousands of enormous umbrellas going over hills and valleys both in California and North of Tokyo, in Ibaraki- yellow ones for California and blue ones for Japan. The- you see those umbrellas and people responding to, to them; and actually being there and getting the work done and- you had to be very strongly moved by this project which was the first of their international projects because it was in two countries rather than just one place.

						The most recent project we couldn't do because as with the other ones we were able to somehow finance the films- just as they financed the projects we would finance the films. And so without- without the financing we weren't able to make a film of the wrapping of the Reichstag- the original House of Parliament for Germany. There were people in Germany who made a film of it and I helped them out with some of the filming but unfortunately it's not one of our own- which, of course, brings us to the next project which we've been filming now for 25 years because it's taken that much time for the Christos to get the approval of the Mayor of New York. A film that takes place in Central Park, in some 7,500 gateways all over the park; each gateway over pathways of the park. So each one of these gateways is a very simple frame that's 16 or 18 feet high and 10 or, 10 or 12 feet wide according to the width of the pathway. And floating from the top is a beautiful saffron piece of fabric that comes down eight feet from the top. And because it's not tied, except at the top, it responds freely to the wind. When I think of the project I think of it as a rendering by these two artists, Christo and Jean-Claude- who is a kind of the producer, really- I think of it as an artwork gracing a piece of nature, just as a piece of nature might grace the park.
					
						Some time ago I, I met up on the bus-  I'm always meeting strangers on buses, and friends as well- but this time it was a friend by the name of Morris Engel who was a famous early documentary filmmaker. And he pulled out of his pocket a photograph; a photograph that he took from his apartment on the 6th floor around 70th Street on the West Side overlooking Central Park. He took the photograph with a panoramic camera and- so that he could see not only the whole park but the park all the way from the South End at 59th Street to 110th Street, I think it is, where it meets- it meets up with Harlem, right?  And you see the park and 5th Avenue and everything beyond. It's a, it's a beautiful, full scope image of the park. But not, not just that either. There was one thing in the photograph that made it so extraordinary- a piece of nature that graced that beautiful park and all beyond it- a rainbow that went from Harlem all the way to 59th Street, standing above it all and making it all the more beautiful. Well, you could ask yourself, I suppose, how could an artist, using the means of a human being, rather than of nature itself, grace the park in so beautiful fashion. Well, the Christo's have managed to do that with their gates project by setting up 7,500 gateways over the walkways of Central Park with simple frames, that are some 16 or 18 feet high, 10 or 12 feet wide according to the width of the walkway. That's 7,500 of them with that, with a piece of fabric fastened to the top and let loose, some eight feet of it responding to the wind. I'm so excited that I'll be making a film of that, as I have been filming it now for 25 years during which time the Christos have struggled with the City to get permission. Finally this year I was there when Michael Bloomberg, the Mayor, gave the okay and so it's going to happen; it's going to happen in February and- February 12th. And in one day, almost in one moment, the fabric will descend from each top of each gateway and the project will begin and last for 16 days during which time Antonio Ferreira and I will be filming it all. And we're hoping that in January we will have- each of us and several other cameramen as well- a new high definition small camera that's being made by Sony and hopefully that camera will be ready for us the night before the- the month before, in January. One way or another we will capture the full beauty of it. But it's not just the fabric; it's not just the gateway; it's not just everything that Christo can put into this as an artist. It's also- it's also the human reaction to it. So we are now spending time filming people in the park. We will be spending a great deal of time filming people in February when the leaves aren't there, when you can get a full view of the- of the gates. We will be filming people of all kinds, with all kinds of stories that will erupt in response to what these people are finding as a new environment for them in this beautiful thing called Central Park.
					
						So there're all kinds of little stories that, that we'll pick up. We, we hope to have at least a half a dozen film, film cameras operated by people that we've known over the years who do work the way we do. I can easily see a little partnership of, of two very young kids. Just what they're going to say I don't have any control of, or, or would I want to. But, but I expect to discover them talking about something which in some way will add to our understanding of the human connection with the gateways: older people; people of different race. You know, New York City has so many different kinds of, of people and we want to catch that diversity. Of course the, the gates are such a fitting compliment to the park but also a fitting compliment to New York City which is a kind of a gateway to America for so many immigrants for so many years, and somehow we're going to capture that kind of theme by, by finding human events that give us a development of that notion. So that's something to be worked out and to discover, and I'm excited by that prospect too.
					
						Well, we have all- all that footage over the years that was shot in 16mm, beautiful color. A year or two ago I, I advanced my technology, I think, by beginning to use a video camera. And- actually it was only a year or so that I used the camera- the video- on this project. But there are many reasons to make it- to have made that choice. One of them is that with this little camera, the tape will run without interruption for an hour so that at no time would I expect that I have to lose a shot or part of it because I only have ten minutes of a run, which is the case with film. And the camera that I've been using is much smaller, less obtrusive; there are economies as well. The- I'm all the more excited with the new technology that'll add more possibilities for capturing more intimacy with whatever I film for "The Gates" project.
					
						In 1966 I got a call one day from a big Hollywood production company saying that they thought it might be a good idea if we did some filming of Marlon Brando who was the star of their film that was about to come out- a film called "Morituri" and they said that normally what they do when Brando is interviewed, as he will be interviewed the next day by people who've come from all parts of the country to, to interview him, because they want to get information for their show on television in different parts of the country. So that people from Pittsburgh, from Boston, from Chicago, Los Angeles, maybe- I think at least a dozen such interviewers- and they thought wouldn't it be interesting if my brother and I came to the Hampshire Hotel where Marlon Brando would be interviewed- and -not by us but by these people from their local TV stations- wouldn't it be interesting if we could film them and then edit each piece down so that each one of these local people from these cities all over the country would have a little two-minute piece of the interview, of their own interview with Brando. So we said- oh, yeah, that's a good idea, especially since we were getting paid well for it. And so we went to the Hampshire Hotel and started filming and right away my brother and I looked at one another and- oh, my goodness, this is so interesting, we'll put it all together and have a film about all this as well. And that's what we did. And so we came up with this wonderful half hour film which we hope to be putting on DVD one of these days. It hasn't shown anywhere on television as yet. But now some- almost 40 years later it's time- it's time for Brando to be seen and heard in this wonderful little expose of, of the tte--tte between the interviewer and this famous guy who was asking more questions of the interviewer than the interviewer was asking of Brando. He's in- Brando was in full charge and it's a charming piece of a charming person.
					
We got a call from public television, it was... the National Educational Television it was called in those days. They said that we're doing a series of films of American writers, three writers, as a matter of fact. Nabokov I recall was one of them, and they had another one that they were about to make. They thought if we could come up with a good idea that we should make one too. So our first thought was well, let's do one of Norman Mailer. And certainly that would be acceptable for subject matter. But Norman, who we knew pretty well, felt that he just wasn't in a mood to do what he called any more advertising for himself. So we didn't press him. And then we heard that Truman Capote was about to publish a non-fiction novel called In Cold Blood. Well, that really was of great interest to us not only because he's such a great writer, but because it was something that we wanted to do.

						What particularly appealed to us in the choice of Capote, having discovered that he was to do a non-fiction novel, was that for several years we'd been entertaining the revolutionary idea in documentary filmmaking to make a non-fiction feature film. People had made- as we had too- people had made feature length documentaries but we hadn't heard of anyone making a feature documentary: that is to say, a film that was fully non-fiction but at the same time had the dramatic qualities of, of a work of fiction. And so we were all the more motivated to discover more about his book and to, and to film him. And so we got Capote's number somehow, called him up, and he said- well, if you call Joe Fox at Random House, his editor, that- and if he thinks it's okay then he'll do it. And we were very lucky when we called Joe Fox, he knew our films and was heartily in support and told Truman that we were okay and we went ahead and made the film.
					
						Truman, you know, he opened his doors to, to his life and when Truman saw the film, once we'd finished it, I remember him walking out of the screening room with tears flowing down his face and turning to us and saying- turning to us and saying- it's the best film of its kind. We felt, of course, quite pleased with that. Then when the film got shown on PBS or NET at that time- excuse me- when the film got shown we heard that some 20% of the public turned the program off after two or three minutes having discovered through Truman Capote's strange voice that he was homosexual. Now, I dunno, if that film were brought back today some nearly 40 years later, I would hope and I think it'd be true that our culture would- would have progressed to the point where those numbers would be very small indeed. But that's the way it was at that time. It's another film that we hope to put on DVD so that millions more people can see it.
					
						"Salesman" came a little bit later. Not that much later, actually. But it came about because of our interest in making that leap towards a new kind of documentary filming, that is, the non-fiction feature. And so, having gotten to know Joe Fox, my brother had luncheon one day with Joe and at some point told him of our plan to make a non-fiction feature film; and Joe came up with the idea of filming door-to-door salesmen and that excited David. And so when David and I got together to discuss it, we thought- yeah, that's a great idea. Let's get somebody to research the notion, to find out just what kinds of stuff were being sold door-to-door. And so it took several months before we found a guy in Providence, Rhode Island who was selling a, a book with some special thing with magazines and so forth. It seemed very interesting because- because the son was in- was in Vietnam and so the whole family picture seemed to be an interesting one, besides the guy selling the stuff. But it somehow wasn't a big enough idea at that point. And certainly just going around selling Tupperware or, or various other products- it's okay; but when we discovered that there were guys, some 4,000 of them, selling a bible door-to-door- oh, that was great, because then it became a story of, of America; with the bible, the man coming to the door who represents, really, the rugged individualism of a capitalist society. It's up to him to, and him alone, to make that sale. And then of course on the other side of the door is the, the housewife- unsuspecting that she's going to have to lay out, if she buys the product, 50- 50 bucks. And then again too, it's so much a reflection of the community- of the consumer society where the most sacred text is offered as a product rather than for its spiritual value. All these things conspired to give the film a, the possibility of- of being a great American document. And so with that excitement, and especially upon finding that there were four guys from Boston- Irish guys at that- the Irish kids that we fought now become the men that we can try to understand and portray for- with what's going on in their lives; get to know them and like them. So when we found that there were four guys working for Mid-American Bible, which had its offices in Chicago- that there were these four guys from New England, from Boston as a matter of fact- our hometown- it had that autobiographical value that motivated us all the more so.
					
						We met the guys one day and went out with several of them, filming a sample of how they work and so forth, and we decided right then and there- yes, that's it. And we got their full co-operation. And we went on this wonderful trip with them, first filming in Boston. I remember it was some pretty tough winter days. Then in Webster, Massachusetts. Then they thought, oh, wouldn't it be great to, to get into new territory and go to Florida. So they went to Florida and we filmed them there. And at some point they were invited to a sales meeting in Chicago and we got that. So it became a very intense experience at times because one of the guys, Paul Brennan, one of the salesmen, he was by far the most interesting and the one who became the main character of the film. Not because he was the most successful but- as a sales person- but because he was the most successful in connecting with the viewers. I mean, you really felt- you felt that his pain; you felt that he could have been so much more successful had he chosen some other kind of trade or profession. And there's a beautiful scene in the film, my favourite, where he's had a tough time of it and he retires to a cafeteria where he sits alone at a table. And my brother and I were careful enough not to disturb him with even a question because in that silence, as he's looking off into the gloom, you feel that whatever is going through his mind you, you are- you are with him and thinking what that might be; you, you are thinking as he might think. And it's- it's a pretty long moment where he's totally silent and just thinking. And I think if it had gone on even longer it would have been that much- even better for the film but as long as it was it kept you so closely attached to his emotions. And- but would it ever stop?  And if it stopped it would have to be Paul that would put an end to it. And in fact while the camera was still rolling he takes his cards, which are his leads, and he raps them against the edge of the table as if to be- as if he was calling himself back to work. And he gets up and he goes back to work. And that scene and others was so strong that once the film was finished and we discovered that we couldn't get it shown on television- no one was interested. They thought it was too depressing. They didn't quite catch its importance or its powers. And certainly nothing like that would get shown in movie theatres; distributors weren't keen on showing a film without a big movie star or without, as so many films are made today, without a few automobile explosions or whatever. All we could do was to rent a movie theatre and, and show the film and get the reviews and get it rolling that way. But we needed money for that so we would have screenings where maybe 100 people would attend and I remember one of those screenings where people had seen the film and as they filed out they would congratulate my brother and myself. At some point I noticed through a crack in the door that there was a young woman seated- sitting in the front row. And, the last person in the theatre, she got up to turn to leave- and to turn in our direction, I noticed she'd been crying- probably at that scene more than anything, it had so disturbed her. And as she came closer I saw how attractive she was and so I elbowed by brother and I said- she's for me. And that's how I met my wife. And that's how I came to have all these children, two, two of whom are now using cameras of their own, doing their own films, plus other artistic endeavors. Another one with a camera travelling in the furthest parts of the world- Nepal and Tibet- meeting Tibetan refugee children and helping them out. As active as I am making my movies each member of my family including my wife who's a full time family therapist and a person getting her Ph.D in Early Church History, writing poetry and so forth.
					
						One of the most rewarding aspects of making a, a film where you treat people respectfully is that you make friends forever and Paul Brennan, the, the main character of the film, we used to see him from time to time and in fact we discovered from him that after a year after the film he actually quit bible selling. And we asked him what he was doing. He said- oh, I'm selling roof and siding and he jokingly said- I'm still dealing with the foundation of the home. He was- he was somewhat self-deprecating. He had such a, a strong and communicative heart. We were blessed that he would be part of the film. And when we would go to Boston we would have dinner with him. It was a continuing friendship. It took us so many years to get the film on television that some 30 years after the film was made, and after Paul had seen it for the first time when we opened it at a theatre in New York, I remember sitting with him and the other guys-  all of them came to New York to see the film and to accept an invitation to a party following the film, party that was given by George Plimpton- a party where people like Leonard Bernstein attended- and so this was really a big event for these guys who had never met a celebrity. And- but the most responsive to the film was Paul who at times, sitting near us, I could see had been crying and times when he was laughing. He, he, he had a very, very sensitive response to some of the most powerful moments in the film. My mother was at that opening also. I think we have photographs to show that.
					
						One of the things that made us that much more interested in making the film to begin with was that both my brother and I had done some door to door selling of our own as, as high school kids. When I was in high school there wasn't any way that I could think of where I could possibly finance- go to college- unless, unless in high school I began earning some money, in that case as a door-to-door salesman. So I sold Fuller Brushes, I sold encyclopaedias. I remember my first day out when I sold encyclopaedias I had this whole long speech in my pocket and- a speech that was given to me by the Encyclopaedia Americana, the company that I worked for. And so I got to the first house, of my first attempt to sell it, the woman let me in and I began giving the pitch. And, not good at memorizing anything, I got maybe one or two sentences into it and I just forgot everything, and she turned to me and she said- do you have the rest of it?  And I said- well, yeah, I have it in my pocket. She says- well, why don't you read it? So I said- oh, okay. So I read it and she bought it. It shows one of my favorite things: the, the kindness of strangers. And in fact, in fact everything depends on the kindness- everything you make in a documentary, it depends on the kindness of, of the people allowing you to be with them and to capture themselves as they are. I think you get that kindness in return when people feel they can trust you. And this, this woman not only trusted me but, but, you know, extended such kindness that I tell the story many times.
					
						In our early days in New York, which is to say in the 50s- my brother was the first to move to New York because when he was in the army he met a fellow soldier whose uncle was the famous photographer who'd done some 90 cover photographs for Life Magazine- Milton Greene. And Milton Greene was also famous, and remains famous too, for the many photographs that he took of Marilyn Monroe. And so when David got out of the army this friend of his said- you should look up Milton Green; there may be a job working with him. And so he did. And there was a job as his assistant that he got, at a time when Milton and Lawrence Olivier were becoming co-producers of two Marilyn Monroe films: one of them "Bus Stop"; the other one "The Prince and the Showgirl", "Bus Stop" taking place, I believe, in Texas; and "Prince and the Showgirl" in, in England. And so, so that's how I met Marilyn Monroe.
					
						At that time Marilyn was married to Arthur Miller and so- and Arthur Miller played some part in the making of "Bus Stop"- I don't know if he wrote the script or what. So when we made "Salesman" Arthur Miller got to see the film and, and gave us a wonderful positive quote about how he appreciated the film. And Norman Mailer also gave us a wonderful quote- something to the effect that he thought it told more about America than perhaps any other film. So that was nice also.
					
						In 1978 we came out with "Grey Gardens" that film is another story, as to how we got to make the film. Peter Beard, the famous photographer who made his fame with his photographs of animals in, in Africa, he was a good friend of ours and he lived in the Hamptons and so when his girlfriend, Lee Radziwill, thought of first writing a book and then maybe making a documentary film of her childhood in the Hamptons, Peter said- well, if you're going to do that you should talk to the Maysles brothers. So she called us up and explained that she wanted to make this film. At first I thought- how come you're making a film of your childhood when- without- with it being a documentary when, when it all took place in the past?  She said- no, no, this- I have a list of some 40 people and things going on right now that- that would be the film. And she said- come on over, let's talk about it. So we got the list. Item number 34, I believe it was, was as she described it briefly, her eccentric Aunt and cousin. And so we made a deal where she would pay for the, for the filming and we began making this film. One of the first things that we did was to go to the family cemetery lot and film both sides of, of her family and with her commenting on the various people that were buried there. But I remember as she spoke, suddenly there was the sound of a train whistle way off in the distance and it just froze her. And you could tell that it must have been something that would bring back all of her childhood experiences, where the family would go out for weekends to the Hamptons, right, by train, of course, and that was the best thing I ever shot of her. But it never got into a film because, because one day as we were about to embark on some more filming she got a call from Edie Beale, the daughter in "Grey Gardens" and the daughter was asking Lee to help out because she and her mother were having problems with the Board of Health I believe, because of the way the health standards were so low in the house that they were living in. And she said- I'm going over there to see what I can do, maybe you want to come along. So we said- yeah, sure. And so we went along with her and she said- do you think you should bring the camera. And we said- oh yeah. So the moment we arrived there, there was Edie just outside the house talking with, with Lee and we began filming right away without even asking. And the daughter seemed to, you know, be okay with it 100%. Anyway, another week went by when Lee said- let's take a look at what we've got. And so we screened maybe an hour of footage, some of it the footage of, of Edie. We hadn't even yet gotten into the house. And we could see from Lee's reaction to it that, that Edie was such a powerful figure and so interesting that Lee was beginning to lose interest in the project, being overwhelmed by the attractiveness of the photograph-ability of the, of the daughter. And anyway, things came to a, to a stop and then several months later with that project at an end my brother and I decided to venture into the house and make a film of the two women. And that's how we got started. So we were introduced to these two women by, by Lee Radziwill.
					
						Well, filming in the house- what overwhelmed everything else was the fact that these two women were so interesting and, and there was hardly a moment that would go by that you wouldn't want to- you wouldn't want to film it. But- so that- because that motivated us so strongly, you know, we could- we could bear under the weight of the- of the awful smell that persisted and the- and the fleas that would have bitten us to death. Actually, because of the fleas we learned quickly that we should protect ourselves that way, so that every day that we would arrive to film, we would park some distance from the- from the house behind the tall privet. We could hear them talking which confirmed that what they were saying was very much the same as they were in front of the camera. It's the same kind of stuff. So, so when you look at the film you can't deny the authenticity of it because even when the camera wasn't there it was the same mother and daughter relationship. But we would stop in order to spray ourselves against insects and fleas. And also I, both of us we'd fasten something around our ankles so that the fleas couldn't crawl up our legs. So, you know, that was one danger that we took care of, but the smell was atrocious and-  In contrast with all that some years later we got a call from a woman, Mrs. Hadley, who was living in Grey Gardens.  The house- about a year after- a year or so after the film was finished Mrs. Beale at age 82 died and Edie decided to sell the house and she, she sold it to people who fixed it up quite well. And then there was a woman that used to sublet the house every- every winter, most of the year, because the people who had bought the house only went there for the summer. So we got a call from her one day. She said she saw the film and loved it and she would like to invite us to- as her guests-  and she would invite maybe 40 or 50 guests; George Plimpton would be the Master of Ceremonies; and they would celebrate the film at Grey Gardens. And so I got a chance to see the house since it's been renovated. I think that the renovation was successful on many counts. Especially I think that the two women would have liked the, the restoration.
					
						Once we finished the film, we wanted the first people to see it, would be the mother and her daughter; so we brought the film to Grey Gardens with a projector, we showed it to them and there was a moment of silence and then Edie walked back and forth in the room and in an extremely loud voice shouted- the Maysles have created a classic! So we knew right away that the film was approved, and quite heartily. All of that being in great contrast to some of the reviews that we got where we were criticized for exploiting these women, whatever. Some people just don't understand the difference between getting to know somebody very intimately and somehow or other hurting them and exploiting them. There's an interesting word in this regard. It shows you how cockeyed this culture is with regard to people getting to know one another on an intimate level. The word is: vulnerability. And somehow when- when one speaks of another person candidly, exposing their inner thoughts to another person, whereas oh, their vulnerabilities. As if- as if through the process of being very open with another person you're going to get hurt. Because- because that's what the word vulnerable means. You're- you're exposing yourself to the possibility of getting hurt. Now, now why people choose that word rather than another word- I don't even know what that other word would be- but a word that expresses the notion that by opening your heart and soul to another person you're doing something healthful and beneficial- something that shows your strength and adds to your strength; which I think is the case of what happened with the Beale's. I think that their- their opportunity to be recognized as artists, as women of creative fashion, of, of an eccentric- an eccentricity that nevertheless was, was a love story- there was a genuine and beautiful love between these two women under odd circumstances. But people use this word vulnerable. I would like to find out what that word is or see a word invented that expresses the fact that people can be benefited in a very positive way by sharing their thoughts and emotions with other people. We seem to stress the fact- oh, you're going to be hurt if you- if you tell people who you really are. I don't go with that.
					
						I learned long ago, especially when I worked with my fellow filmmakers on "Primary" that my contribution is in getting access to people, coming up with story ideas along with my brother, but primarily as the person behind the camera. I tried my hand at editing and I just- I'm of such a makeup that with each moment of editing I just can't make up my mind, and I'll come up with one idea then go to another and it becomes an endless procedure that never acts to complete anything. So I've never edited after that and I've relied on people who are extremely successful at that and I've been so pleased that people like Charlotte Zwerin have worked with us.
					
						You know, one thing that irritates me with so many movies- good guys, bad guys; Cowboys and Indians, right? The Cowboys are always the good guys. But it wouldn't be any better if it were turned the other way round either. And, you know, in the film "Grey Gardens" most editors I think would take that easy course of favoring one of the women over the other and making perhaps big Edie- the mother- kind of a monster, keeping Edie from ever getting married and so forth. But, you know, it takes two to do the Tango and, and the basic thing about that relationship was that they loved each other. It was a genuine love. And that was paramount to the way that the film was put together. You- you could understand their love; you could connect with these two women but not on the basis of pitting one against the other. And it was very important that we selected two women to edit the film with- who had exactly that kind of approach in mind. It made the film so much- so much better; so much better.
					
						When somebody makes a film with a- with a- with a plan, sometimes a very precise objective, to come up with some kind of a prejudgment as to what's going to take place, it- it doesn't do service to the documentary form. I remember reading Virginia Woolf's article about the cinema as she wrote it in 1926, and at one point she asked this extremely important question- what would it be if cinema were left to its own devices?  Well I think there are special devices that, that go along with a fiction film.  But for me, for me although there are various ways and legitimate ways in which to make a documentary- even, even as a work of propaganda I can see there's a legitimacy to it- but left to its own devices, doing what it does best, I think a documentary simply uses the best powers of observation on the part of the person behind the lens to, to put onto the film or tape exactly what's going on and representing people as no better, no worse, no different from what they really are. And then, and then you have to say that, that something truthful is going to come across. Now, the more perceptive the person with that camera, in a way the more different it would come up, the more different the result for another person also being very perceptive and truthful. But that doesn't lead to misinformation necessarily. It, it simply is seeing things that- and noticing the things that are truthful and significant and, and, and what one person is more aware of another person may not be so aware of but if perceptive, will come up with something equally truthful and important. I mean, there is- there is a connection between capturing what is real and telling the truth. The two go hand in hand. Truth and reality- they go hand in hand. And this idea which so many filmmakers use as an excuse, I think, for not being responsible and authentic and truthful, the excuse that well, for one thing, you know, in the editing everything's manipulated. Not- not in defiance of what is truthful in reality if the editor is a really good person, right? And of course, you know, well, the camera's there so that's going to affect everything. Not necessarily. When my brother and I made  our major films like "Gimme Shelter" and "Grey Gardens" and "Salesman", I defy anybody to take a look now or 20 years from now or 500 years from now and say well, it's- it's- it's lacking in truthfulness. No, these films will hold up for as long as they can- and the images and the sound can attach themselves to the- to the medium. I'm sure of that. And it's been 30, 40, 50 years in the case of several of our major films including that and "Grey Gardens" and people have misrepresented the films from time to time but the misrepresentations don't hold up. In fact there's a scene in Grey- in "Gimme Shelter" where a Hell's Angel comes down with a knife on- on this black young man by the name of Meredith Hunter who was holding a gun. But all the reports at that time before the film was put together were that the, the black guy was holding the knife because that's the stereotype that we have of black people. And- but the film held up to be a bastion in many ways of what really went on. So if you really want to know what happened, take a look at the film.
					
						Another thing that I'd like to point out is that when you approach documentary filmmaking with an- as open a mind as possible, you get into discovering things that sometimes you don't even realize until you're in the final stages of the film or even later on. For example, none of us gave that much weight to the film's depiction of the housewives in the film as- as- and as the title suggests, the title was "Salesman" right?  Sales-Man, right?  So- but it's not just the- not just the sales-Man, that film was kind of revolutionary in that, at that time in 1968, we paid so much attention to the unhappy role of the housewife. I don't know many films- or of any films that have gone into that deep an explanation into what a housewife goes through. And so, so the film becomes in a way a feminist film as well as a film that connects us with all kinds of aspects of life in our culture. And simply from this deliberate, concentrated observation, patience and empathy that we gave our subjects. By the same token in "Grey Gardens" it didn't occur to us quite fully that suddenly in a, in a feature film- a documentary- attention was paid to the mother / daughter relationship, so important, the most profound human relationship- the mother / daughter relationship. How is it that literature and cinema had neglected this particular relationship when it's so important?  Even Freud neglected to analyze that kind of relationship and instead shows the mother / son relationship- the Oedipus Complex. But just by that random attention to, to these women that attracted us, partly because of their eccentricity and their way of life in a kind of haunted house, all of which inspired us to investigate more fully, right?  And in that process of investigation and discovery, we came up with a film that so profoundly attaches itself to the- to that human relationship. So profoundly that- I've met so many people who've seen the film over and over and over again.
					
						I remember a woman calling me up one day and saying that she needed three tapes of the film that she wanted to buy, but the stores had run out of the film and so she was asking me if she could purchase one from my company. I said- well, come right over; we have, we have several tapes. And no sooner had she come to visit to make a purchase but then she began to tell about how this film has been so important to her. She'd seen the film 200 times and she'd given the film away to some 80 odd people, and there were three more, right?  But that was about a year ago. Six months later I got a call from her on another subject and the number of 200 had gone up to 206. But that of course is very unusual. But there's a famous designer of clothes who has stated many times that he's got so many ideas from the daughter, from seeing that film- ideas of fashion- that it's every two or three months that he takes another look at the film. We don't, in our society, give enough credit to people who are ordinary people, who are outside of our own narrow confines of our- of our friendships. And, and I'm hoping that whatever else our films do, that they broaden our view of humanity and, as Margaret Mead put it in a lecture that I attended, she said- the greatest need in the world is to develop a sense of common humanity. And so each one of our films and each good documentary, I think, serves the purpose of bringing one person closer to another. And, and in the case of the film being shown on television or DVD or the internet, you know, it means that millions of people will make that connection. And furthermore I think that, in a very important way, I think that a nation remains only a piece of geography to the extent that one citizen is not aware of the life of another and a documentary, because it, it presents people in their, in their lives as they experiencing it, see that person and you're in that other person's shoes for that time and if it's a really good film you'll never forget that person. So that as films- so that as films explore the lives of one person after another, you know, we get to know each other and we build that kind of connection with one another whereby we can think- yeah, yeah, I'm an American, and furthermore-  And if only we would do so- more so- import documentaries from other countries, right?  As we see people from other countries we become that much more citizens of the world. It's, it's a beautiful thing that, that we can do and I feel that it's, that it's a terrible thing when people remain isolated from other good people that they would otherwise become friends with and sympathize- empathize- in short, love one another; through feeling what it is to be in another person's shoes.
					
						I think one problem with just about any art form is that when people put up a lot of money for it, as with a film, you're usually answering to the commercial needs of the person that is putting up the money or the one who is showing the film. And so it's not so often that you make a film that comes from your heart and from your own need to tell that particular story. We were very lucky when we made "Salesman" and "Grey Gardens" because we just went ahead and made the films and these were films that just popped up from our own experience and part of why they were so important to us, and perhaps why we made films of high quality, is that we motivated, in the case of "Salesman" certainly, by something in our own make up, something from some kind of family connection that made it very important for us to dig deeper and fuller into the life of a particular character, Paul Brennan who is the main character of the film. In many ways he was unlike my father. Paul Brennan was Irish; my father was Jewish- a very important difference in those days. But my father was brought up in a, in a neighborhood in Boston that was totally Irish so all of his friends were Irish, and like his friends who were Irish, who inevitably sought out jobs working for Civil Service: postmen, policemen, firemen, a postal clerk- my father became a postal clerk even though- even though he was very good with a cornet and, and loved good music. On the other hand, in an obverse paradoxical fashion, Paul Brennan is an Irishman who shouldn't be a salesman- should be, should have been the postal clerk, right?  And, and also he was somebody who could have done much better at choosing his job than being a door-to-door salesman, he could have, perhaps been a writer because there's a poetic kind of consciousness in that man, as there was in my father. So that in a way we were telling my father's story in an obverse fashion. My father had died many years before my brother and I made that film and this was kind of a revisit, heart and soul, to a kind of a parallel paradoxical connection and, and therefore a beautiful fulfillment.
					
						Going back really to just a few years after I started making films and realizing that I had the kind of equipment where I could portray very accurately in sound and picture what was going on, the world around me, I had this idea of making a film where I would travel in a number of countries on a train- long distance trains- and find people that I found interesting, especially because when they were about to get off the train a story might develop and a film would be made of all those short stories. And my brother had this idea of telling the story of my father and a cousin of mine- two of his heroes and my heroes as well. And so I began my train film and David began his film of my- and his- two heroes. And in making the film of our heroes it was difficult because both of them had passed away but there were cousins who knew them, there was a young woman that was engaged to my cousin whom we could film. And I remember particularly going to the cemetery where my cousin, my mother and my father were buried and somebody came along with us to film our experience in revisiting the cemetery. And my mother's tombstone had her last words that she wanted written as an epithet and she chose to have the following- count on me as one who loved her fellow man. And for my father's, my- my mother who used to read my letters, which I find kind of charming, and when my father died I wrote a letter to my best friend and when she picked up on it she chose a sentence from the letter which- wherein I described my father as a- as a layman but a great person which I think was my expression of my faith as a filmmaker also in finding what's good in ordinary people. And then there was my cousin's tombstone. His brother-in-law who was a poet who wrote some words in praise of my cousin. I don't remember all of the words but there was the expression that Alan, who was a pilot, you understand, he was a war pilot right- that Alan is still flying. And I guess in a way he is. And I remember my mother, who was a kind of a poet herself, certainly not of a professional grade but with all the kind of heart and sensitivity that a poet has, I remember her talking on the phone telling a friend of hers of my cousin's recent death and telling that- describing the way he died in the most succinct and poetic fashion. She said- well, the plane came down and Alan fell out. I don't know of any more touching way to express it. There was a lot of love in my family and there's a lot of love that has gone into each film that my brother and I made. And I think it's because we did empathize with the people that we filmed that we were able to get the best out of the story and out of them, and, and get the kind of access that is quite unusual, access that gave us the opportunity to connect heart to heart with the people we filmed and the films show that. I think they're all the better for that kind of connection that we made. I mean, and then there are some documentary filmmakers that make their connection through their hatred for a particular person but I don't think you can get so, as far with hatred as you can with love, nor would I want to.
					
						We're more a part of "Grey Gardens" because, especially Edie the daughter, was pulling us into her life as we were filming her. And we never asked questions of her, we never tried to control her, but a lot of her behavior was in response to what it would have been for her if anybody had come into the house as well, but because, because she could connect with us so easily, sure, we're more a part of the film than we would be in, say, "Salesman" or, or "Gimme Shelter" even, but the payoff was that you got to know her so much better from having a opportunity to pour her heart out to these two strangers who became very close friends. I have maintained a relationship with just about- certainly all the major subjects of, of the films- celebrities and ordinary people too. And just the other day I got a call from Jerry who was a very minor character in "Grey Gardens" but there are only three or four people- five people that, that appear on the screen and he's one of them. And I've lost touch with him all of these years. So all the years- these years have gone by, almost 30 years, and I got a call the other day from him; he'd like to get together and he- for sentimental reasons, as he expressed it. And he was only a kid then, maybe 18 or 19 at most, and it's 30-odd years later, and he tells me on the phone  in his voice message, he says, that- I'm driving a cab in New York. And so I'm going to call him back when I have a tape recorder going so we can get the conversation and respond to his desire to get together and hopefully, with his permission, to film him. Probably as he's driving the cab and as we both recall the episodes from the film, I'm going to take that piece, with his permission, and put it on a DVD that will include a lot of other interesting stuff, a lot of it related to what's gone on about the film, beyond the film itself. And it's going to be put into a scrapbook which my daughter Sara is putting together of old photographs, of Edie's poems of hers, of letters between her and myself, and a number of scenes from the, from the film itself- scenes that would be perhaps on the DVD and, and also individual shots from the film that will be part of the scrapbook. So it never ends.
					
						So many of these films come about through some random experience. My, my family has a house on Fisher's Island and I remember meeting a Peter Gelb who worked for Columbia Artist Management, which is to say that he was an agent for some famous people including Vladimir Horowitz, Seiji Ozawa, a number of people in music. And as we got to know each other, he, my- our films and my his work as an agent, we decided, well we've got to do some films together and that's how it came about. One day he called us up and he said that- there's a film possibility- this interesting couple. He says- I don't know if they are too strange but maybe if we had lunch with them we could decide whether there's a film there. Well, this was Vladimir Horowitz and his wife who are not your normal types, shall I say, right?  But we connected immediately with them of course, the guy's one of the great geniuses of our time as a, as a pianist. And so we arranged to film the two of them as he himself gave a concert, and this took place in their apartment in New York- in New York City. And- very pleased with that film, enough so that- as we were all pleased with it-  We then later on went to Milan in Italy where we filmed Vladimir Horowitz making a recording with the La Scala- the La Scala Orchestra: a recording of the Mozart Concerto Number 23. And well, you got to like Mozart, you got to like the performance, and therefore the film.
					
						The film about Ozawa- a different pianist. Rudolph Serkin also is well recognized for his genius. He and Ozawa. I remember- one thing that I like so much about what I did in the photography; in the opening scene I filmed the opening movement of the famous Mahler Resurrection Symphony- the Symphony Number Two. And we hadn't thought of filming the opening movement until almost finished with the film. And so as an after-thought, we thought- well, there's a hole in the wall behind the orchestra, if I got behind that hole in the wall I could film directly into Ozawa's face and could film him conducting as he's looking right at the camera whether, whether he was or not. And so with a telephoto lens, and behind that little hole in the wall I got a wonderful close up of him and his conducting. But that wasn't enough because with my left eye I roamed the people in the audience and I saw in the front rows two people, two men, who were just eating up this music. And, and, and as they were connected with one another, as they were responding so beautifully, so lovingly, to the music, I got a bit of them as I panned over to them, and then just at the right moment, with a very graceful movement with Ozawa's hands, I returned to Ozawa to complete the, the movement. That little reaction shot which was part of the scene itself, a part that didn't have to be manipulated by an editor, you know- that whole movement is just so well depicted. And I've made films with my brother, a couple of them, of the Mahler Symphony. On another occasion when Leonard Bernstein went to Israel, just three weeks after the '67 war, we accompanied him; we made a film of the audition- journey: it was called "Journey to Jerusalem". And he went with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, performed in Tel Aviv, and then also performed in an open kind of amphitheater in Mount Scopus looking, looking over the Dead Sea. And, what was I going to say?  Oh. And, and of course- and what did he perform? The Mahler Symphony.
					
						I've seen so many films where the reviews are great but there's some- something missing and that's, especially in documentary, the lack of a sensitive poetic eye behind the lens of a camera. The cameraman could be a perfectly well trained person technically who is able to capture and set up lights properly, to hold the camera steady, to compose the shot well, y'know? But if- if the cameraman doesn't have that poetic instinct then nothing very artistic or poetic or, or profound is going to come out of it. And so many of these technically perfect films- and Hollywood is particularly guilty of this sort of thing because the prime thing that they're looking for when they make a film, apparently, is that the film have high production value. So they're willing to spend $100, $110, $120 million dollars for a film. I mean, a documentary filmmaker could make something far more, far more from the heart for as little as $50,000- $500,000. You know?  I don't- I don't want to emphasize the $50,000 because I'm always looking for the 500 but it can be done for very little money because it's not the high production value, the famous person, the crowds of people, the music that has to be paid for at an enormous expense. I remember when my brother and I were early on in our, in our work but we still had something of a reputation already, a man came to visit us- Martin Scorsese- he had just graduated from film school and he wanted to earn something of this new art for him. And almost upon arrival he began to be- suddenly got very intense and he said- I can make a feature film for $13,000. I know where I can get short ends and I know that-  Well, I related that story to him many, many years later when I began to make a film of him making another film. He'd already gotten a great reputation for making some very good films. And he was about to make a film with a $100 million budget- was it "The Gangs of New York"- and we were going to make a film, as we did, a film of him making that film. So on that first day on meeting up with him and having- some 30 ago- having gone by- I jokingly reminded him of that scene where he quite furiously insists that he could make a film for $13,000 and we both got a laugh out of it. But if anything can be said about how "The Gangs of New York" might have been a better film, I think that so much of his talent was lost because of the demand that there be big crowd scenes and that he fulfil the obligation of something, making something with a high production value.
					
						Well, when I made- when I made the psychiatry film my sole source of income came from lecturing with that film and another one that I made of my experiences in general travelling around Russia. But that wasn't enough to pay for the films that we were about to make, you know, or even to pay for our living expenses. And so once we got going in the '60s we thought we could earn our keep by making television commercials because we had the conviction that a very good selling tool would be simply to film people experiencing the product or service that was going to be represented in the commercial. And if you could film them at a moment where they're actually experiencing it or at least talking about it from, from having used it and from really feeling genuinely positively about the product, you might have a very good commercial. But the best thing would be to film them actually in the use of it, okay? Well, one of the commercials that we made, it was a series of commercials for a bank that was extending itself all across the country. And they had the idea that like- unlike other banks they had this special kind of service where they felt that they were so committed to the customer that they were forming partnerships with the customer, and so the idea was to film successful partnerships and so we filmed, for example, Hume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy- this wonderful marriage. And so as we began to film them- we didn't give them a script or any specific instructions. We spoke of the fact that we might talk about partnerships- you know. And we exposed a roll or two and nothing seemed to happen. Then we took a break and he said- oh, I got an idea. So I said- oh, okay, let's film it. And he told a story about a poem that was written by a Apollinaire of a human relationship, and I was thinking, as he told this fascinating story, that- and it was about people getting along together- that it's too bad, I'm hoping that she's going to come into this thing and be just as brilliant. And, sure enough, that happened just, just a moment later. So we had this beautiful one-minute exposition of a beautiful partnership and it served the purposes of the bank so very well. And it also did something that inspired us to make commercials in another direction as well, and that is, to satisfy some sort of need that the person watching the commercial would have satisfied other than just going out and doing what the company wants him to do. And what they- we learned later on that the awareness was only 3% of this bank's growth and, and value to the customer, but once the- this film came out in the commercials they changed the rating to 93%. And I think part of it was this extra thing that people got- they loved the poem. And they wrote in and they said- who's this Apollinaire- I want to get his books. And that was an added benefit that you don't get in most commercials nor even get the benefit of recognizing the product for its true value in most of what you see. Most of what you see is commercials that are very expensive; they have a high production value but very little communication value. They don't grab you by your heart and they don't give you that little extra thing that you wouldn't expect but it's kind of a bonus for having watched the commercial. But all documentary style commercials have kind of gone out of fashion as the demand to make them more and more expensive takes place. The advertising companies make their profit from the 17% of what it costs to make the film, and plus other profit as well. That's a very important part of it all. So if they can make the commercial come in at a cost of three or four or five hundred thousand dollars, so much the better, but that would be very hard to do in filming just that simple scene of these two people but you'd end up with a much better commercial.
					
						When I went into the service, not that long after that, I came down with a terrible case of bronchitis, and they put me in the, in the infirmary for, for a month it was that bad. And- but I was put in a ward with some 30 or so soldiers who had just come back from the front, wounded, and some of them in terrible pain and under traumatic stress, and so that hardly a moment went by when there wasn't somebody screaming. And, and each one of them told me their stories. So in that particular way, that month, I really got to know in a rather direct way about being under fire- just what it is that these guys went through and what I might have gone through had I gone on active duty at that time. Fortunately the war was over before I could be sent across. But that experience taught me a great deal. And then, as I, as I was saying, reading the book "All Quiet on the Western Front" that taught me something too. But you know, they- there's a scene in that book "All Quiet on the Western Front" where the hero of the film, in the last moments of the film, he's, he's in the trench under fire and, and a butterfly flies across and he jumps up to catch it and he's shot and he's killed. And, I don't know, maybe that was what made me more alert to seeing, in my neighborhood, only not so long ago the young man who does the pick up and delivery of his father's clothing- cleaning establishment. I saw him coming along the street once and he's a mentally retarded guy so he walks with a peculiar gait, but as he was walking towards me his, his hands were all in- grasping, trying to reach this, with this big wonderful smile- he's trying to get a- trying to get a butterfly. But thank God there was no sniper around in that case. And had I filmed it, I would be able to collect- add it to my collection of what I would call poetic moments. But in this case I would call it an audiovisual poem- just that 30 or 40 seconds of this man doing his best to- not to write a poem but unconsciously, without knowing it, creating one.
					
						One thing that excites me, the possibility of creating new forms of documentary. Especially if one thinks of literature and parallels to literature that could be documentary. The, the non fiction novel- the parallel to that would be the non fiction feature film; the documentary which is a feature film- something that hadn't come about, I think, until "Salesman". And I want to make more films that are documentary features. But then if you think about the train film, which is really a collection of short stories, it's like the literary equivalent. A collection of short stories usually by one author, sometimes a collection of various people but usually by one author, and, and that's what the train film is. Well, if you think of parallels for music, for example, where you have in music a tone poem, right?  Well, maybe some sustained filming that's- that's a documentary scene that goes on and on, that doesn't have any beginning or middle and end. Too many people making a documentary film figure- well, if it doesn't have a conflict, if it doesn't have a beginning, a middle and end then, you know, who's going to watch it for, for any length of time. But I think there may be scenes that we've neglected to put into film that correspond to the music- to the tone poem.
					
						Why is it that we haven't, in documentary form, that is, as pieces of non fiction audiovisual, filmed what could be called poems?  And the obvious thing is, I suppose, to film a poet reading his poetry, but that's not what I mean. I mean something that is an audiovisual document- documentary- that, that is a poem in itself, like the man chasing the butterflies. Or: I remember standing and waiting for a bus and the bus didn't seem to be coming so I got out onto the street, looked all the way down the street; nothing coming. So I came back to the kerb to find that another person who was waiting for the bus- this older woman- who put her hand on my shoulder and said- don't worry, the bus'll come soon. And right away we were talking with each other but I wasn't saying anything because her story was so interesting. It was a story that, in those few moments, gave away her whole life story, or at least the most important thing in her life. She said, first of all- she said- she said- I'm getting into my, my 90s and somehow- maybe because of the way I looked at her, maybe because she felt that I was empathizing with her, she suddenly said- you know, I had this wonderful sister of mine and she, she- I never got married so I never had any children and she never got married so nei- she never had any children, but we had each other. And two years ago, she said, she died and it has left me devastated. That was almost enough in itself. But then as we got on the bus she turned to me and to finish the poem- and she said- you know, we loved each other so much that I don't think any man would want to come between us. And that was a poem, I would say. Another piece of poetry in film form- in documentary film form, so it's a spontaneous thing without any control- I'm looking at a very much overweight black woman on the bus, and she's just looking off into the- into the blue. Nothing's going on. But it's something about- I don't know- I felt maybe that something was going to happen. But anyway, I nudged the woman next to me and now the two of us were looking at this woman, but very kindly, so that she wasn't affected by it. She just kept looking off into the distance. At that moment the little girl next to her, also black, maybe eight or nine years old- had to be her daughter- gets up, slips around in front of her mother, and nestles her head between her mother's enormous breasts, which would seem to be enough except this little girl then fell asleep. Well, from nothing- from even something negative in the mind of, of people with the stereotype of, of a fat lady, right, who was black, right, has turned out to be a very universal thing of motherhood. It was almost as though some super power had come down to change everything, to make it more beautiful. But that wasn't necessary. There was something between those two people that provided that beauty for me, had I had the camera, and for this woman, because I had noticed it. Then there's another story, which I think could have been a poem had I filmed it. I better get into making these poems. I got to have a camera with me all the time so I can catch these things as they happen. This one would've been very easy to do, and you'll see why. I noticed across the aisle from me on that same bus on another occasion an older man was talking to a woman- I think they probably just met a couple of stops before- and he was telling her how it's so true that when he was in the war it was always young kids and they're the ones get killed. And starting off with that serious story he, he got to be looking at me. And he was sharing his storytelling with her and me but looking at me very intensely and saying, saying, at one point- you know, here it is, it's nine o'clock in the morning; I get up at eight thirty every morning; I have a, a full day's activities and I-  And then, still looking at me intensely, he says- I'm 86 years old and I'm totally blind. Oh, my God. So, anyway, had I filmed it I'd have a title for that one: Sight Unseen. So it goes on. I don't know. I think that what I'd like to do is- when I have the time for it- is to really just spend a day with my camera and, as a still photographer might do, search out that moment; in this case, that poem. And if I- if it takes too long for me to make a collection of all these for a half-an-hour, an hour show, I, I would be most eager, as some people do when they come forth with their poetry, to make it a collection where there are other people- other, other young filmmakers- that- some of them who are interning in my office- I'd let them have a go at it. In fact I've spoken to them about it and I'm eager for them get started.
					
						Well, so many of us have seen the film 'When We Were Kings' where Muhammad Ali's fight in Zaire in Africa, and I was asked to go to do some filming. And so I went. And right away I noticed that all these black Americans who were there for the event, many of them musicians, were having a hard time of it because somehow they felt so uncomfortable that they were disappointed in coming back to what was their home really wasn't because American culture is- that's their life and the local life they had no familiarity with, and especially when the musicians performed to an empty audience who couldn't connect, really, with this American music. People like BB King, for example, whom I filmed onstage; and when he got back to his dressing room he just about collapsed out of depression; that there was no one there to watch and listen to him and that he was really not a native son any more but a foreigner in his own country, so to speak. And this is something that I kept finding and, and filming. But, but that sort of thing never got into the film; I think not because of the man who was responsible for producing it but for the fact that Don King, who was the Executive Producer, I believe, that was paying for the whole thing, wanted to be much more positive view of the, of the experience. And anyway the producer was kind enough to put my name as the first credit of the cinematographers- and there were quite a few of them- but none of my footage that I shot is in the film. And- but he was kind enough to give me a two hour sampling of what he saw and what he'd loved so much.
					
						There were several famous journalists- writers- who were there to report on the match and who- who've thought a lot about and had written about the boxing and- and one of them- one of them I began to film as we were standing not so far from the building where Muhammad Ali was working out. And at one moment Muhammad Ali's trainer came running down to- to tell us something, but he came up with this terrible anti-black kind of comment. And the journalist that I was filming- I knew that he was so sensitive to this sort of thing that he'd have something to do- or some- he'd have some reaction to it and-  Oh, it was Budd Schulberg. And Budd Schulberg- anybody that knows him- he is a terrible stutterer. He writes very well but it's difficult for him to express himself because of the stuttering. But because he stutters you pay all the more attention to what he's saying, right, and so he began to talk about how he stutters, how it came to be that he stutters. He chose the most vulnerable element of his own life to kind of counteract the vulnerability of, of- for blacks in, in the way that this man had told this terrible story. Right?  So then it became a whole sequence of people talking about their stuttering. George Plimpton spoke of his stuttering when he was a child. And that little thing would have made a beautiful scene.
					
						I made a film with my brother, just the two of us made this film, much later on when Muhammad Ali was about to fight his last fight; the one with Larry Holmes. And that came to us in an odd way. A young black kid, his early 20s at most, living in Chicago, got a job selling life insurance. And, being black and adventurous and ambitious, he thought one day, well, maybe I can sell Muhammad Ali a bunch of life insurance. So he knocks on Muhammad Ali's door; Muhammad Ali answers the door; and he ends up selling him a raft of life insurance. But he also happened to know around that time that Muhammad Ali was about to have his next big fight. And this kid, who knew nothing about film, thought- oh well, I've got to get his permission to make a documentary film. He does that and then he finds somebody to help him out but it turns out that the guy wasn't really doing that good a job. And he heard about the work of my brother and myself. And he's the one that brought us to Muhammad Ali. And that's how we- that's how we got to make that film. I had already known Muhammad Ali because when he was first fighting in Florida the BBC sent me there to do some filming of him. Not a great deal of filming but enough so that you really got a feeling of him practicing, preparing for the fight. Many years went by, and then many more years went by after the film in Africa, but, you know, here's a man that must have met so many people- how he could possibly remember me I don't know, but one day I was crossing the street on Broadway in New York and I heard somebody shouting- hey Al, and I looked, and there was this guy rolling down the window in this cab, sticking his head out, and shouting for me; it was Muhammad Ali. So, we remained friends.
					
						It's a story of Rostropovich- Mstislav Rostropovich, the great cellist, who is thrown out of Russia because of his friendship with Solzhenitsyn and 17 or 18 years later, when things have changed in the Soviet Union, he was invited back, invited back with the New York Philharmonic and my brother and I accompanied him- accompanied him to Moscow and then to Leningrad. With him was his wife and his daughter who later became a cellist herself. So it was a family reunion with their friends as well as the performance. So there was very little then, and certainly now, of Russians at home with their friends and so this- that's a beautiful element in the film. And with all that wonderful music and the stories that they told of the old days-  There's a beautiful scene where they revisit their dacha which the local people, at their own expense, kept, kept in shape so that if he were ever to return, he could go back. Well, there's a get-together of three or four of those people with Rostropovich. And that little conversation that they had was really- pulls you in with, with average Russians the way you would never get by watching a normal news event or newspaper in America.
					
There's this expression which is so telltale: the near death experience. And so with this opportunity to film families, three or four families, where somebody is dying and to film through that whole event, there's the opportunity to film the dear... the near death experience. And it's so touching. There's a scene, for example, where this woman from Queens, just outside of Manhattan, she's in her 40s and she's dying of cancer, and she's a Pentecostal believer. And so are her children who are teenagers, early in their 20s, and the son, I remember especially, prayed for his mother. And then during that last... those last moments as she was coming to the end of her life, the priest is there, and he's there, the three of them are in the room. And the son turns to the priest and says, 'What have I been praying for?' It's such a touching moment. And, I'd like to film the other end of it as well, you know?  What happens in those moments after a woman gives birth to a child.

						I remember meeting up with a woman in the advertising business- I hadn't seen her for, for several years- and as we were about to have lunch- we were travelling in the taxi in our way to the restaurant- I remember her telling me that she had a two-and-a-half year old child and, and I thought- goodness, I've forgotten what her husband did. I said- what does your husband do. She says- oh, I don't have a husband, but I'll tell you more when we get to the restaurant. So we got to the restaurant and she said- you know, I, I was getting into that age where I wasn't about to have any children and I wasn't about to really get married that soon. And so one day I expressed, she said- my anxiety to my best friend- this young woman from- visiting her from the far west- and suddenly this woman, this friend of hers, her eyes kind of lit up and she said, she said- what about my husband?  And so I said- well, how did you do it?  And she says- oh, the old fashioned way. And it was the most beautiful story of the most beautiful gift that somebody can give somebody. And that too has, among other things, has, has led a desire on my own part to, to film people doing good things for one another.
					
						Well another, another film that we did for HBO was to do a film of a very poor family. This one, my brother having died some bef- years before, I made with Susan Froemke, and there're several moments in that film that are totally unforgettable. There's a moment when the little boy-  mind you, now, this is a film of a black family, of an extended black family, very, very poor, in Mississippi, the Delta region; and the little boy, who's a great-grandson of grandma, who's the main character in the film, she's talking to him one day about what he wants to be when he grows up. And, full of smiles, he says- I want to be in jail. Sometimes moments like that really tell it all, y'know? And, of course, the father and, and- none of the, none of the male population is around; they're, they're in jail. So a number of them- perhaps his father, I forget at this moment. There's another moment in the film where the grand-daughter, only 12 years old or so she's sitting at a- with her head down, just outside of the trailer, and grandma comes over to her, to ask her how was the three days that had gone- I'm sorry- three days had just gone by, school had already begun and she hasn't been going to school. And she says- oh, I don't have the paper and pencil that I'm required to have. So grandma has to find paper and pencil, somehow or other, so she can continue school. Well, as it develops, she seems to be the most promising student in the, in the whole family, enough so that there's a good possibility that she may even get into college. But still she's only 13 or 14 at this point, right?  And we got news not so long ago; she's pregnant. Which puts an end to her dreams. I mean people- people- millions of people, I dunno, tens of millions of people who've seen that film now, y'know, now they know what they didn't know before. They know what poverty is really like, from having experienced it through people who were experiencing it. That, that's so important in itself. And so we've gotten many calls from people who asked us- what can we do?  How can we help?  And so there's a Foundation through which they can contribute. And we- and we learn directly how these children, who come from a family of illiterate people, you know, and therefore are ill disposed toward learning much of anything, right, but then they go to a school where even- even if they had better education at home, there was nothing for them to learn because- in the school, because the school's just dedicated to improving their SAT scores. So, to learn how to take an SAT score is not to get an education. All that becomes very clear in the film.
					
						We made four films of filmmakers making their films: Scorsese, Robert Duvall, Wes Anderson, Jane Campion. Took us to all parts of the world; Jane Campion- Australia. Scorsese- Cinecitt in Rome. And Robert Duvall- Argentina. And Wes Anderson- well, it was just New York City. But that's okay because now we're making another film about him making a film in Rome, so we're back to Rome again. It is true and very satisfying that this kind of work involves a good deal of travelling; places like North Korea I never would have gone to if it hadn't been for my filmmaking. China, all- many parts of Africa, South America. I want to go back to Brazil as soon as I can. England, Ireland, all over Western Europe, most of Eastern Europe- certainly Russia several times.
					
						I'm about to make a film which is the film of my autobiography, and I plan to have excerpts of various films in it; conversations with fellow filmmakers. But I think what would be some of the best material will be my conversations with people who ring me up in order to get advice on how to make their film, people who may be, in some instances, they've never made a film before but they're in film school. Or they've made a film but they're kind of stuck. So I got a call one day from this woman who said she's got to talk to me, she has to talk to me about a film. I said- come on over. I said- now look, don't tell me anything yet, but do you have a title for it?  And she said- oh yeah, "In Good Conscience". Oh, well, tell me more. And she told me that the film would be about a nun that she knows, who's been a nun for some 40 years, so she's a true believer, but she's run into problems with the Vatican because she's not only worked- done missionary work with homosexuals but she's written a book about it. And they put a silence on her. And so I said- well, wait a minute now, so she's in battle with the Vatican?  So I said- and she said- yeah. I said- what a fascinating story. She said- in fact she's having her birthday in a couple of days. I said- I'm going with you. And it was to Baltimore, right? And so I helped her. But had I been filming her, as I will other people as these opportunities come along, I would have had a nice piece for my autobiography. But, in any case, with her permission, I'll put a scene or two of the film into- into what we're doing now. On another occasion two young filmmakers- a young woman and a man- they called me up. And when they came they began to tell me that- or he began to tell me that his grandfather was in the Second World War and that he was taking his fellow soldiers, his comrades, a whole group of them, back to where they fought- in the Normandy beach and the Hertigan Forest in Germany. And so they wanted to make a film of it. And I said- oh, that's great. But then they added one more thing that made it so interesting that I joined them in making the film, and that is that they were not only going together but they were meeting up with German soldiers with whom they had fought. And so I came up with this title for them: "On Common Ground", because on common ground they tried to kill one another, on common ground they were trying to become friends. And that's the film, and it's a beautiful film at that.
					
						Well, I've made the transition from film to, to video and I think it's a permanent one. Especially since video cameras are getting better and better. And, in fact, by the end of this year, the beginning of next year, I'm going to have a fully professional, high definition camera that it's as small as the one that I use now. And I, I've come up with 30 reasons, which have gone into publication actually, as to why it's important to make the move, for a documentary filmmaker, from film to, to video. Some of the re- reasons are: it's so much more economical- it's $5 an hour instead of several thousand; you don't run out of film as you do with a film camera- ten minutes you're, you're already reloading and with my little video camera it's an hour. 30 reasons which I needn't go- needn't go into. But I'm more intrigued, rather than with the somewhat more beautiful result on film, more intrigued with the, the opportunities to get closer to people with a video camera without interruption. And that's, that's what the video camera offers. And that's of paramount importance.
					
						I think the, the biggest influence was that opportunity that I had to, to get to know how to do it, when I met up with Bob Drew and Pennebaker and Leacock and we made this film called "Primary". I had the tools for it, the philosophy which was already very consistent with my own outlook on life. But meeting them I had the opportunity to really do it and to, to then go on to build my own camera, and with my brother and myself, to do exactly the kind of films we wanted to do. So it's been a very happy life professionally.
					