anthony.caro

British sculptor Sir Anthony Caro (1924-2013) came to prominence in 1963 after a show at the Whitechapel Gallery. Keen to create a more direct interaction with the viewer he placed pieces directly on the ground, rather than on plinths, a technique now widely used. He held many honorary degrees and was knighted in 1987.

I knew what I didn't want to do because my dad wanted me to be a stockbroker, and I think it would have been horrible. It would have been... I knew it would be horrible. It's very unreal, and I don't like, you know, bits of paper which don't mean anything. And I did... I always liked drawing and I liked messing around with clay. It was first of all a little bit, you know... And I don't know – do you think one sort of likes the idea of the sort of life? One likes the idea of... I remember my son, really, my oldest son, going in for... for, you know, watching animals and seeing them, simply because of "Daktari" on the television and, you know, he liked that – the idea of that life. And I think I liked the idea of the artist's life where, after all, you know, you could bum around as an artist, can't you? You don't have to do set hours or anything else.
[Q] So your father wanted you to be a stockbroker and join the family firm because that was his work?
Yes, yes, yes. And my older brother was sick and he couldn't join the family firm, so everything was sort of put on to me. And my sister, who was also older – you weren't allowed to be in the stock exchange if you were a... a woman. So it was all put on to me; I was going to be the one who was going to do it and I just couldn't... couldn't bear the idea. And I really had to fight quite hard to... to get family permission. I didn't really want to do anything that he didn't want, and I struggled and trained as an engineer, or trained... went to an architect's office at one time and I did the... I drew the orders of architecture... and I was so bored I used to go and read in the loo. And then he said, ‘Well, if you don't like that, do engineering’. I mean, I was a real loser, you know. ‘Go and do engineering.’ So I went and do... did engineering.
[Q] This was at university, at Cambridge? 
Cambridge. And there I... I really worked not at all, not a bit. But who wants to work at something like heat engines, you know, how much heat you put into a bath, and how much hot water and... oh, it's so... it's so dull. The only bit I liked about that was when we did geological – you know, we did sort of surveys, you know, surveying, putting a stick up and seeing where... where the...what is the height of it and so on – you know, making maps. I mean that was interesting because it was sort of real. But I didn't really enjoy any of that. Well, I enjoyed being at Cambridge, and then I was in the Navy and finally I... I wrote a letter to my father. I... my father had taken me actually to see a man called Marsden who used to teach at St Martin's. He was a sculptor. And we went up to this chap's department and my father had asked him... he'd... my father had an introduction to him. He said, ‘Come and look at Tony's sculpture’; I'd made a head of something. So we got into a taxi; we went down and saw this sculptured head, and then came back, and Marsden said to my father, ‘He'll never be any good’. My father was rather pleased. I didn't pay any attention. So anyway I wrote this letter to my parents and said, ‘Look, I'm sure I could teach’, and I... you know. And they said, ‘Well, you do realise, you know, you won't be able to get married, you won't be able to have any sort of life, and you couldn't... if you were... if you were doing it as an amateur, you couldn’t afford to have your sculpture cast in bronze’, and all that things. And I didn't pay any attention. I said, ‘I want to do it’, and, finally, they sort of... they capitulated; they gave in. My father was very... he was very supportive after that and I... I went to Regent Street Poly and, you know, began. But after that I mean... but he died before I'd... you know... well, he saw me get married but he didn't see any children, didn't see any grandchildren.

[Q] Did you feel the need to prove yourself to your father? 
Very much, very much indeed. Very much. And I remember saying to my mother... you know, my mother was looking at books on me and that, and she saw Diane Waldman's colour book, and she saw those catalogue raisonné – grey books with all the sculptures I'd made. And she said, ‘There's... that's the one. Those are the ones. Like your colour thing – I don't care about the... the... that thing but I want to know that you've worked, you know?’ Something like that. She didn't say that but, I mean, that was the implication. But it was more my father really that... that... because my mother was always rather artistic, and my father had good taste but he wasn't artistic. He was very fumbly about drawing and doing anything like that – couldn't draw at all.
[Q] Did you grow up in a household where there was art though? Did your parents have art on the wall? 
Yes, yes, to a very limited degree. They did; they had some nice paintings. But not – nothing great, nothing important. But nice, and we looked at them.
[Q] Sort of landscapes? 
Yeah. We looked at them, you know, and talked about them a bit. I don't remember ever going to an art gallery with my father; we lived in the country anyway.

[Q] It's often presumed by people who don't know you that the fact that you read engineering at Cambridge must, in some ways, have informed the work that you made later on – that has a kind of constructed quasi-engineering quality to it. Do you still maintain it had absolutely had no bearing on what you eventually did? 
Well, I... I don't think it had much bearing on it, but I mean that was the side that I would have gone if I'd gone into engineering, I would have gone into making bridges. I would have gone into that sort of things, and in fact when I look at Maillart's bridges, or some of the bridges, you know, that... that are made, they're marvellous. They're marvellous pieces of sculpture and I... I... so I suppose there is that slight connection of real and making things, real things, and making things that stand up and so on. But there's no... there's no immediate connection in the way that people are saying, you know, ‘Did you make things using beams and so on?’ I didn't.
[Q] Which was more formative for you: your years at school, at Charterhouse, or your... or your time at Cambridge? 
I hated my life... my years at Charterhouse, and I don't feel there was anything good about them at all. Cambridge was much better.
[Q] What was it you hated about Charterhouse? 
Oh, don't let's talk about it. It was just... it was a horrible place and I think it's a... I think actually, now that I see my grandson at fifteen – he's doing fine actually – but I realise it's a... it's a dreadful time of a boy's life, and probably a girl's life too, because you're... you're half... you... you try to behave like a man, but you've actually got the body and... and the metabolism of a... of a child. And... and, you know, you're having a constant sort of tug of war between you. And Cambridge was... at last one was... one was a person. At last one was a person, and able to make friends of other people who think... thought similarly, or... you know. I had a lot of friends who were interested in religion in Cambridge and... and I really enjoyed... I enjoyed the sort of conversations we had – the sort of times we spent together. It was wonderful. And, funnily enough, last week we went to... to Eton – only because I was meeting my son, Tim, at... at Heathrow, and he had to catch another plane, so we had to go and have lunch somewhere fairly close, and it... it happened we chose a place in Windsor. And we went through Eton. And I saw Eton... Eton College, and I thought, ‘These boys will never get over this’. Eton will leave its sort of stamp and its mark on them; it's happened too early because it's like Cambridge or Oxford. But it's five years too soon and it will never... they'll never get over it. And I think it's... it's born out in a lot of old Etonian friends I have, you know. And I think when he... what hit me, that sort of atmosphere was... was what I got at Cambridge, and I didn't get it at... at Charterhouse at all.

[Q] Who were the... the people that you remember from Cambridge? Who were your contemporaries? You know, Oxford and Cambridge, in particular, talk about different generations of people who rule the world and do things. Who... who were the alumni of Cambridge when you were there? 
No, they weren't particularly anything. Eric Heaton who became the... the Principal Head of Christchurch and... and Peter Baelz who became the Dean of Durham or something, you know. But he was interesting. He was... he was, you know... he was a philosopher, and I mean they were interesting... they were very interesting. I don't know that they were famous; they were just interesting.
[Q] You said religion. A lot of people were into religion.
Yes, there were, there were.
[Q] So were you wrestling with your own personal religion at that time? 
Oh, very much because I was a Jew, and I was very much wrestling with it, yes. And I... you know, I... I went to the... we did...  we were not very religious in the family but we went every year to... you know, the Day of Atonement and this sort of things. And it was out there for me. It wasn't... it wasn't real enough. It was too... it was too abstracted to... the Jewish religion was too abstracted for me. I really wanted something more you could get hold of, so I was very much for being a Christian, very much for Christianity because I felt it was... it had a real something you could get hold of and something that related to my life. You know, I think my parents – my father in particular – you know, didn't... he would say, ‘I have my own religion’. But he did... he did, you know... he did do the Jewish thing, but I always felt in a way that the Jewish thing was so much to do with history, ancestry, and all that and it wasn't enough to do with me.
[Q] Do you have religious beliefs now? 
I don't go to any religious things. I don't, I mean, you know... if we're near the chapel at St Aldhelm's Head when we're down in the country, you know, and it's a religious day, like a Christmas, or sometimes on Sunday, Sheila said, ‘Shall we go?’ Yeah, I'll go. I don't enjoy it much but I go. I... but I think I believe in God. I find the... the people who... who are so strongly atheistic are unconvincing to me – not sufficiently convincing to me. But I don't think I believe in a... in... in a very religious... I don't think I believe the format thing of religion, but I mean I... yes, I... I've been asked to do this... this church in Northern France, you know, that... Have I told you about it or not? It... well, it... it was a church that... that a plane – it's near Dunkirk – and... and an English plane went into the roof of it, and the roof caught fire, and it was burned down, but not... the church was not burned down. And they replaced the roof over the whole church but in the... the only bit they redid was the nave. So the entire choir has been left as a ruin for sixty years and they've come to me... I think because they saw my "Last Judgement", and... and said... and I said, ‘What do you want... what do you want?’ And they said, ‘Whatever you want, whatever you want’. I couldn't... because it started like that and it never finishes like that. In the end everybody gets a say in the monument historique and the Bishop and the lot, you know. So... but I'm interested to do that. I would like it to be sort of multi-denominational but I do think there's a place for people to be able to sit and think and... and reach into them... into their spiritual side of things. And anyway I think that in a way something that Ken Noland said to me: ‘Aren't we all sort of, you know... clergymen manqués? Aren't all artists something like, you know?’ And you once asked me. You said... you said, ‘Is sculpture your religion?’ And I think it is. I think it is. But it... it's because of an affirmative belief in... in good... in good. That's not God good. I mean do you know there's a wonderful essay by Iris Murdoch called "The Supremacy of Good", and it... it's... it equates God and good.

[Q] I was interested that you said that Judaism was almost too abstract and remote, and that Christianity was... was in... in a way more real. And that's... that’s an area that I'd like to explore with you a bit. Do you think it has anything to do with the fact that Christianity, for better or worse, has produced some of the most stupendous works of art? Judaism has a less artistic tradition; it's a wonderfully verbal and literary culture and religion. Is... is there something in that for you? 
I think there is something in that, yes. Or there was. I mean in those early days I used to like Gothic and Romanesque art because it was... because of the story. There was... a story was there. Oddly enough, in the twentieth century, so many of the artists have been Jews; it's been... it's very odd. I remember Ken Noland saying to me: ‘God, I wish I were a Jew', he said. ‘They're... all the best artists are Jewish'. But, no, it's... I... I don't mean it's remoteness but it's abstraction really that I was thinking, you know. You… Jewish prayers are all about praising God. They're all about praising God. They're not much to do with you and your life, and I... I think I wanted that. And of course there's always this figure of Christ which is very graspable for a child or for a young person. It isn't now but it was.
[Q] Interesting there, because Christianity is... its central image is one of a crucified, sacrificed figure. It has an extraordinary negative connotation, doesn't it? 
Yeah, but you know all this because of your father being a priest, wasn't he?
[Q] Yes, but it's part of my culture, I think... is that, more broadly speaking, that is the culture that... 
How did it strike you? Did you... did you become very religious?
[Q] No. Although it took me... it took me years, though, to detach myself and actually see aspects of Christianity... I mean I just accepted the crucifixion as an image, I mean, as the most enduring symbol of Christianity. But it wasn't until much later that I thought this is very bizarre that this extraordinary global religion is about a defeated, violated, sacrificed, crucified image of a... of a man. 
Yes, destroyed. Man destroyed. It... it... and it strikes me like that now. I mean there's one thing is the truth or the falsehood of the thing. Another thing is the need, you know. Do you... how much do you need to have something to hang on to, something to look to, you know? So when you say a prayer, is the saying it as important as whether it's received or not?
[Q] Religion and ritual, obviously, I mean, the ritual of religion is very important to people. That often is the most tangible or real thing. 
Yes, yes, yes, and the coming together, yes, yes. But I... it's not a big thing for me now. But, I mean, obviously you have some thought because I... I... you know, I'm eighty-one and you start to think, you know, you're going to die before too long, and I mean I hope it could be quite a long time but, you know, so you... you know, you do think, ‘Do I believe in the afterlife?’ I really don't know. I think most unlikely but I don't know; I really don't know. The point really that I always say when that is... when I... when I kind of... when I respond to that question which I say to myself... which I ask myself... I find myself saying, ‘No, but I believe in this life’. I don't know whether I believe in the afterlife but I believe in this life. I believe in it totally, and I believe it's got to be lived to the full all the time and we've got to try and make something of the life that we're... that we're living. The other bit's a different story, and who knows?

[Q] When you make sculpture, is it a quest for some kind of truth – potentially at least? 
Well it's not like that; each individual... I suppose for each individual sculpture it is, yes. It is in a way, yes, yes. Yes, and I suppose its universality is because... you know, because of people appreciating it or people entering into it... into that world. It makes it sort of a... it makes it some sort of universal thing in a way, you know. Didn't every work of art like that... that is not just purely self-masturbation? It... it is sort of to do with a response and reaching out, wouldn't you think?
[Q] I think so, yeah. Have you ever been interested in self-expression as an idea? Does your work seem about you, instinctive in expressing intimate parts of yourself? 
No, I don't think like that. I don't think... I think it's too much to do with the subject to be... the subject of sculpture like the subject of cookery, or the subject of... of being a surgeon or something. I mean that seems to me that you get... that's where you get focused. The surgeon is not thinking about himself; he's thinking about doing the job as well as he can. And some part of the way he approaches it, or the cook, certainly – some part of the way they approach it is to do with their character. The cook's food is not just food; it's also this cook's food.  The way... the way it's presented, the way it's... the amount of sugar and... and spice they put in is also something to do with... with him that's... that's particular – or her. But I think when you say self-expression you're giving too big an importance to the artist or to the... to the creator of it. Because it’s... it's a partnership. When you make art, it's a partnership between yourself and the material and it's a partnership with the people who are working beside you in the studio by helping you do the welding and so on. And it's a partnership with your... with the knowledge that you've... that you've accumulated over... over all your experience of all your life.

[Q] When you look back at works that you've made though over the last few decades, did they feel things that seem very remote to you now? Do... do they all... can you almost not relate to having created them? 
They mean nothing to me. They... it's... the past means nothing to me. Don't let's... I mean, you know, I remember early on saying, ‘I never want... I never want to make an abstract sculpture; I always want to make a figurative sculpture because I... because I believe in people and believe in that’. And... and, you know, that's why the show at the Tate where I'm showing old things, it was a bit of a shock to see some of these coloured sculptures which I haven't done for so long and that would say something to me perhaps. But they're not really you... they're not really me. What's really me is what I'm making today and what I'm going to make on Monday, what I'm starting to do on Monday, say. That's interesting. The past is not interesting, particularly. Not for me, it's not. And then I think it's... it’s not quite true of one's life because obviously, you know, you've got your family and all that stuff, and I've lived in this house for ever – for fifty years or something. But I've really... I really... I really want to look forward. I really want to look forward, and I want to continue looking forward until I die.

[Q] What was the defining character of your time at the Royal Academy Schools? Endless classical busts in the columns... the corridors? 
No, not terribly. Yes, oh yes, yes, yes, all down the corridors. They're really funny. I mean, they're brown and they're horrid. They gave me a real bad view of Greek art. I mean I really got to... to loathe Greek art when I saw those, until I went to Greece where they're not like that at all, as you know. No, we used to work from the figure and there... there was sort of quite a good training like always doing a...  life models, I think, from the mornings and the afternoons when you could do more or less what you liked. I met Sheila there and, you know... but that was later when I was... in the drawing school then. No, it wasn't. No, it wasn't later, because I drew a lot when I went to Henry Moore's. I drew at the Academy. I went... I used to go back to the Academy and draw and I thought it was then; it wasn't. It was before that. And we used to sit round in this sort of horseshoe-shaped thing with tiers in this room. It was absolutely like the nineteenth century; it was really like the old Academy. And we used to sit down and draw this model. Quentin Crisp was one of the models there and there was a pugilist, who... the bell used to go for the break, and he'd get up and do a boxing position. He thought, you know, he was completely... had it. But there were... the teaching was atrocious in that because I was being taught by painters and I was being taught not to express sculptural form but to express painterly turns and things. And it was only when I went to Henry that... that... and he said, ‘Well, you go and draw; I'll criticise your work’. And he criticised it to try and make it more sculptural and he taught me a lot that way. But that was the drawing, and that's when I... I took Sheila's board by mistake and... and that's how we made... made contact and got to know each other. But...
[Q] Was that an accident or was that a... a clever strategy? 
No, no; I was not much of a seducer. No, it was just a sheer accident and we got talking, and then we got married forever. Anyway...
[Q] It sounds like the briefest courtship in the history of art. 
But... but... no, but most of the time was spent in the sculpture school and I... I was trying to... very romantic, some of the stuff I did in those days. But then, when I look back, some of it was... had a little, little inkling of architecture in it, and that sort of thing, or architectural stuff in it. But I made friends with Peter Smithson, who was in the Architectures School. I think I was always interested in the people who were... I think I had a taste for the best, and I think that I did, you know... my friends were... were good artists or good beginners, you know. They had something. And... but you go through it; you go through those years. And then I began to get interested in Greek art and so on, and I remember showing a couple of sculptures that were terracottas in a show that William Scott criticised that he... he didn't know they were both by me and he liked them both. And that was a big... a big... gave me a big lift because he was an outsider. The people inside didn't like my work. Maurice Lambert taught me, and I didn't like Maurice and he didn't like me.
[Q] What didn't they like about it? Did it not conform to certain academic principles? 
I suppose it didn't conform, yeah; I suppose not. And I... it wasn't... it wasn't... the academic thing, you know, was awfully to do with dolphins and... and they were... they were pretty awful, what they did. Hardiman, who made the Haig Statue in... in Whitehall, was somebody I thought well of and I liked his statue. I thought that was good. He taught. But McMillan, who did the other fountain in Trafalgar Square, Wheeler who did one of the fountains in Trafalgar Square – they... they were the hotshots of the Academy at that time and it was really dreadful. It was... but it was Carl Milles... it was Carl Milles from Sweden, and I thought, well, they've taken it from Carl Milles; I'd better go and see real Carl Milles. So I went to Sweden with my sister, and went to Carl Milles's studio and his sort of sculpture garden. I saw all these... more dolphins than you'll ever see in your life. And that sort of thing, and fountains and things like that. So I had to get it out of my system, you know. We all have something we've got to get out of our system, bit by bit. And it was just a growing up period; it was a growing up time. I think all that was a growing up time until finally... until I left Henry Moore. And then I... then I was able to make my own sculptures.

These people like McMillan and... and Garbe and... and Machin and so on, you know, were all sculptors from the past. I said, ‘That can't be what sculpture's about; it cannot be it. It just doesn't have relation, any relation, to sort of what I'm trying to do. Who is the best modern sculptor around? Well, there's this chap called Reg Butler who’s just coming up, and there's this chap called Henry Moore who I... we've heard of a bit'. I think that Epstein was a bit too old. Henry was about fifty-five, so it was quite early, and he was beginning to get talked about, and I thought: I'll find out where he lives and go and see him. So I went up there and I knocked on the... the door and he said, ‘Yes?’ He came in and he said, ‘Yes?’ And I said, ‘My name's Tony Caro and I'd like to work for you’. And he said,  ‘Oh, oh, well you might have telephoned’. Good old Henry. And then: ‘You'd better come in and have a cup of tea’. So I went in and had a cup of tea, showed him my photographs of what... the work I was doing. And then he said, ‘I've got nothing for you at the moment', he said, ‘but I... we're building... we're building a bronze foundry, so in six months’ time we might have something for you. So be in touch with me in six months'.
Well, six months to the day I telephoned him, and said, ‘Do you remember me?’ He said, ‘Yes, I remember you. If you want to come, start on Monday'. So we moved up there – to Much Hadham – and I started on Monday. And I worked for two years for him, and he was very generous to me. He was wonderful to me, actually. He let me have the run of his library, so that I would take a book out and bring it back the next day, or two days later, and then take another book out, and so on – books on negro art, which I had never seen a piece of negro art. Surrealism, cubism: I didn't know what they meant. That was how... I knew there was something wrong with what I was being taught at the Academy. These people, they were just... Picasso was laughed at at the Academy, and all this was completely like an opening of a new world to me, to see this stuff. And then I used to... Henry would like to talk about art, and he'd like to have a discussion with you. ‘Who do you like?’ You know? ‘If you had... if you can choose Velasquez, a Masaccio and a Rubens, which would you choose?’  You know? I mean that sort... I mean, not very critical or very... you know, things like that – little... little games. He played those games a lot with me. The other chap, not very much, who was there, because he wasn't so interested. I was interested in that.
And then I used to drive Henry into London because he used to be... I think he was a trustee of the Tate or the National Gallery, or something. He was certainly a trustee of the National Gallery... he was a trustee of both, and he was a trustee of the National Gallery when they bought that... that "Old Woman" by Cezanne, you know? I remember him saying, ‘We bought a very good Cezanne’. And, you know, on the way back I would... I would... we'd talk about what he'd done and what he'd seen. He'd say, ‘Oh, I've been to...’ I remember him saying it; I remember these little things. I want to remember the little things. ‘I've been to Chelsea School of Art, and I've been to the Slade, and I saw an... an interesting... an interesting young sculptress; she's just starting. Her name is Elizabeth Frink'. It's funny, isn't it? And Rosemary Young, who was at the... at the Slade, was a girlfriend of... of Reg Butler. And, you know, we'd talk all... on the way back about art a lot and... and then the next day he'd say, ‘Now let's see what you did yesterday’. In the evening he'd say, ‘Come on, show me these’. And we'd go through my drawings, and he said, ‘Look, you know, where's the light coming from? Do you... are you... are you inventing the light or did it really come from the right side? Or did the light come from your eyes? If the light came from you, then the bit that's closest to you is going to be the whitest.’ I mean, he taught me all this stuff; nobody ever taught like this before. He said, ‘But, you know, the laws of light, like as you turn round, the further away from the light it is, the darker it's going to be’, and so on. Or, you know, ‘the closer to you, the bigger’. Like perspective, even with a figure, or ‘the closer to you, the more intense, so your leg would be intense to me and your body and face, because it's further away, would be vaguer’, you know. He would accentuate all those things. Of course in his drawings they were very accentuated. But it taught me how to represent something that was... that was three-dimensional on a flat sheet, which I had never done before, because before they taught me to try and draw like Ingres which is... which is nothing to do with that at all. And I mean that was... that was a big... a big leap for me to learn that.

And then working with Henry, because, I mean, when we made the "King and Queen", for example... when he made the "King and Queen"... I remember making the tiny one of the "King and Queen". And he cut them out of a flat sheet of... of wax like a tailor, like just cutting that round like a tailor and then bent the wax. And then he had some boiling water and we put... he put the thing in it, and put the head on, you know, and it was... it sort of became soft because it had been in the boiling water. It sort of began to melt the wax and so on. Watching him do all that, working beside us, it was great; it was great. And the... and the... the "Fallen Warrior", and all those things: I mean these were all done, you know, at the same time when I was in the studio. And we did some other things, too, like actually carving the "Time Life Building", which, you know... I didn't find that was so interesting because I was, you know, carving... that was enlarging too; that was doing it with an enlarging machine. I'd seen it... I'd seen the bought enlarging machine from the nineteenth century at Wheeler's Place, which is on a sort of pivot and with a length... with a long pole, and then, if you wanted... and then this side has a small arrow and this side has a big arrow so that... that you put something on a small arrow to touch a position on the small model and it makes it on the right position on the big model, but three times as much or five times as much, whatever it is. But we didn't use that; we made our own one with Henry which was like a... a sort of a wooden structure with the same idea to show where something was in space. I didn't find that so interesting, really. It was quite interesting. Or enlarging a... a little plaster of his and making it into a big figure and so on... all that. There's so much of that work in sculpture, you know, of the... the chores, the... the donkey work.
[Q] So it was actually working directly with the material that you realised was the most interesting thing for you? 
Yes, but I mean I was much more interested in... in working in... in... when Henry was actually creating. I thought that was... that was terrific; I loved that. I mean when he was... when he'd say, ‘We'll enlarge that’, it wasn't so interesting. And we were also having... having his bronze foundry which we couldn't get... we couldn't get... we built it wrongly; it wasn't very good. It was very bad. But we were casting things there too. So I mean, I was learning a tremendous lot, and I had never learnt any of this at... at art school.

It was a cowshed we worked in. We worked in... we worked in the cowshed; there were not a lot of assistants. There was Alan Ingham and me and I think later... I think later we... there was one other chap came. But I mean basically no, it was two or three of us, that's all. And then Henry working in the cowshed and working sometimes in the little, little part of the cowshed on his own things. But it was... no, it was small in that way. The grand reputation was not there yet; it was coming but it was not there yet. We had some people, foreign people, coming and so on. We had people that... I didn't know who the hell they were. 'This is Nancy Cunard'. I didn't know who Nancy Cunard was, you know? But there were people like that who came from the '30s somewhere, I didn't know where or how or anything. It hadn't really... it wasn't big and Henry was not a... was not a... he was not the god that he became later in the world's eyes or in his own eyes.
[Q] Do you think his reputation took up...? You say in his own eyes. Did he... do you think he started to believe the myth then, later on?
Well, 20 or 30 years later, yes. I think he did. Very dangerous, these myths. I think so; I mean enough people told you that you were Michelangelo, in the end you think you're Michelangelo. I think that did happen to Henry. And I think his work deteriorated, yes, really because I... Did you see that show at Dulwich not long ago? The early work was wonderful, absolutely wonderful, and the late work is... a bit overblown and, and, and I don't go for it so much. It can happen to anybody.
[Q] Is he... was he a creative father figure for you then, in a way? 
Yes, absolutely, absolutely, and so kind, so kind, such a nice person. Because the two father figures for me were him and David Smith. And David Smith was a competitor and Henry was a father, you know. Henry was... was somebody there to help you and to try and be, you know, to lead you and to help you and so on. You were always having to come up against David. Any sculptor would come up against David. I mean David would put every other sculptor in that competitive position.
[Q] But it was more competitive with you later when you became successful? 
Oh no, I don't think so. He just thought what I was doing was bad. I... I didn't realise. I mean, no, I... I think that... No, Henry, when I left Henry and he came here once and he bought a little figure of mine and a head and I was thrilled. But I think that that was when it was still, you know, the figurative stuff and I didn't realise this until only a... a few months ago an Australian chap, who worked for Henry ten years after I did, told me that he.. when he was there he said to Henry you've got see Tony's Whitechapel Show.
[Q] '63?
Yes. And, and Henry went and the next day they said to Henry, what do you think of it? And Henry said window dressing. That interested me quite a lot. I mean I sensed that he didn't like it. He kind of believed that I really cared about sculpture and he believed that side of it but the way I went was so totally against his... his attitude. He said, 'Sculpture is like a fist, all these bits pressing their way out'. And I said, 'Sculpture is like cubism'. You see, I had a completely different... different direction really to him. You know, I see him, in a way, as the last Renaissance sculpture... sculptor and... and I think that, you know, in those intervening ten years, whatever it was, I had discovered cubism and discovered the possibilities for sculpture in cubism.

People like de Kooning and Francis Bacon and Dubuffet – they were... they were the people that I was... that I had pinned up on my wall. So I was looking at surface and I was looking at what it felt like to be inside the body. I was very conscious of the body, and I was trying to say, ‘Well, if you're lying down you feel heavy, so you're compressed into the ground a bit more and so on, and the shapes are compressed and so on’. I mean all that stuff came into it... or you're, you know... a man pulling his shirt off because he... he's all pulling, and his head's got small because he's trying to get his shirt over the top, or he's... you know, all that stuff. And that was... and the ways in which I was doing it would be very often to... to incorporate stones or things into the... that... that gave me some of the... of the sort of... they became breasts, they became parts of the body, and then I suppose I was moving away from that. And I used to go down to Porlock, and by that time my son, Tim, was... was about three or four and we used to... must have been four or five. We used to walk along the beach. We'd get a... a wheelbarrow, we'd collect stones, took all these stones back. I didn't dare say they were for sculpture because we used to stay at this little... this little bedsit. ‘What do you want all those stones for, Mr Caro?’ I said, ‘Oh, I'm making a... I'm making a rockery’. It was a... completely untrue. But, you know, those were the... that... that was I was interested in and I would... we would even go... I would even find ways to take casts of the stone cliff and... and then, you know, I'd take this plaster and stuff and try and get it off. And of course you had to... it needed something to get between the plaster or the rubber or whatever I was using, and so I used to wait for the tide to come in, and then we pulled and tried to get it off. Tim loved it but it was fun; it was fun. These were... and then I'd use these pieces, these... these moulds, to make casts from and incorporate the casts to my sculpture and incorporate the stones into my sculpture. And that was... that was how they were... It's not so different from... from doing it with pieces of steel, actually.
[Q] I never knew this, and I think it's fascinating that... that Moore was making these human figures that had a relationship to landscape, and you were taking aspects of the landscape and then trying to turn them into aspects of the human body. 
Yes, I was; I was. And that was the early stuff and... and, you know... and I did that for a... for a... quite a while, here, working here in the... in the garage and pushing them out. They were... they were Moore...  They didn't come out of Moore, though; they came more out of... out of Picasso, really. They came out of Picasso and Picasso's... you know, I'd been very turned on at the end of the time with Moore by... by Picasso... Picasso paintings of... you know, of the cocks and the... and I tried all sorts of things and ways of... of putting pieces of clay on to... on to stands and then going around so that eight or ten pieces of clay would be stuck on to, say... knock each one, kick them, bang them, knock at them. Let them drop on the floor; let's see what happens. I tried to see what happened, you know. These were all ways of... of trying to loosen up from exactitude and loosen up to... into accident and so on, which is a sort of surrealist approach. And finding, you know... I remember... even at Moore's it must have started, because I remember finding an enormous... an enormous tree root that had fallen, and sawing it, and sawing it, and sawing it, and making it into – I destroyed it, I don't know what happened to it – into a... the head of a bull, you know, because it just suggested it. All these things... you're getting suggestions and then you were... you were going with it.

[Q] Did you ever meet Picasso? 
Never, never. He would have overwhelmed all of us, I'm sure. I used to dream about him but I never met him.
[Q] What would you ask him if you could meet him now? 
Oh, now he's out of my system in that way... in that way. He's not that sort of a threat in a way that... when I... when I dreamt about him I... I would dream these sort of conversations. What would I ask him? I have no idea what I would ask him.
[Q] What were the conversations in the dreams? 
I don't know. They were sort of... I'm trying to get into his head, I think, like I tried to get into Moore's head. I did get into Moore's head. See, now, in a way, I think I'd have been more... I'd be more bowled over by meeting Matisse than Picasso. And, you know, I've learnt so much from Picasso. I've learnt so much from both those two. It's... it's amazing to have lived at the same time as those two – not at the same time, but while they were there, while they were there... while they were that important to us. I'm sure I told you that, you know, we... I got back from America and came here and Sheila was... Sheila was... I said, ‘Don't meet me; you go to bed’, and she woke up when I came into the room. She didn't say, ‘Have you had a good trip, have you... have you had a good flight?’ Nothing like... She said, ‘Picasso's dead’. That was that big a thing. It was the end of an era: Picasso's dead. They were... they were... they are giants, they are giants... they are total giants and they set the scene for all of us. You see, I don't rate Duchamp who set the scene for the present day artists but I rate... rate Picasso and Matisse right up there.
[Q] Did you meet Duchamp? 
No. I didn't meet any of those people. But it was almost... it was almost my... my wish not to meet them. I didn't... I didn't have a chance to meet... I don't speak French sufficiently well to meet either of them – or Spanish, or anything. But I didn't even want to meet people like Passmore and that, who I could easily have met. Because I wanted to do it on my own... on my own, and I did not want to be carried along by anybody. It wasn't conceit that but it was a sort of independence, you know. I think also I'm easily influenced and I didn't want their influences. I did meet William Scott and he was one older person who I... knew him a bit. I suppose I knew Alan Davy a bit, and so on. He was about the same age as me. But I... I think the heroes I want to stay away from because, in a way, when I met Moore, you know, I was still a student so I was... I was learning from him. I didn't want to be a student anymore so I didn't want to meet people who might have been my teachers. But Picasso and Matisse are a different story altogether and... and they're so big, they're so big. I mean historically big; they... they rate up there with Cezanne and... and Giotto and people. They're that good. Still... still I find myself looking at books on Picasso and Matisse and... and looking at what they've done, and, you know, loving it, and saying, ‘What was he trying to do, how does he do that?’ You know?

I felt I had kind of used up Douch... Dubuffet and... and that, and I thought there was something, and, of course, this was the moment that America was the place where it was all happening – New York. It was... I never wanted to go to Paris much. I had been to Paris, and when I went to Paris I'd never really... because I don't speak good enough French and that, but also... they were all so intellectual; they were talking about sort of intellectual concepts that I just hated. And, you know, what was that thing? What was it they had in those days?
[Q] Existentialism? 
Yes. I don't know what existentialism is; I still don't. You know, it's... it's so fucking clever. I don't think that was what I wanted. And I knew that over there, somewhere, it was different; it was happening. So I went for this Ford English-speaking union travel grant and I got short listed, and I went along and they interviewed me. And there were... I don't know who... Robin Darwin was there, but I don't know who else. So there were about..about six of them, firing questions at you. One chap was firing a lot of questions or something, and I did do badly. I came back and said to Sheila, ‘You know, I did a very bad interview and...’ ‘What did they ask you?’ Sheila said. ‘I'll be him and you'll be you'. So... so she... we did it. So Sheila would ask me the question and I would answer and she said, ‘No, you can do better than that... that's not a very good reason. This is the reason'.
Well, I went the next year for it and he asked me the same questions... the same guy asked me the same questions! And of course I had them perfect – I had all the answers because I'd done it with Sheila already. So I got it that year. I did so well that Robin Darwin asked me to go and see him afterwards, and I went to his place in Richmond Park, I think it was... very odd. A little... little house he had. And he said, ‘I want you to become the next... the next teacher... sculpture professor at the Royal College after...' Because who was going? Skeaping was going, Skeaping was going and he said, ‘I want you to... to take the next job’. I said, ‘I'm very interested’. I was very interested in the idea. And I said, ‘But I... I think I need a lieutenant’. He said... he said, ‘Oh well, who do you want?’ And I said, ‘I want Bill Turnbull’. And he didn't like the idea of Bill Turnbull; he wanted Philip King, who was a young guy, but who was... was very popular at that time as the... the up and coming chap. I said, ‘You see, I would like to make this the centre of art... of sculpture. I would like to have visiting teachers like Giacometti'. He wasn't particularly interested in that; he was interested also... he said, ‘I like my professors to have old-fashioned Rolls Royces and things like that’. ‘Oh, God, you're into this style, are you?’ ‘And I would like them to be able to behave nicely in the common room'. And I said, ‘This is not for me; I don't want people to behave nicely in the common room and to be... have elegant old Rolls Royces, you know. I want dirty clothes, serious talk about art and the best people'. And in the end I didn't... didn't do it. I... we were... you know, I... I said, ‘No, it's not for me’, and he... he got Bernard Meadows in the end, and that was... that was the story of that one. But I did well in the interview because that I'd prepared it so much, and so, over to America I went, the second shot.

Sheila came with me. She stayed for a while, but I went on round to the West Coast where I met Kienholz and Diebenkorn and people like this, and... but Sheila stayed for... for some of the... some of the New York stuff. We stayed at the Chelsea Hotel... no, no, I stayed at the Biltmore, I think. We had a room for two dollars a night up in the roof. It was great. I met a lot of people, you know, and talked to Clem a lot. I had met Clem here by then, and Clem was the one who said, ‘If you want to change your art, change your habits’. So I... that was why I went into... into steel and aluminium and things instead of going into clay, because I had found that I had been trying to go abstract with the plaster and clay and it hadn't worked for me, or trying to get... trying to get away from the figure. I couldn't do it, but then he suggested, ‘If you go into something completely different you'll be forced to... to change’, which was good.
[Q] Is he the main reason you went to America – Clement Greenberg? 
No, because I had wanted to go before I met Clem. I wanted to go in '58 and I didn't meet Clem until, I think, the summer of '59, and I went in the autumn of '59. No, and I met Ken Noland there and I met... saw the Noland Show. We got along very well; I got along with Diebenkorn up to a point too, but there was always a distance. I met Rauschenberg and Johns and people but they didn't mean anything to me, particularly... Chamberlain. They didn't mean anything to me. And Nevelson and... Helen was very nice to me: Helen... Helen Frankenthaler and Bob Motherwell were very kind to me. That was when I first met David Smith too.

[Q] What kind of a man was Smith? 
Big. No, he was physically big but he was a big man; he was a big character, big personality. And, in fact, when three years later I got the job at... at Bennington, it was the time of my Whitechapel Show, and I was late, and he stood in for me. And the first night, when I got up to Bennington, because we'd lost our bags, and Ken met us, and we stayed at a motel, and I left the children with Sheila, and... because Ken said, ‘David Smith is at the Rain Barrel’, which was a little... little place we had dinner. And he said, ‘So he's at the Rain Barrel, you know, and I'm sure he'd like to meet you’. And I went to the Rain Barrel; I had met David. I met David in '59 but in '63 I always remember him getting up when I... when I came in and I suppose I felt pretty shrunken after a long trip and, you know, fourteen hours to get to America in those days. And we'd lost baggage and so on, and then we'd taken a train up to... to... up to Rhinebeck and then we did... I was feeling fairly shattered, and there was this man who got up, and he was so big – he was so physically big – and I thought to myself, fee, fi, fo, fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman. And David was always like that; he was always like that. And I got quite friendly with him, but he was always the big chap – not with women, not with children, but with other artists, with other men, he was. He was always competition and always a sense of... of sort of... he wanted... he was dominating, he was dominating. But he was sweet with the children. My little son of five, Paul... and he would hide sweets for him and that sort of thing; he was very sweet in that way. And then he would... he'd say, ‘Come on’...  he'd say, ‘Come on’ to Sheila; take her into the kitchen. He said, ‘Look now, there's some champagne for you; now you watch me, I'll show you how to make an omelette and... I mean, you know, or cook some... some mushrooms or some odd mushrooms’, or something, you know. He was very nice in that way but he wasn't like that with... with another artist. With another artist he was very competitive.
[Q] Did you feel competitive with him? 
No, he was... I mean, he would say to me, ‘Look, spend money on your art; buy the best paper. I buy this paper.’ Because I had been drawing at that time on lining paper, you know, real cheap, cheap, cheap paper. He said, ‘Look, these sheets are two dollars a sheet, these... these paper... paper I use...’ Was a lot of money, you know, in those days.
[Q] A night at the Biltmore. 
Yeah, absolutely. And... and so he would tell me things like that, and then he would say, ‘You know, I...’ Mind you he'd lost two wives but there's... probably the reason... he said, ‘I wouldn't buy my wife a washing machine, I wanted to buy the steel instead’, you know? He was... he lived very... he lived in a very raw way, very raw... very lonely too. You realised it when you went up there, how lonely he was. You know, there was David, and his... his friends were these sculptures – eighty sculptures in a field, just amazing... amazing. And, you know, I used to say, ‘Henry puts his sculpture out to show everybody he's the best sculptor in the world; David puts it out to show himself he is’. You know, David was trying to... David was... was I think trying to... to confirm his... his primacy in his own mind because he'd not been thought well of. He was not thought that well of by Pollock and people; they thought he was a hick sculptor. They did not think he was... he was up in their level and he thought he was... and he was too. I mean the pity... David, who couldn't sell much... you know this sculpture of David just sold for twenty-three million? How he would have loved to have known that. How he would love to have known that, David. It's a wonderful sculpture. But I could cope with him by then anyway. I didn't want to make things like David Smith. But I went up there and he gave me a lot of bits of steel, and Ken said, ‘That was an insult, the way he gave you those bits of steel’. But it wasn't – it was nice; he was trying to be kind, he was trying to be kind. He was... I don't think he related well to other artists in a way, not really. He related well to Ken Noland because he was a painter.

And when he died, you know, it was at Bennington in fact.
[Q] In a car crash? 
Yeah. We went round... round the corner and he went into the ditch and... and it was an awful night.
[Q] Were you there? 
Yeah. And we all went on... over to Albany and he was dead by the time... He died on the way... on the way to Albany in the ambulance.
[Q] Just take us... I didn't know you were there that night. What... just, what...? Tell me about, you know, your last hours with Smith. 
No, well... well, David had said to me a week or two earlier, which was amazing – he told me he was lonely. He'd never really revealed himself, and he said: 'I'm alone', he said. ‘The girls don't talk to me on the telephone now; I ring them and they... and their mother stops them talking to me, or something', he said. He said, ‘And I'll be all alone when I die’. He said that. Awful. And he was playing around on a sort of... on a... on a motorbike thing that he had there at Ken's, and he went into some... some brambles or something first anyway. So maybe he was... I don't know. But, anyway, there was this show after dinner at the Carriage Barn at... at Bennington College and everybody piles into cars, and David came in his car, and there was a bit of steel in the back, and I don't know what happened. But he... he ended up in the ditch, and then Stephanie, Ken's wife, came and said... and we said, ‘Where... what's happened to David?’ She said, ‘I'll go and find...’ And if you were to see, and there were all these policemen there and police cars and things, and he'd gone off in... in the... in the ambulance and... and we all went to... we all went to... to the hospital in Albany – Helen and Bob, Helen, Bob Motherwell. Helen was terribly upset. And Ken and Stephanie and... and Jules and Andie, Jules's wife. Sheila had gone back to England. And he was dead; yeah, he died. He was dead in the... in the... I think in the ambulance.
[Q] Had he been drinking? 
At dinner.
[Q] It's almost a parallel with Pollock, though? 
No, it was quite different. I don't know about Pollock; I know the story because I know the book and I know, you know, what Clem told me and so on. But that... but... I don't think... he wasn't showing off. I think he was just... he was out of control. He had this sort of... he had this sort of Jeep type car and... and there was a piece of steel in the back; maybe that hit him, I don't know. I don't know what happened. It's only three miles, or five miles, between Ken's place and... and Bennington College, just in that thing, round the corner and... there you are. It was awful; it was awful. He was young; he was only fifty-nine or something. But I never became a friend of David and that... he was... he was a... he was an example to me. He was an example to me. God, he knew how to work. He'd work like a mad thing and he worked like every ounce of every day and he had this chap, Leon Pratt, who was his assistant, and who used to work with him. And I went up to... to Ken's... to... to David's place... I went to the funeral, and then... and then I think Clem and Ken and I stayed that night in David's place. And then there was this terrible sculpture. I said, ‘Who made that?’ No, that was sometime later. Stainless steel with everything in it, and... and Leon said, ‘I made that. That... that... I made that as my sort of homage to David, you know?’ It was awful. Made with David's materials and so on but it was dreadful. But... then there was a lot of steel, you know; there was a hell of a lot of steel and Ken... we said, ‘What are we going to do with the steel?’ And Ken said, ‘I'll buy the steel’. He said, ‘Do you want half of the steel? Do you want the steel, Tony? No, not half, much more than half'. And I said, ‘Sure’. And he sent it over here, and one day it came and they couldn't get it down the road; it was too big a... down... down the drive here. Thirty-seven tons of steel I got standing on the courtyard here and I tell you, my neighbours complained like hell. It was all David's steel.
[Q] How long did it take you to work through those thirty-seven tons of steel? 
Oh, I don't know. A few years.
[Q] A decade? 
No, a few years, yes. I even had some... some fragments.

He's had trouble here with the cutting. He's had trouble here when he's cut here; it's splattered, and it hasn't worked, so he rejected this "Head of Oculus", and it was in among his junk. I saw it: ‘The "Head of Oculus"! Oh, I'll have that'. So I... I have it and I... I paid for it, stuck it on the base... not a real David Smith. But it didn't... it was a little different from the English stuff, and there were a few things that... it didn't really... it didn't really mean anything to me, especially, that it was... that it was David's.
[Q] So when you were working with the steel it wasn't like you were working with the ghost or the memory of something? 
No, no.
[Q] It's just stuff? 
Just stuff. The interesting thing was that some of the... of the angle irons were much thinner than we get in England and that's the sort of thing. It wasn't really... I don't know, just stuff. But I did say it was David's, you know. I did sort of... but no, no.

I mean, I also work with all sorts of other materials too, but steel's the one that's most... most natural to me. I never thought it would be – never thought for a moment; I mean, clay is the natural thing. Clay does what you tell it to; clay does what you want it to do, push it here and it goes in. Steel's resistant; it's much more resistant than that. The first time was... I suppose in '50... about '60, I suppose, yes, '60. I had been... I went down to Canning Town to the scrap yards and bought some H beams, some old second-hand stuff and... and, you know, circles and things. Never seen this stuff before. Couldn't cope with it, didn't know how to stick two pieces of steel together. I remember asking Frank Martin: ‘How do I stick two pieces of steel together?’ He said, ‘Oh, you either weld them or you bolt them’. Didn't know. I'm very impractical, you know. I'm not into all that stuff, not into making at all, don't like making. And I stuck them up... I think twenty-four hours for the first one. Stuck it up, all this different, you know, parts; there were three or four parts to it. Went and got Sheila, said, ‘What do you think?’ And I was going to make it much more ordinary. She said, ‘Leave it, leave it, leave it; it's fine’. And I went from there. And... and in fact one sculpture... you know, basically, when I went wrong I was... it worked. One sculpture... I remember David... Gabriel Cohen... Gabriel Cohen was a very good American sculptor and not much known now. And he came over here, and came and visited me, and I was making a sculpture and he said, ‘You should make that piece float’. And I did and it spoilt it. And I've always regretted that on that sculpture. I shouldn't have listened; he was seeing it... he was seeing it in a different way.
I used to work in this... in this studio here and I worked in this studio because... really because of Ken. No, I don't say I worked in the studio – because I had to work – but the way I worked was... was because of what Ken had said to me on that night in... the first time I went to America... we spent a long night; we met at the Cedar Bar, and we talked and we continued to talk until six o'clock in the morning when he went back to Washington. He told me a lot about his life and he told me a lot about how he made art and he told me that he made art flat on... on horses. He put the canvas out on a horse so that it was flat and he couldn't see; he couldn't make those sort of aesthetic judgements. And I thought to myself: how could I do that in sculpture? Well, one way to do it was to put the sculpture flat, and I did make one sculpture flat on the floor, but it didn't suit me. That was a lot how David worked – flat, and then stood it up. Didn't suit me. But that one car garage suited me fine because it was too small to put a sculpture in and look at it. I had to live inside it somehow. I used to sit in that place with one sculpture there for a couple of months. It took that long. I would move something an inch or two and that would be the day's work; I mean it was really so small, the movements and the things. There's only room for one sculpture in there when you're making a big sculpture. I mean all those big sculptures in there – the first ones. And it was a great way of doing it because I just could not be aesthetic; I could not make those sort of judgements which relied on my previous taste. I had to make... I had to make changes from inside the sculpture instead of making them from outside it. It was... it was a good way to work. So I worked there for three years or more and then finally got other studios and so on.

[Q] How much did getting a new studio, bigger studio, change your work? 
Probably... well, I'm trying to think of the studio I had in Lowden Road, which was a sort of basement. It probably did change it a bit. I wasn't becoming quite so dependent on... on not looking in that way, you know, and I started to be more willing to look. So, I mean, that's... yes. And then getting a very big studio like I have now – I mean the same studio as I have now, which I got... I don't know what year – fairly late '60s, I think. Then I took... then I... then I really took different means to get to where I wanted to get. For example, I would make things and then put them away.
I'm much more interested in method; I'm very interested in method. I'm interested in the way that you... how you approach a sculpture. So you might start and do it – do two hours work on it. For in... the table sculptures, I mean, two hours work on them, make them in here, and then don't look at them for three months, and when they... they come back you see them afresh and you... you know, they've been... they've been properly made by then; they've been ground; they're looking new. And so you're seeing something, and you can say, ‘It's no good there. I'd turn it upside down, it needs a bit on the bottom’, or, you know, or... or ‘I love it, it just needs that and it's finished’. I mean, you know, there were hundreds of different... but you didn't look at it as sort of as attached. And I noticed that Matisse did the same thing, and I've seen pictures of Matisse where he's done something, and I'm sure he did it that night and said, ‘Tomorrow I'll change...' and next day he said, ‘It's right as it is’, you know. I started thinking that way because I worked in Toronto years later – I don't know when.
[Q] '71? '72? 
Oh yeah. I worked there and then made these sculptures very fast... big, big sculptures, made very fast on... with a crane so there were four. I could have four on the pad at the same time, and one had to come off everyday. So I was doing quite quick... quick stuff. And then I would go away and come over here, and while I was away Willlard and Jim and people would... would weld them up so they were firm and strong, and then I'd go back and look at them and say, ‘Oh that's completely wrong, I'm going to change that’. I find that's a good way of working. I thought, ‘Well, I'll work like that in the... in... in England too’, and that's how I came to doing the small sculptures like that.
Big sculptures: I work a bit like that in... now. But I... I found that other things have come in which I'd never expect. But your method really, the way that you... the way that you... that you attack a sculpture is terribly important – or a painting. I mean, you know, Sheila likes to work on one painting and stick with it. I don't; I'll work on a painting and then I'll move... on a sculpture. I'll... then I'll move away from it and give it a chance to... to cook in my mind. And... and so, for example, now I've got several sculptures in the studio and now I've decided to use a bit of colour on some of the sculptures. Well, because these latest ones – I'm talking about the latest things – are galvanised, you can't paint them. If you paint them you lose the galvanised things so they... all that work – you'd have to go back to the shot blaster and repaint and re-... re-blast them and then galvanise them again and then paint again. So it's... you mustn't make that mistake. So I've been working a little bit on models, which I've never done before. So I will always adjust according to what the thing needs but I... but I... I think the thing of steel is... it's so straightforward, you know. Now it's a little bit less straightforward, because I'm working in cast iron as well as steel, but it is pretty straightforward. Put it, and if it's not right you take it away, you know? But there are different ways of putting and there are different ways of... I mean, like him... like... like David Smith puts it... puts it... very put. Whereas mine touches. I... I know that... I notice that difference. I notice that David's more American in that way.

How do you protect steel? You make a bit of sculpture, you've got to stand it outside because you haven't got room for it indoors, so you varnish it or you paint it, oh... paint it... paint it brown. You know, that's how I started: paint it brown. Why does it have to be brown? Let's paint it a different colour, try another colour, you know. That was like that... like that. And so, you know, I kept painting them for a few years; the painting's so seductive. The colour is so seductive in the end. You start enjoying the colour; colour is one of the hits you... colour always hits you first – before form anyway – and colour was... you know, was... was taking over a bit, I thought, and then the '60s were finishing, and... and those... those wonderful ‘60s, when everything was breaking open and we were fresh and free and throwing away all our attitudes about authority and everything. We were really... it was great. Not very realistic, but great, and not very down to earth.
And then the '70s came along and we were right down to earth again, and I couldn't go on painting them bright colours, and I had this show in America and the coloured sculptures, and they went down a treat. That show went down too well; it really... it threw me. I said, ‘There must be something wrong: people are liking it too much or too many people are liking it or something. So let's make some sculpture which is a bit more horrid'. So I didn't paint them, and I made a lot of sculptures from, say, 1970 to about 2000, and what are we now? Yes, they were... they were brown; a lot of them were brown. A lot of them were just... just varnished and... and it was interesting to me, the show at the Tate. Everybody was loving those coloured sculptures; they hated them when I first made them but they were loving these coloured sculptures and they didn't like the other ones – they didn't like the more recent... They're so much less seductive; they're more... they're more contemplative in a way, I think. I might go back to colour. I mean I... I... as a matter of fact, as I told you, I'm making some sculptures which are light because they're galvanised, and putting colour on them. And I might very well... I don't mind. I'd like the idea of some coloured stuff but it isn't a... it isn't a big thing whether they're coloured or not.
[Q] Do you think it had anything to do with the fact that you were very close to painters? I mean you seem to know... you seemed to know at the time more painters of your own generation – Helen Frankenthaler, Jules Olitski, Kenneth Noland – and hang out with them more than you did sculptors. 
Much more, much more. Probably... I don't think it had anything to do with it much, but I didn't look at sculpture either. I was... you know, I had not really spent a lot of time looking at old sculpture. I spent a lot of time looking at old painting. 
[Q] Why? 
Because sculpture, old sculpture, has... it... it would tell me a... a lesson that I don't want to learn or that I know already. It would confirm things and so on. Yes, Greek sculpture is utterly marvellous, utterly wonderful, and sort of a lot of Indian sculpture is wonderful and you can see I've got a lot of sculpture in here. But I... I think I'm... I think at... at least in the early days I got more... more food from the painters because they were doing wacky things and I could... ‘How would that be if we did that in sculpture... with... sculpture wise or something?’ You know. ‘How could I...?’ ‘Is there an equivalent of that?’ I mean like... like... as I told you, working in the... in the garage, it had been the equivalent to... to being unable to see the... the painting properly, being unable to, you know, get a surprise when you put it up on the wall, and... and I would say, ‘You put your sculpture out and suddenly it's a new sculpture to you; you see it’. You see what you were... what you had been trying to do. You don't actually judge. When you... when you... when you behave you're not making a judgment; you're just behaving. Afterwards you can look back at the way you behaved and say, ‘Oh, I did make a cock up of that’, or ‘I did say what I meant to say’. But you... you know, you're not acting it. I think this is the danger with... with seeing something and responding to it, in a way. You're in the middle of making judgements. I think that Blair does that, oddly enough, do you know? I think he... he's saying something, and he's almost seeing himself saying it. I never thought of that until now; maybe I'm wrong, but... you know. But I think that you just act, and I think that you just make sculpture, and then... and it has to be that way. It has to be that way; it can't... you're not making a... a... you're not making a... a... what's the word I want?
[Q] Illustration? 
No. A sculpture which doesn't have... which doesn't have... It has to be the way it is, but it has to be the way it is not for... not because it looks better that way, but because that's the way it has to be. You see what I mean?
[Q] Yeah. So you're in a sense trying to lose control in some... in some senses? 
You're trying to lose the control, and give the control over to the sculpture, but you're not doing it without any control. That's it, that's it. You're doing it with... the sculpture has... is taking over, somehow, plus, I mean, all that to do with what you're trying to do, of course, as well.

[Q] How do you know when a sculpture's finished? 
It tells you. Larry Poons said that, you know? ‘When it says yes to me; when it says yes to me'. It tells you; it tells you. Not always. Not always.
[Q] How do you begin a sculpture? With an idea? With two bits of material? 
Both. Oh, hundreds of different ways. Probably with a sort of direction... probably with a sort of direction. I mean with two bits of material you can do it, and then you have some fun and it's lovely and you're making a nice thing that works out. But that's kind of like a given, an extra, creaming it. You're creaming it, when you're doing that. But when you... but I think you don't do that; I think you... you tend to sort of say, ‘Well, I think we need to go this way. I think we're thinking about what... we're thinking about throughness, we're thinking about looking from the one side'. Very important... how you see the sculpture is very important. How the... how the spectator, the viewer, looks. Does he look from a position and let the sculpture turn round? Does he want the sculpture to corkscrew? Does he want front, back, sides, you know? I mean, one of the most interesting things I thought about the Damien... early Damien Hirst was: you're walking through it. You could see the thing on both sides; you would walk through in the middle. That's an interesting way of... of thinking about sculpture, you know, it... it being round you... you know. Are you inside the sculpture perhaps? You know that's... that's why I'm very interested in... in environments... environmental sculpture, you know – installations and things – because it's a different sort of way of seeing sculpture, a different way of approaching it. And that, I think, informs a lot of... of how you... of how you start a sculpture.
On the other hand, you know, I... for example, that sculpture, “Halifax Steps”, started with the poles; there were the poles in the place where I made that sculpture and the poles suggested to me that we went round the poles. And then, having made that, you developed that and you say, ‘Well, maybe we don't need the poles; we'll try doing it without the poles. Maybe we'll try doing it big, you know, or maybe we'll lay it down on its side. Or maybe we'll hang it from the ceiling or maybe we'll go down and treat it as architecture and go into another... on to another level'. I mean all these are... are different ways. Or just sheer fury; anything could make you start; anything could make you start.

[Q] I wanted to go back to the beginning of the '60s and to what is now seen art historically as a group of... of younger sculptors – Phillip King, William Tucker, David Annesley, Michael Bolus, Isaac Witkin and others – who were seen to be a... a group that were inspired by, that were led by, you, who then came to prominence in that show in 1965 at the Whitechapel called "New Generation", curated by Bryan Robertson. Did it feel at the time as if you were a loosely knit group forging ahead, redefining the language of sculpture? 
Yeah, yeah. I was older. I was ten years older and I was the teacher. But absolutely, absolutely. We were starting to re-think what could sculpture be. ‘Oh', says Tony, ‘it could be anything'. I wish I'd never said that. But, yes, it was... it was... we were starting to re-think it because previously sculpture had been what Henry said it was, you know. It was... it was bronze and stone and wood, and it was the inside pushing out and so on. Now, wait a minute, why does it have to be these sort of materials? And of course there was a lot of funny things happened at that time which are sort of happening now, like people, you know, breathing and calling it sculpture, or, you know, Gilbert & George and all these things... all these things were natural outcomes of one's... of... of opening sculpture up. But I do think, yes, I think that... the first lot, we definitely were. We were definitely trying to... to see where it could go. I think it... Tim Hilton put it very well. We sort of tried to push the balloon and see where it... you know, where it was going to... where it was going to tear or break or something. How far could we go, you know? We certainly went into things like colour for that reason too.
[Q] And did you feel that you were, in a way, working almost collaboratively in the sharing of ideas, or was this a very individual... was it a group of individuals who, for various reasons, produced work that had certain similarities and certain differences? 
No, I think we were... in a way, we were a group. We didn't give a damn about what anybody else did but we did say, ‘Look, I've made a sculpture; come and see it’. And I remember, you know, going to all these people's houses, seeing what they'd done – extraordinary sculptures of Philip's which were, you know, just amazing – and what a shock they were. You didn't know why you liked it. Yes, it was good or... or seeing Bill's doing a different thing, you know. You would go, or say to them, ‘Come and see what I've done’. It was... they were the... they were our audience. They... it was tiny; it was tiny. There were six people or something and that was it. You know, with the years of Gilbert & George and company were the second or third generation. The first generation was six people or something, and I do think we broke sculpture open; I think we did... we did release it. And sculptors were stupid people in those days; they were expected to be dumb carvers, hitters, you know. They were very physical. They were... they were an extension of the traditional stone carver who did the memorials and... and then, you know, it went to people like Eric Gill and so on. But they were... that was the sort of tradition. And I think Moore changed things, and... and Epstein before him changed things a good deal and... and we, in our turn, changed... changed some more things, you know?
[Q] And then, as you say, there came the next generation, with Barry Flanagan and Bruce McLean and Richard Long and Gilbert & George and Hamish Fulton and others, who, in a way, were doing to you what you had done to Moore, which was this strong reaction against... 
Oh yes, absolutely, and they were all at St Martin's. And we didn't agree with them all. I mean a lot of them we didn't agree with, you know, and I couldn't see a lot of it. A lot of it I couldn't see, and I remember arguing with Richard Long and people. I mean, you know, yes certainly, we did. And people were trying all sorts of things, and then we would do... I mean there was a wonderful atmosphere. I mean we would do... You see, I would teach on Wednesdays and Fridays, and on Wednesday evenings we would finish at four, and then we'd start again at six 'til eight-thirty. And then late... that last evening session, we would call it an experimental session, so we would try everything. ‘Okay, at four o'clock, or four-thirty, or whatever, go into... into Soho and bring back stuff’. And when they’d bring it back: ‘Now make a sculpture with what you've brought back’. Or... a lot of it was theatrical too, you know, doing things with... with dividers like... like screens and working between the screens so you couldn't see the other person. And then one chap I remember... he... he had different lengths of... of steel and connectors, and he made a game of it, so you each had your position and you had to try and conquer the other ones. And it made a sculpture in the end. I mean all ways of making sculptures, you know – all ways of rethinking sculpture.
I always remember Barry Flanagan and saying, ‘Make a sound, make a sound’, and then Barry picks up a piece of clay and throws it at the wall and it makes a bang. He said, ‘That's my sculpture’. And I said, ‘It's not sculpture’. This is when... then we started to argue about when is it sculpture, when is it not sculpture. I mean this... all this, yes, it was very... it was very challenging and inventive. And the way of making sculpture at school was... was different insofar as when you did a figure you would go along and say, ‘That figure is not standing and so on – change it’. I left everything alone until people were ready to... to have a crit and then we'd have a criticism. And we'd all get round and talk about these things.

[Q] Did you learn as much from teaching as you imparted to your students? 
More. Because they learned... they learned most of it from the... from each other. And I learned it from having... from having to try and say what I meant. ‘What do you mean by that?’ And students always ask you; they don't let you get away with it. They make you... they make you be clearer. They make you say what you mean, so you can be woolly as hell in your mind but you can't be woolly as hell when you're teaching. Have you found that?
[Q] Yeah, yeah. I find teaching more exhausting than anything. 
It is, it is, but it's wonderfully stimulating too.
[Q] So why did you stop teaching in the end? 
Well you can't go on teaching forever. I mean I taught for about twenty years, twenty-five years, I think. If it gets like a gramophone record, shut up and... and then I did another thing which was to have the... the workshops – the Triangle Workshops – which were certainly not teaching. But they were also... they were to do with other people's work and other people, you know, responding to each other and so on. So they were a sort of replacement for teaching.
[Q] What's the replacement for teaching now? 
Sleeping. No, I don't know. I don't get enough stimulation; I don't. I mean this is... this is bad. I get... it's nice to... I mean, you know, like talking to... to John... John Gibbons and so on is... is always stimulating and interesting and he says things, you know? Going around shows with him, say, or with somebody else, or with Sheila. Sheila and I know each other too well and... and I've got a lot of young people working in the studio, but it's not easy to... not easy to... Who wants to hear what an old man has to say? That's not so interesting, and I'm not interested in what I have to say. I've always been stimulated by workshops, and going and working in a different material or with a different person, like going to the South of France and working with Hans Spinner, or going to America and working with paper things with, you know, what's his name? I forget. Ken Tyler, you know. All those things are interesting, or travelling is interesting. Travelling's interesting. But I don't get the day-to-day thing that I had in the... in the '60s, no. But you don't, you know. You don't, do you? Where do you get your kicks?
[Q] Surfing. 
You see, there you are. It's a different thing altogether, yeah. Altogether. That's your hobby. And I say now, ‘What's my hobby?’ My grandchildren are my hobby.

[Q] Does sculpture ever feel like a chore? 
Bits of it, little bits. Certainly the business side of it is a chore – a real chore. And we never paid enough attention to it; we never paid attention to merchandising our sculpture or our careers, and we thought it was beneath us. We thought... we were such pricks; we thought it was beneath us to... to... you know, to try and get a response from the public, and we would just make our sculpture and that was enough. And it was all going to be fine. The fact is, it wasn't all fine and, had we done a bit more of that, we would all be more famous and more successful or more... or sell all the sculpture we made or something. And look at this generation now. They've done that; they've done that. They've probably done it too much but they have known how to market themselves. That side is a chore.
Sometimes, when something's been fabricated, I don't enjoy fabrication; I don't want to weld, I don't to grind. And sometimes, if I've made a lot of sculpture or created a lot of sculpture, it then has to be fabricated and the studio's taken up with noise and people, and I... and I can't seem to make a new sculpture. And that is... that's kind of irritating. But, no, the making of sculpture is never a chore; it's a pleasure. I wouldn't do it if it was a chore, you know. It's a delight and you come back and you've made a good sculpture or you've made something you think is going to be all right and you...you're over the moon. You're... you're absolutely, you know, on wheels; you love it – love it. The best days. We are so lucky, Sheila and I, because Sheila painting and me sculpturing, what could be better? What can be better than that? It's a life. I mean, you know, lots of people of our age are retired or in homes or something awful, you know? No, we go down that place every day, and if we get something good done it's a... it's... it's such a reward.
[Q] I know your lack of complacency is what's made you the artist that you are. But I do find it odd to hear you say, ‘If we'd been more professional, or if we'd been more aware we could have been more successful’. I mean, in a way, how could you have been more successful? If one measures the way that an artist's career is perceived, you've shown in almost all the major museums, if not all of them, you know. You have work in all the major collections; you're an Order of Merit; you're... you know, you've been knighted. You've worked collaboratively with all sorts of people. I mean, of course, everyone could say in their lives they could... they could have done things better but, deep down, what is it about your career then, as an artist, that you really think you could have improved upon? 
Well, I'm very satisfied, but not everybody liked my show, damn it. No, there's one thing. I mean, you know, that's... that's... and actually it would have...it would have been horrible if everybody had liked it.
[Q] Well, you said in the '60s, when everyone was loving the colour sculptures you wanted to make them tougher or... 
I know, I know. Yeah, but you know, that's a sort of thing. You know, I have to think about money too, you know? And that... some artists don't have to, you know. I don't think really there's anything but, you know, you think to yourself, well, wait a minute, Rodin had twenty-seven assistants, you know? And I actually don't want twenty-seven assistants but I sometimes would like to be able to make more sculptures and, and that might mean, you know, I had six studios instead of one, or something, you know. I don't think... no, I don't really have any... any... No, I... I'm not really complaining at all. I'm really... really, in a way, saying that there was another... there was another way of... of tackling... and I think I am associating it all with everybody too, with the others... tackling our lives as sculptors. And I would think, I do think that... that we didn't all follow through and go on making good sculpture all the time, you know. It sometimes... it... well, you do have... you have troughs and hills. You can't... you can't help it but, you know... But I think that, you know, there are always adjustments that one could have made.

[Q] Talking about your early career, you know, we were talking about it in terms of the artist heroes or artists that you admired, and artists you wanted to react against. And I guess there comes a point when one has defined one's own creative voice where the person that you then have to react against is yourself. 
Oh, you do, yeah.
[Q] Is that the dominant model, then, for your career from the late '60s to the present? Is it always yourself and the rules and the work that you've created that you feel the need to... to push against? 
I think quite a lot, yes, quite a lot. Because I don't see enough sculpture which gives me trouble, which gives me... which makes me anxious and makes me feel, you know, I'm missing it... I'm missing something. People of my own age or people younger than me, I don't think I'm seeing enough challenges in there so the challenges are in my own work, yes. I'm trying to think of people who have given me a bit of a... a bit of a... rattled me a bit. I think that when Cragg first started off he rattled me a bit, you know. I think Rachel Whiteread's “House” rattled me a bit. I think the Serra Ellipses, possibly some Chillida... possibly. But I don't think they rattled me very much. No, I don't think... they're not really the way I want to go anyway.
[Q] Do you rattle yourself? Do you make some...? 
I hope so. Mm?
[Q] Yeah, you hope so. 
Hope so. Hope so. I'm so uncertain; I'm so anxious. What do you think of this, you know? I ask... I ask Sheila; I ask... I used to ask Clem; I used to ask Michael Fried, Ken... And I think that... that I was interested reading the Matisse life, you know, how Matisse... some Matisse stuff was rejected by his family. They said, ‘That's not good enough, Dad’, you know? I mean... so obviously he had that sort of anxiety. I don't think that... Picasso had never had any anxiety. Picasso knew everything he did was perfectly good, marvellous, and that is a wonderful confidence, to have that. I've never had that. I... I... is it any good, you know? I'm never sure; I'm never sure. And I want it to... to... I want it to give me a... I want... I want to be unsure; I want to be unsure. I want to be far enough out for it to be unsure.

My thinking marched closely towards Clem's in a way. In... in... when I worked I think I was fortunate enough to live here so I was well away from him. I didn't make the sculpture that Clem wanted me to make. I made my own sculpture.
[Q] Was he quite deterministic in that way? If he could have done, would he say, ‘Do... why don't you do this and this and this?’
No, no, he never said that. He never said that... absolutely the reverse in fact. His idea was to be a critic, to look at what you'd done and criticise that. He didn't want to give you any ideas. In fact you would say, ‘I have an idea, Clem, I might do...’ ‘Just do it and then show me'. Always. Never... never wanted to... to do that. Though with Michael I'm much more inclined to say, ‘What do you think about this idea? What do you think about going this way?’ And then Michael will build on that and develop it, and I think that's quite a different sort of way of going. But Clem, you know, I would make a lot of sculptures and then Clem would go down to the studio, come down... come over here. If he was over here we'd go... we'd have a session at the studio. He'd look at them and say, ‘You know, I think the... the right hand side of that's weak or, you know, what do you think about... you know, about adding a bit here?’ Or... you know, we'd talk about like that... it would be... very much a critic... very much a critic in that way.
[Q] Do you think he was over-dogmatic though? His reputation is... 
He's not dogmatic. He wasn't dogmatic. He's just incredibly clear and, oddly enough, since I saw this show of... of Paul McCarthy, which shook me, I said, ‘I must read art and... I must read "Avant Garde and Kitsch"’. And it's so relevant; it's so relevant today, written in 1939; it's so relevant. And when Clem writes about Monet, he's... he seems to be able to see the world... the world and the detail at the same time. It's very broad and it's very... it's very exact, his criticism of both.
[Q] Do you think you had a very strong desire to gain his approval? Was he often in the back of your mind when you were making things? 
No, not when I was making things, but I would love to have his approval, love it if he liked my work.
[Q] Did it disturb you if he didn't? 
Not particularly and, you know, as I read now from reading this... this book that Ian Barker did, you know, there were times when... and remembering, for example, the "Writing Pieces". Clem didn't like them and... and there was... you know, I made another sculpture, called the "Mosque" I think, remember? Clem didn't like it; I think he was wrong but he didn't like it. You know, it was... it didn't influence; it didn't interest me particularly when he liked or didn't like. What I was interested in was the detail in a way, what he... what he was not liking and so on. But I think his... his approval meant a great deal to me and I... I can't... It's very hard. I mean, Clem died nearly twenty years ago, I think, and it's very hard to recall what Clem was like but I can't help thinking now that quite a lot of sculptors and painters... I see a young sculptor... I'll say it now, though I don't like to criticise any other sculptor particularly, but Rachel Whiteread's show at Gagosian. I think Rachel Whiteread was very good; I haven't seen the stuff at the Tate but I think the stuff in Gagosian is very... nearly very good. It just... I think to myself if only she had had Clem to talk to, she would have pushed it that stage further. I feel that really interesting... what she's on to is really interesting, but she doesn't seem to be able to develop it, and Clem could somehow get you to develop it, get you to go that one stage further. That... that I think is... was his... was his... his thing. He was in the studio; it was in the studio he was good. I'm not talking about his writing, but it was in the studio he was... he was so good. But you had to do it; he didn't do it.

The Triangle had been going for a few years – about three or four years – and Peter Palumbo came in as our Chairman, and he said, ‘I like the idea of Triangle’, and he had come up and seen it. And he said, ‘But I think you should have architects’; you know, he loves architecture. And I said, ‘I think that's a good idea but how would we... how would we get them in?’, and what were they going to do, and so on? ‘Let's ask a few', he said. So we had lunch with Richard – Richard Rogers – and had lunch with Norman Foster, but they were all too busy, and he said, ‘There's this architect –’ I hadn't heard of him – Frank Gehry. ‘Well, let's meet him'. And I met him in New York, and we talked a bit about an idea I had for making a sculpture into a... a piece of architecture, and he said, ‘You do that’, but he said, ‘Let's work freely when... when I do this thing; I will come and do it with you’. And so we had him as one architect, and then there were the... this other architect, who was a local architect from Pine Plains, who built a kind of pavilion, which he put sculptures into, and we also had Peter and Alison Smithson who I knew because they did this building. And they said, ‘Well, we're sort of enablers and we will try and convert a building so that it can be used with... in conjunction with paintings and sculpture’.
I thought that the idea of working with Frank Gehry was the most inventive because it was really starting from scratch, working together. And we had a little group: Frank and his two assistants, Sheila, Jon Isherwood and me, and we worked as a team, going our sort of separate ways. We took... we enlarged pieces of parts of my sculpture; we enlarged them to about ten feet high in wood, and then we had the local builder with his forklift truck move those about, and... so they made sort of different configurations and then Frank would come in, and say, ‘Well, we need a roof on that’, and so on and so forth. And we began to get something going very good, but it was more like a village than it was an architecture. And then Frank got a job and was called away so that we... he left with his... he left his two assistants but they weren't... they were drawing it out; they weren't really seeing it in his way. So in a way he only did about half the...half the project. But we got along well and I learnt a lot from it. I think Frank is a sort of sculptor manqué, more than an architect in a way. You know, he's... he's brought... he's brought sculpture to architecture; he's brought architecture towards sculpture. Quite different from somebody like Ando and so on, who thinks, I think, very much like an architect, like... Oh, we had a discussion actually a couple of years... two or three years later, we had a discussion, a public discussion in Japan as to what was the difference between architecture and sculpture and I didn't think...
[Q] You and Tadao Ando? 
And... and Frank Gehry and Pierre Soulage and Isozaki, and I mean it was a public thing; it was at the time I had to be in Japan to get a prize, and they put this thing on and it was... it was very interesting. I think actually what Ando said, which was that he saw architecture as really a silent place for the inhabitants and he worked outwards from that. But I don't think Frank ever did; I think Frank worked inwards from a... a sculptural concept. We got along... we got along well. We didn't make anything that I thought was good enough, anywhere near, and it was destroyed afterwards anyway. But there were ideas in there which got me going, which was very good, and got me thinking about the idea of almost enclosure, almost walking in, almost having a roof on it, you know, which I found was nice for me, really... really terrific. So I made this sculpture which was called "Cathedral", and I remember saying to Karen Wilkin, ‘Come and see my sculpitecture’, and it was a joke. The words got... caught on as sculpitecture; it wasn't sculpitecture. I mean it was... it was a sculpture but it was... it was very close to architecture and bit by bit, over the years, I've kind of developed that quite a lot.

I'm very interested in the idea of a sculpture building, and... well, the idea of interior space interests me a lot, and the idea... for example, I made a sculpture with Elena Foster. Did you ever see it? It was... it was a sort of... it opened up. It was called "Open Secret". And when, I think, Gehry and... and Norman saw this and they said, ‘It's... it's an architecture, a piece... it's a building’. I'd love to make it into a building – a building that the whole roof opened, a building that... you know, it... that was like a sculpture but ended up by being a building. I'd love to do something like that. I don't want to get into the mechanical stuff at all, no, not as the real architecture stuff at all.
[Q] Did you use to build tree huts and things when you were a kid? 
Oh yeah, everybody does. You know, I built things for the children and so on but I didn't... it didn't mean anything to me though.  Except when I built the "Child's Tower"; that was like that. It was like that; it was like a... a place that you could discover your body in... in a way. And when I built a larger version for the Tate for the... the steel one and the door was too small, I made it bigger. It didn't work when it was bigger; you had to... I mean, squeezing through it made sense so I... I changed it back again. It has to be kind of... it has to be awkward. It has to be a thing that you are conscious of your body in those... those buildings. They're not buildings; they are... they are a development of sculpture. I love the idea of a sculpture which has no outside and has only inside.

It was collaborative at an early stage. We were all sitting and throwing it around, and it was great. And basically Chris's idea of a sort of guitar string stretched across the Thames was really fundamental to it, and it worked really well. But a lot of the work was done by the Foster... the Foster architecture practice because it had to be worked out... it had to be... we had to... they had to send people down there and count how many boats went through the wrong... the wrong entrance way. And so what height do we have to have? And... and what happens with the... the stones on which the certain sorts of... of worms that are eaten by the fish live? So we had to take them all out. We had to... he had to talk to committees. He did all that; he did all that. Enormous amount of work. It took three years or more and he didn't... he said it was one of the worst experiences going... having to go through thirty committees and talk to them, persuade them every time.
And that side of it was no fun but the building itself, and building and working with Norman, and working with... I find Norman very... very easy to work with; very good to work with; very open. And I found Chris Wise was... was, again, amazing – to have an engineer who could see things so sculpturally. So it was good and I thought... I learnt a lot from it. And I think the bridge is quite beautiful but I don't think I was that much responsible for it because, I mean, a bridge... for example, the landing on the south side was going to be very sculptural and they didn't want sculpture there because they wanted to be able to put big sculptures that were made by... by other artists there. And then Norman and the architect at the Tate weren't friendly with each other so it didn't go in through the Tate and out again. But, you know, there were all sorts of possible things that could have happened which didn't happen because of practical blocks. And we were going to take the idea of it right up to St Paul's where you were going to be able to turn right at St Paul's and go across the river; that's where you'd find you were in the... in the Tate Modern. But it didn't work out that way because there was, you know, a council who said they... they didn't want anything on the steps, you know. It was... it was murder; that was murder. But then I said to Norman, ‘I hate your job; I don't like what goes on, having to cope with all this in an architect's office’. And he said, ‘If you think of architecture as that ring there, that little segment is design and all the rest of it is this sort of thing’. And I realise it's very hard. You see, I've never been in that world. I've never been in the world of commissions. I've been in the world of making my own stuff and hoping for the best, and I'm so pleased I did.

[Q] Sculpture previous to the twentieth century was predominantly in the business of memorials and monuments. 
Oh, it is now. It is now. 
[Q] You think it's come full circle? 
Oh yes.
[Q] And is that an area that you're interested in getting involved in or reinvigorating? 
Not a bit, not a bit. I... I... I’m old fashioned in that I want sculpture explored; I want sculpture pure and simple. I'm... to hell with social activities and monuments and, you know, things that my brother-in-law is going to love. I... I... if he loves it, great, but that's not what it's about. What I'm trying to do is to make this sculpture better, like painting is better. I don't want to make it more available to more people.
[Q] Have you ever tried painting? 
Once.
[Q] And what happened? 
I hated it. Helen Frankenthaler came. I invited her to come; she wanted to make some sculpture, so I said, ‘Come and make some in the studio’. So she stayed for three weeks in London and made sculptures in Camden Town with me at my... well, not with me – at my studio... made some very good ones. And she said, ‘Now you've got to come and work in New York’. And I said, ‘No, I'm not going to make paintings because that's Sheila's job. I... I'm a sculptor and she's a painter’. And she said, ‘No, you've got to come, you've got to come to the studio’. And she was very generous and she said, ‘Here's my studio, here's... my assistant is now your assistant, my paints are now your paints, my canvas your canvas and your place... my place is yours’. I thought wonderful to turn it over like that. ‘So you ever come in?’ ‘Yeah, I'll come in; I'll come in occasionally'. That was very nice of her. I couldn't cope with it – just put a bit of blue on the canvas and then I want to move it so I had to cut it out and move it. I just collaged it; they weren't very good. I was just so uncomfortable, so much into illusion, not into reality. Really, I had to make it more real by cutting it out, but I mean it didn't work for me, no. I did it for two or three weeks – three or four weeks – and I think I've got them somewhere rolled up.
[Q] When you look at old master paintings, some of which have inspired directly and indirectly sculptures subsequently, do you... do you look at paintings in a three-dimensional way? Do you think you're always looking at them in terms of sculptural possibility? 
No, not in a three-dimensional way at all, not at all. And I'm not... no, I just look at them because I enjoy it; I enjoy it mostly. And then something that you see, and you say, ‘Wow, I wonder what would happen...?’ That's what you say. ‘I wonder what would happen if I did something similar in a sculpture, so that I had that blank thing, and I put those things on it in that way? I mean it's... I don't know what, but I wonder what would happen if...?’ That's how I see it; it's not to make any sort of direct translation at all, and I've been very foolish in admitting, which I did... have done... that, you know, say, ‘Oh, I was looking...’ when I saw this Rembrandt, I think I should have kept my mouth shut and not told anybody, because people now talk about sort of source sculpture. ‘What are you looking at now?’ ‘What's making you make?’ You know? ‘What's starting you off?’ Just every... every artist that I know looks at old art and somewhere along the line what they make has had a... an echo or that sort of thing. The start was perhaps something that they saw years ago in some painting or print by Raphael or something. And they don't... they don't admit to it, you know. Usually it's just detected by the critics. I've been stupid and sort of said, ‘Well, this is where it came from’, or something. I don't think it came from that, but sometimes... sometimes it did, but very often not.
[Q] So do you think that people read those sculptures over literally if they know that you've looked at Rembrandt's "Descent from the Cross"? 
Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely. Except that I think that Rubens and Rembrandt, "Descent from the Cross", are pretty literal; they are particularly literal and they came because I was using loose curved parts of steel and enclosing them with a geometric shape, holding them with a geometric shape. And then the idea came that I should put the geometric stuff inside the picture, inside the sculpture. That was for the cross so that, you know... and I think that seeing that, one thought almost, ‘Well that is... that is a way that you could get the geometry inside instead of on the outside.’ And I looked at these... Rubens was first and saw that that was exactly what he was doing in the painting, and then he was also having these extraordinary... this sheet that was held by the man's teeth... and he holds it with the Christ in the bottom. So we get this tremendous sweep in it, you know, pretty literal stuff, that. And I remember you writing about it and saying it was too literal; I should be ashamed of myself for doing that sort of thing.
[Q] I've now come full circle. I think they're amazing sculptures now. But I think it's interesting that you choose something as ambitious as that painting, which is one of the most staggering paintings in the history of art. Much, much safer to have gone for something less well-known. But I love the fact that one is taken away; it's such a physical painting and to translate it into something as physical as a sculpture seems to me an interesting thing to do now. 
I don't think it really works, that type of thing, but it's a try and it's a try, you know... it's got a lot of pulls and pushes and stuff in it like that; I felt I wanted to see if I could get it in a sculpture.

[Q] It wasn't until the mid '80s when you were, you know, a mature artist, a mature man, that you first went to Greece. Why did it take so long for you to get to Greece? 
Because I could see the terrible effect that it had on all the old guys and the Flaxmans and people it had... it was awful... it was awful – all those awful figures with plumes and things. And they... they... you know. Is it as bad as that, Greek art? And I knew it was going to have a big effect on me, and I thought: don't look at that; don't look at something which is so obviously going to... going to be... going to have an influence on your work that much. And I think, by the '80s, I felt I could handle it; I could get it. And it was wonderful; it was a totally wonderful trip that first trip, because we started off, apart from, you know, we landed at Athens, and we took the car and went straight down to Nafplion. And on the way we passed this amazing lump, bits of stone stuck about, which was a... which was a palace, and it was so crude.

And then, after that, to Olympia. And then one day we came to a little road into the tombs... to the tombs, and there was a sort of... there were holes in the ground and a bit of corrugated iron over them. We said, ‘What's that big hole?’ ‘That's where the horses were buried.’ ‘And what was found here?’ ‘Well, when you go to Athens, you go to the museum; you'll see the gold that comes out of here.’ I mean, it was so real, it was so real, and it's never been real like that, these things in museums. They had never been real. And then one time, much later, when I went to Naxos and went up into the hills and there was this orchard with a great big Kouros, broken leg... with a broken leg, about fourteen feet, enormous one. And it was lying on the ground where it had fallen, where it had… where it had fallen and broken its leg. I mean obviously they were getting the damn thing down the hill and somebody said, ‘Steady, steady, watch it!’ You know. And it had gone; it had fallen and broken its leg and they'd left it there. It was so real, that, and, had it been taken up and put in a museum, it would have become precious in some way. And Greece was not precious; it was... you saw it going from that very first beginning of those rough old stones which weren't carved at all, through the archaic and through to the classical, and even beyond the classical into the more decadent stuff. You saw the history of it, very short history. It came to life, it came to life. Unbelievable sculpture; marvellous.
[Q] And what impact did that have on the way that you worked? 
It blew my mind and it made me, first of all, obviously try and do some sort of Greek things like the... the "After Olympia", the sculpture which, you know... and the "Rape of the Sabines" and... and these sort of metope things. It made... it had an obvious effect on my work but I think it also slowed it down and made it more classical, made it more... less romantic and more sort of... more digested, perhaps, which is, in the end, a good way – not the only way, but a good way to go. It was a great experience and I mean I'm... you know, I love seeing these things. I love going to Greece and I love the Greek museums; the little museums in some of the places are marvellous – there are some marvellous things. There isn't an awful lot; there's not an awful lot of the art about, but it's... it’s first rate and its colour, its lightness and... and the light of Greece and so on, it all... it all fits, and in a way, you know, the destruction of it is seen in the Royal Academy corridors down below where it's all casts, and it's painted brown and so on. It's... it’s like the destruction of... of the real thing which is so great.

No, I like going to other places but I don't think I'd go there for the art. I go there for... because something comes up and somebody says, ‘Oh, there's a great guy there for clay’, or ‘Would you like to come here because they've got such and such sort of material’, or something, you know, interesting. Or there's a person there couldn't make it; and something is interesting like that and then you find it. Then you find some... you find a new thing; you find a new way. And I think, of course, always in the end my studio is the centre for me and the place where it's really happening. I'd like to travel more but I... the right place hasn't come along.
But I mean there's an idea now: would I like to go to Medicine Hat? I love Medicine Hat. Have you ever been? Well, it really is the prairie and it's in Canada and it's a few hundred miles south of... of Edmonton – Calgary really. And it's flat, except there are holes in it, so it's been... it’s been, I think, flattened by glaciers and things. It's a bit like Denmark so, instead of there being hills, there's flatness and then holes where the valleys are. So it's wonderful scenery, and the people are so... the people are marvellous. They're... they’re like at the beginning, you know? I was staying with this pair and she was a brilliant paediatrician and... what did he do? I'm not sure that he wasn't a doctor too. But he was a Cree Indian but he had... he had a herd and he would send that herd out to the hills. ‘What do you do when... when one of the animals gets lost?’ He said, ‘I get on my horse’. I thought he was being funny. He really goes on his horse and he goes and gets it. It was very, you know... I was there with... Do you know –? Did you ever meet Clay... Clay Ellis? Well, Clay Ellis was a son of a bull rider, and we got there and Clay said, ‘Where shall we eat dinner?’ I said, ‘Well, let's eat in a real Western place’. So we go to this place and he shows me the... the menu and there's a picture of a cowgirl on the front. He said, ‘That's my aunt’. And you know we... it was like that; it was very like, you know... I think Durango, which I'd been to before, was... was a sort of film version of the Wild West, but this was a real version of the Wild West. And I would love to go and work in... in Medicine Hat, but I can't see what to work in because they used to make clay... clay pipes... clay big pipes for... for stuff to go... you know, for drains and things, and I can't see... I can't see anything working. It doesn't seem the right thing for me, that, at all, those big round circles. If I could find the right thing I'd love to go and work there but it's the sort of place I'd love to go to. And I could have a good time with Clay and people; it would be great.

The things that have come up so far haven't... just lately, have not been right for me, you know: the possibility of working in glass. But I can't see that I could make sculpture in glass that wasn't just decoration. I don't want to do that. Glass is so decorative, such a difficult material to... to make it work, you know.
[Q] What about your return to clay though? Tell me about that. 
Oh, you mean the clay I worked with... with Hans Spinner in the South of France?
[Q] Yes.
Well, that's... that's ceramic clay and Hans is very physical, and so it's very solid and we can push things in... push our fingers in and... and do very... very fat things there, which is a completely different way of working in clay from the way that I worked at it before with Margie Hughto in Syracuse or with Paul Chaleff in Pine Plains. Paul was a potter so I tended to make pots and pot figures – pot ladies I call them. With Margie, she would... she knew how to flap the clay, which I'd never seen done before. She would, you know... it comes out like a flat pancake. Hans has done alot of grog which is cast... which is fired clay in small little globules. And he's got that inside the clay, sixty per cent of it, so it's very solid and he is able to cast... to fire things that are very, very solid. So it comes out sort of fat and strong, his stuff, and it suits me very well.
[Q] And how did you start to work with him? How did that come about? 
Well, it's only that... that, you know, I talked to... to Tàpies, and I particularly talked to Chillida about it and Chillida said, ‘You've got to go and work with Hans, you'll really enjoy it. You'll have a good time if you work with Hans. And Hans is very nice; he's very nice, very jolly – a fun guy who is really able to do whatever you want and, and he suggests things too. It's good to work with him.’ I went there and... and I said, ‘I'll stay in town’. They said, ‘No, no, no, you've got to stay here’. So, okay, we had dinner; I said, ‘Okay, I'll stay here’. They were so nice. And then, next day, he said to me, ‘Oh, what do you want to do, Tony?’ I said, ‘I don't know, you start’. Nobody's ever said that to me before. And then he picked up a bit of clay and threw it down. I knew now where I was going; I could see... I could see how he worked, the sort of way he interacted with the clay, and very physical. A big weight of clay didn't bother him; he liked it. You know you could... he could work with it big like that. I didn't say that actually to Paul Chaleff but, had I said it to Paul Chaleff, you know, he would have turned something on the wheel. It's a different approach. Had I said it to Margie she would probably have taken a piece and... and rolled it out with a... with a rolling pin, you know. You learn something from the way they start, from the way they... there they... This whole thing of sculpture is not some genius doing the thing himself; it's absolute nonsense, that. It's... it's watching; it's being a... being a radio, having your antennae out, seeing what other people do, seeing what the... the material's different, seeing what the place is different, seeing the approach is different.

[Q] Okay, so he's chucked this clay on the floor and you suddenly think, right, I know what I'm going to do with it. So... so what do you do with it? What happened? 
Well, I stuck some things in it and it started to become like a... a bit like a face and no, it's not... it seems a bit obvious, that. So let's try a lot of curved things, let's throw it on to something curved now, or let's do this or let's do that. And at the end of it I didn't know what I'd done, I really didn't know what I'd done. But I liked some and the ones I didn't like, I destroyed and started again. And I don't know what I'd done. I said to Hans... I said, ‘Fire them and send them to England’. And when I sent them to England, they came to England and Pat put them all out, when I wasn't there, on the floor of the studio in their boxes, and we opened them up. I said, ‘Don't touch them; don't do anything, just open them’. And they were the "Trojan War". They were the "Trojan War". They said to me, ‘I – we are the "Trojan War"’. They were the... they were the heroes and they were the gods. The gods needed little... little steel things so that they could run and walk, and spears and things; and the heroes usually needed some... some sort of wooden sleepers I was using. They made the "Trojan War", they made it for me. They really... that was a case where they told me. I had no intention of making figurative sculptures or anything else. It came about; that came about.
And that was the only time I've ever done that. The other times I've tended to... to come with an idea, so where I've made the... I made the "Last Judgement", I had an idea. I didn't have much of an idea, but I had an idea, and then when I came, they came back to England I started putting on... I had an old wardrobe, metal wardrobe, which was... which was bust – it wasn't square, it wasn't rectangular, it had a sort of break in it – and I worked with that with the first one. And I started to make... put them into those sort of cubicles. So that was really how they came about, and I think that when I made... I made some called "The Barbarians" and I think I was far... in that case, too... I was too much in control, so I tried to make them fit it a bit. Difficult to get it right but I think that it never happened to me before – that something forced itself on me, and I think... then I started reading at the time of the "Trojan War", I started reading the "Iliad", you know, again in a wonderful translation. And I realised how brutal they were and I realised it's a very... it's a very... it's a strong and it's a very tough story; they're very tough people, those heroes; they're not nice. They're sort of human... bad things as well as good things. And the gods too have got some bad stuff in them too.
[Q] But I love the idea of just playing with clay and then suddenly these characters emerge. 
It doesn't often happen though.
[Q] Quite a... almost romantic idea. 
Yes, yes, it was almost. That was very strange, it was, the first time. I didn't know what I was doing. But, you know, it's a funny thing. That clay is funny stuff. You can't mess with it; you take it and you do something with it. Now leave it alone. You can't go and say, ‘It needs this, I must... I'll do that to it’. Just do it and leave it. If it doesn't work, you do it, you leave it and you break it up and start again. You push it together and start again; you start again. But if you start trying to improve clay it loses all its life, so you can't do that.

I... I didn't know what to call it. I didn't call it "The Last Judgement"; I just called it a... a "Group of Sculptures". And then I gave it a working title of "The Last Judgement", and then the guy, Worth, came to the studio and loved it and said, ‘It's marvellous’, and, ‘What's it called?’ And I said, ‘I don't know; I want to call it "The Last Judgement"; I'm calling it "The Last Judgement" for now’. He said, ‘Then you have to call it "The Last Judgement", you have to call it "The Last Judgement"’. So I called it "The Last Judgement". But it is "The Last Judgement" really, isn't it, in a way?
[Q] Yeah, it is. And you made that when you were in your seventies. Is that something that you think is only a subject that you could wrestle with, you know, in your... in your mature years? I mean is it a subject that... that deals with mortality in the way that younger artists don't necessarily come to terms with or confront? 
I have no idea. I've no idea and I don't find it; looking back, which I don't like to do, I have my doubts about that sort of sculpture. It's so romantic; I have my doubts about that sort of sculpture. I'm not sure... I'm not really happier. This shouldn't be on the tape but let's leave it. I mean I think I am really an abstract artist but why shouldn't you do these things? And I think you get your... in your seventies you have the freedom to do that, to feel that and I feel, you know, it's like taking... it's like... it's like Goya's prints as opposed to Goya's paintings. So it's a sort of subsidiary thing, I think, sort of social and narrative and all these things. So I don't want to do much of it. I like to do it sometimes but I don't want to do much of it. I would rather make abstract sculpture in the end.
[Q] It was also perceived... and I think you alluded to conflict, both generalised conflict and also, you know, the Bosnian conflict. So that was a trigger too, or did the work suddenly suggest that to you? 
We were bombarded with... with Bosnian... Bosnian thing and, you know, it was... it was just like we’re bombarded with Iraq now. We're bombarded with it; it's in the... in our faces, these awful things that are happening, and you can't go through life nowadays without it hitting you in some way, can you? I mean, you know, Iraq, people being killed in Iraq, soldiers, Iraqis, everything, the whole damn time. And, you know, you can't just ignore it; it's... it’s more than that. But it's a subject for sculpture; it's a subject for sculpture. In a way it's a... it's a step back to get into a subject for sculpture because I think that, you know, the subject for sculpture is sculpture... that's how I see it. And that has almost stopped happening now, especially with these monuments and things. But, you know, our time we were trying to... we were focusing on sculpture as... as a... as a discipline, as a practice, and ‘Let's try and do everything we can to build this up afresh’. It wasn't for telling stories, you know. It wasn't for using; it was for itself. So it's fine to do it a bit but I don't think I want to... I don't think I want to make a life of it.

[Q] Has sculpture ever felt futile? You know, when you see this kind of tragedy, or when you feel the most intense happiness or joy in the world, does sculpture ever feel an activity that never... can never quite capture or realise any of that? 
No, it's my life. For me, it's my life. But for the rest of the world, like everybody, of course it's futile. It's a little pisser, you know. It could be football; it could be anything. It's the activity that I've invested my life in, and it's a tiny, tiny, tiny bit and that bothers me sometimes. That bothers me insofar as, yes, I think we can try and make it as good as we can. I'm... I have read so many rotten books lately that I've decided to... to pick up "War and Peace", and I'm half way through it. And I've read it two or three times and it's enormous, the canvas is giant; it's wonderful. You can't think of it as... as a novel; you can't think of it like you think of a Turgenev or a Jane Austen novel. And they are marvellous too, but they are like jewels, the little jewels, whereas "War and Peace" is... is a world; it's a world. Maybe the true... the same thing is probably true of the Sistine ceiling and so on. So you do think to yourself,  yes, sculpture that I've sort of engaged myself with is a very small activity, and perhaps there is... it is possible to invest in a bigger activity which... which would be sculpture but... if one was that sort of person or something.

[Q] You say that fundamentally you feel an abstract artist. The connections between abstraction and music are often made by individuals. Do you think there is a musical quality to the work that you do? Or has there been a musical quality in anyway? Or do you see parallels between your work and music? 
Yes, I like to play music. I do see some parallels a bit, and I think I'm interested in rhyme and rhythm, and sometimes in the bath I say completely meaningless things. Because the words don't mean anything, but the words have got a rhyme to them; they've got a rhythm to them, and I realise that I'm not really into meaning half as much as I am into rhythm.
[Q] So you're saying that actually, sometimes the way in which you use language in the bath, which is a mind-boggling thing – there are parallels between that and the way that you make sculpture: that just words like forms are put together. 
I don’t know... I don't know but I do notice that, you know, I mean when they both come together, like in Shakespeare's sonnets, like in some... some poetry has... has got these wonderful rhythms and sort of rollingness about them. And yet the words also make total sense and they go with it perfectly. That is... that is perfection; when that happens there's perfection. But I think I would put the rhythm and stuff before I would the meaning, which means that I can sort of join W.S. Gilbert, you know, because the meaning's not very deep or very important but the rhythm's fun.
[Q] Do you have music on when you're working sometimes? 
Sometimes, sometimes. But less than I used to. More people in the studio, and when I'm up here alone I will do it but, you know, less.
[Q] Is there a... a rhythm to the way that you work? Do you have to force yourself into routines to get work done or is there a natural impulse to what you do? 
I've never had to force myself to get into the studio; it was always easy. I have to force myself to go and answer my letters or anything like that but I... not to get into the studio, no. And I think that's one of the joys of being older, that, you know... you know your rhythm. You know that... you know the... when you work best and you know what not to do sometimes, you know. So you can sort it out a bit, you know. ‘I think that's not the right one to be working on now, it doesn't go with me now but, you know, it might tomorrow or something.’ You know, I think all that is something that you kind of... you know... you know yourself well enough to know that, and that's very helpful. I think in the past probably one did... you know, certainly when I was working here in this one car garage, you'd have to go in and confront the same sculpture day after day, you know, and the same problems and the same mistakes and the same difficulties. I can... I can swap from one sculpture to another now and I can... and even plan my week a bit, a little. Then it helps; it helps to make it all more natural.

You've got to get your work out because it's so depressing not to. It's so depressing: make a sculpture, send it to the store and you don't see it again for ten years. It's very depressing, that, and you don't feel that you... you've done only half the story. So, the other half of the story is for people to see it.
[Q] OK, but what about you make a work, someone buys it, it goes to their private house? It's the same thing as it going to a store, isn't it? Doesn't...? 
Yes, very much, very much and... and disappointing in a way. I would like to have it shown properly first so, in a way, you know, the... most shows which are chronological – they're not... unless they’re retrospectives, you know. It's like the last bit of making the stuff so you make the stuff, you write it in your book and you write the... the date of it and the size of it and the... the paint you used or whatever. And you have a photograph taken of it. And then the last of those equally pedestrian things usually is having a show of it. Then I think... then it can go its own merry way, but I don't think... it's not to me as real and as important as looking at it and saying it's right, you know, that's it.
[Q] Do you learn from exhibitions? Do you look at work with a distance and think, ‘Oh yeah, I see what I did there and I know...? 
Sometimes but not much... not much. I learn a little bit from retrospective... and restrospect and saying, ‘Yes, well, you know, there was something fresh about those colour sculptures that was interesting’, you know. And... but I don't think you learn much from the past, no.

[Q] Do you think there are certain works that you have made that have been much more significant than others, that they become staging posts, and they become triggers, and they become the beginning of something else? 
Yes, yes, partly when people tell you so, but also partly when, you know, those things, by chance, have happened and you're pleased, and that's... that's... that was an important... that was an important move you made there. And I think I'm very interested in the move, so I've often found, when I've been to studios of American painting friends, that the ones I've picked up on and got excited about are the... often failures, but wacky things. I'm really interested in where they've gone wacky and I'm not terribly interested in when they've... when they've made a cream...a creamy painting, like perfect, yes, it's absolutely right. Because it's almost as if that came as like a... cream is right; it's like the top of the thing is the splendid achievement. I don't think I want the achievement so much as the struggle, and I find, when I'm looking at... at things, I very often find myself very interested... for example, in Mondrian's work before he hit it – before he hit these black and lines with the colours in them – very interested in the pier and ocean ones, and even the ones before that where he's tried to do an abstract... he's tried to abstract a still life. And the same with Picasso: very often interested before it is achieved, which in the process of achievement, because that's got all sorts of hints about how you might start thinking yourself about trying to achieve something.
[Q] So give me some examples, then, of works that seem to have this significance for you. 
Well I was talking about Picasso; I was thinking of... there... you know, there's somewhere he did... where he had a sort of pear that was cut. There was a... and a picture and some things like that, you know. Quite early... they were early. They were just... just pre-cubist work.
[Q] But what about your work? 
Oh, oh mine. Oh, mine? Oh, mine. Oh, no, I don't know. I don't think like that with mine.
[Q] But you said earlier that you think there were – are – some works that are more significant than others. 
Oh, they're not the... No, the significant, no, no, I don't know where. I'm talking about the... the significant ones are much more likely to have achieved it, in a way, because you can go on from there, you know. I suppose with works like "Midday", "Prairie". And yet "Prairie" is really quite accomplished... like a finished thing. It is... it is an achievement. It's not... it's not a... it's not a struggling attempt to get somewhere; the thing works out quite well. No, I thought you meant what I looked at, and I'm looking... the stuff I look at, I'm looking at it as a way to kind of start thinking, and I think what I'm saying with myself is, you know, like it isn't... when I look at the... at the key works they're nothing to do with... with struggle they're to do with getting somewhere, I think.

[Q] Do you feel, in any meaningful way, part of a British art history? 
No. No, no, no, absolutely not. I'm not interested in Britain as... in that respect. I'm interested in sculpture. I do belong to... you know, to a time that... that... and I was very comfortable when I went into the show of the '60s work at the Tate, even though it was, I thought, not truly what the '60s were about. But it... I was comfortable with all that work. I suppose I am part of that... that world, but I don't feel that matters. That... that was all... that's all in the past in a way. And I suppose I'd be interested certainly in... in the place in which I... in which I stand in terms of the history of sculpture in this country, yes. I mean I think there should be a big show – and I've suggested, you know, at Burlington Gardens – of British sculpture. But I would really hope that it's properly done and it's... it's fairly done, you know, and... and that would show sculpture from Epstein right up to... to the most modern things now that are being done. And I think I would... would take a part in it. I never think about these things, really.

[Q] Do you feel that as an artist with a public profile who has a position now within the establishment when... you're knighted, your Order of Merit – do you think there are certain responsibilities that go with that territory? Do you feel that's sometimes overbearing, that you have to be a role model, a figure of the establishment? 
I don't think I even behave like a role model. No, Tim, I don't think any of that but I think... I think it's... as a human being and a sculptor, it... it behoves me to try and make good sculpture. That's all, that's all. Give me an example of what you're talking about.
[Q] Well, you have to spend a lot of time as trustee, for example. You have done of museums or institutions. You have to give... make public appearances. You have to give interviews, you have to give a lot of your time in... in that kind of respect, and it seems to me that the more of that you do, the more of that... the more of that, more of your time is taken away from the studio. Now, I wonder whether you resent that or whether that's just part of the territory. As you become more senior, more famous, more celebrated, there are certain things that one has to do. But it was more of that that I was getting at than actually a way of behaving, but obviously a way of behaving is –
When you're over eighty they don't want you anymore and it's lovely; it's lovely. Now I can get on with my own work. Why am I doing this? Well, because she was persuasive and I thought, is it worth doing?’ I thought, well, this is an opportunity to do another one with you, which is fun and, and you're asking me... asking me questions I have to think about. But I don't feel it's a responsibility at all, not at all. And I think, you know, the stage of that is a stage, you know, that younger sculptors are at now, not me...not me, you know. I'm quite happy on the shelf.
[Q] On the shelf! 
It's true; you'd be surprised. How much of what I can say really has any resonance for students. It's... it's a different world that I belong to, and what could I say that could really catch them? Very, very little. Very, very little.
[Q] Do you think that's inevitable though? Do you think that your own teachers when you were at the Academy had no... very few of them had a sense of connectiveness with you? Is it a generational thing or is it just the way the world has changed? 
Well, I wonder about that. I mean I think, in fact, the world has enormously changed in the last ten, fifteen years. It's been a... a terrific leap of change recently. Old Richard Garbe, who used to teach... I don't know how old he was. I thought he was incredibly old; he might have been sixty. He might have been very old, he might have been eighty – I have no idea. He used to work in ivory and he used to chat about his experiences and stuff and I said to myself, ‘I'm like that sometimes now’. It's... it is totally different and I said one time... I mean I have young people working for me now and I like them very much, but it is a very different language. I said to one of them... I was talking about idealism and I said, ‘I don't think that the...that the student of today is... has the same idealism as we had’. I said, ‘Are you idealistic?’ So he said, ‘Well, yes, you've got to have your dreams, haven't you?’ And I said, ‘What are your dreams?’ And he said, ‘Well, I'd like to travel and I'd like to, you know, have a good life’. And... and when I went away afterwards, I thought, ‘He doesn't know what I mean by idealistic; he doesn't know what I'm talking about because that's... if I had said that when I was teaching, you know, I would have heard a lot of stuff about doing good in the world, about helping the poor, about all sorts of things’. That isn't in his world and I do think there's a big difference, you know? I'm kind of sorry but I... but it... but life's got to go on; it's got to change. A lot of things are going to change and the angle you come from is going to change. That's all right. I don't happen to think this is a particularly good time to live, actually, but then I don't think the Roman Empire was a particularly good time to live after Greece. And I think I belong to... to a purer generation. I mean I think we were not about applied; we were about the pure science or the pure art. We were talking about the subject, you know, and I always thought, in a way, that science, knowledge should be about the subject and... but it isn't now; it's about... it's about how it applies to human beings, and that's quite important too, but it's different; it is really different.
[Q] Did you actually believe, at any time in your working life, that art could change the world or make a significant difference? 
No, I don't think I thought any... it would be any different from what it is now. But art does have an important part to play in... in enriching people's lives and that's... that's quite a big thing. I don't think it changes the world, I don't think it changes... it doesn't make people good, but I think it does have a very important part to play in... in sort of... well, like... it's like eating good food. That has an important part to play, you know? It's... it's food for the soul.

Well, I'm so delighted that sculpture has become, you know, a real force in the artistic life of all of us and that is really... not only in this country but particularly in this country. It... it's something I never, for a moment, believed, because it was the poor relation always when I was young. And that's not true anymore.
[Q] Who was it who said that sculpture was something you tripped over when you stepped back to get a better view of a painting? 
Yeah, exactly, exactly, exactly. Barnett Newman or Ad Reinhardt. It's exactly true, yeah. So that is... yes, that is a big difference. And I think the ambition is enormous and I... I welcome that very much. The art... the art, I think, is... is very confused, very confused. I mean I think, in a way, that the sculpture that's being made in Spain is more interesting probably as sculpture than the sculpture that's being made here. But when you see the show at the Hayward or when you see this chap, Paul McCarthy, you know, I think... I think they are staggered by the world around them. The world around them is... is blasting them; it blasts us all. I mean the amount of information, the amount of imagery, the stuff on the television, the stuff everywhere – it's... it's coming at one like an avalanche, and I don't think they quite know how to cope it and what to do with it. But it's really impressive the way they're trying. I think they're... they're not giving themselves the leisure to make great art, or to see great art, but they are trying to cope with it. They're trying to do something with it and... and that impresses me; that impresses me a lot. What do you think about that?
[Q] I think it's very interesting, and I think that... I think we lived... I think we live in a very fragmented, pluralistic age and we get that... the art that reflects that. I think it's a very confused and knowing and intensive world of mass media, and I think the art reflects... reflects that. There's no one way now; there's no one dominant form. 
When you think how quiet it was in the... you know, in the Clinton years, something which... I mean, you know, like it was very... it was... somehow it seemed to be much more set. It's not set at all now. How do you cope with that in art? I don't know, I don't know. And I think, don't think these guys know. But, by God, they're trying, you know.

[Q] You said that in the beginning of the 1960s that... you described sculpture as a language; that was the metaphor that was... that was flying around, particularly at St Martin's, and you talked about it expanding the language. Do you think that you...? Two questions: one, do you think you're still, broadly speaking, speaking the same language? And secondly, do you think as you were in the ‘60s...
Yes.
[Q] And the second question is: do you think that a lot of the younger artists who work across the board in terms of... are they, broadly speaking, speaking the same language in a slightly different way in the way that the young speak the language of their parents but with different emphasis and different phrasing and different words? Or is it a totally different language? 
I think I am still speaking the old language and... and it would be impossible not to. I mean it's funny to think of Degas making a sculpture in 1917 or making paintings in 1917 at the same time as cubism. It's impossible to think of Monet at the same time as surrealism. Surrealism and Monet have nothing to do with each other at all.
[Q] But they were in the same world.
They were just about in the same world. And so I mean I think I have to keep going my own way and not worry too much. And I often think about this problem about whether they're just making the different thing, like I was making it for Henry Moore or like... you know, like always parents and children, you know, are at odds with each other because there's talking... they're talking the same language in a different way. Is it that or is it a completely different thing? And I'm inclined to think it's a completely different thing but that could be because I'm older now; it could be because I'm a parent now. I would think it's a completely different thing but whereas... whereas, you know... it's so easy to catch on to Rachel Whiteread because she is not... she is speaking the old language in a different way. You can't say that about Sarah Lucas; you can't say that about Paul McCarthy; you can't say that about...about Damien Hirst. I think they're speaking new languages. Now, what's your answer to that?
[Q] I think Damien Hirst is a painter at heart; I think that's what really... he said he wants... that's what he wants... he sees himself most strongly as. And I think that the subjects he deals with are the old subjects of mortality and death and life cycle. I think Sarah Lucas has a closer relationship to the art of the '80s, to people like Cragg and Woodrow, than maybe is often acknowledged. But her gender's very key in that and she makes a good play of it. I think that Rachel – you're absolutely right – is a kind of pre-modernist history. It goes back to Egyptian art and the art of casting. I... I think the parallel is closer to: you will hear your grandchildren speak and they will be speaking the English that you understand but, at the same time, they will have phrases and nuances that you have no idea what they're talking about. 
Well, that's what you hope for. That's what you hope will happen but that is like... you know, that is like the normal cycle. The normal cycle is to reject your parents and accept your grandparents. But that's the normal cycle. I think we have come through a very big change. It's interesting to look at these new people and to be hit in the solar plexus and then to think, is it any good? It's not up to me to judge; I can't judge it, I can't judge it. That's the thing is I can't judge it. So stay out of it. Look at it and enjoy it and... and be... and be open to it, but don't think it's going to do anything for your work; it probably isn't.

[Q] How important have curators been in your career? Critics and, more obvious... they write on a bigger platform. In the last two or three decades curators have become more important. But have you had important curator champions that have made a big difference to the way your work has been seen? 
Well, yes. I mean I think insofar as people who put on good shows, people who make their selections. Paul Moorhouse doing the Tate Show, people like Michael Fried occasionally. But I mean, it doesn't strike me as terribly important but it... it's important from a... a career point of view that you have good people paying attention to your work and choosing and looking after it, and so on. 
[Q] What about your first important show at the Whitechapel in '63? 
That was not curated; I just put in my stuff.
[Q] So Bryan Robertson, this legendary director of the Whitechapel, kind of gave your free rein almost? 
Pretty well, pretty well. He did come in contact with it; he did grasp it quite well. It surprised me he could... I remember him saying to somebody, who said, ‘I can't, I don't like that sculpture, I can't get it’. He said, ‘You're not looking at it right’. I... that impressed me. That... that made me realise that he was... he was trying to see it in a new way, which was good. And I think this is part of what I was talking about, the last question, you know, about seeing it right, seeing it... You have to have a different pair of glasses to see the new art now. I don't think that whole thing, curating and... it's not in the studio, and I'm interested in the studio. I'm interested in criticisms; I'm not particularly interested in what people write afterwards. Very seldom does it touch me enough to... to really make me rethink. Your thing in "The Listener" did, but I mean occasionally... and something that Richard Cork wrote one time did, and something... some things people have said about shows have interested me enough to shake me, but, by and large, it's in the studio. It's in the studio; that's when it's... your criticism is counting – when somebody comes into your studio and you say, ‘What do you think?’ and you just see their face or you... or they... or they say, ‘Have you tried doing that instead or, you know, maybe you could make a step there or something’. I mean this sort of thing is... is terrific; it's a real help because you try it, and I mean I always say to Pat, who is not a sculptor but he's been with me for donkey's years, ‘What do you think, Pat?’ And he's intelligent and he says, ‘Um... what is it, wait, I saw you looking at it and doing that; now, what were you looking at? What were you looking at? What is it that's bothering you?’ And then he will say, ‘Have you thought of doing that?’ And I said, ‘No, let's try it’. I will say, ‘Let's try it’. Not always. I mean, if it's totally against the meaning of the sculpture, no, but by and large it's not against the meaning because he's in there; he's in there making them with me. He knows what I'm trying to get at, so when he says, ‘Let's do this, or should we do this, or should you do this’, then I say, ‘It's worth a try; let's try it’. And if it's wrong we don't. And that's very like working with Hans Spinner, say, who will also say... I said, ‘Well, can you do this, can you do that?’ He'd say, ‘Yes, and let's’. You know? And you'd go and get a... a block of wood and hit it in some ways, and I would never have thought of doing that, you know? So in a way these people are bringing a new expertise – a new technical expertise or a new aesthetic expertise or something – to your work. We have to try it; we have to have a go to see if it works.

[Q] People in the kind of career that your father wanted you to go into reached the end of their working life. Sometimes they aimed for retirement a decade or two beforehand. Have you ever considered stopping doing it? 
No, but I have said, ‘Oh God, we ought to be stopped’. We ought... we oughtn't to be doing this every day. We ought to be, you know... what, being bored everyday, you know? Going in the garden everyday and pulling up a couple of weeds, and watching television for the rest of the day? No, thank you, no, no... not seriously, not seriously. I would like to... to do this until they carry me out of the studio, you know, in a box... in a metal box. No, I would like to... to keep going because it's such fun; it's a life... it's a life, and I'm quite sorry for people who do retire very early. They're retiring and what are they doing with it? I mean... but then perhaps it wasn't... not a good thing that they were into at the beginning. It was not a... an absorbing enough thing. I mean you can't be absorbed enough with... with sweeping the streets, that's a... that's a job one would like to be retired from, I think. There are a lot of jobs that one would like to be retired from, I should think. It's an awful thing though. You've only got one life to have to do something like that and... and boredom is a very... is a very bad thing. And I mean... and I think a lot of the people, the out of work people, have a really rough time because of boredom as well as... as discomfort and poverty and... and lack of food and so on. But I think... and can you think of anything more awful than sort of standing in a museum, you know, being a... being a sort of a guard in some room you don't like the work? And just standing there, and it doesn't matter whether you're not there today or tomorrow because somebody else will do it. It's... it's no good, that. You... you've got to have a better life than that, I think.
[Q] Do you think art is your entire life? I mean you're married to a painter so when you come back from the studio/office and Sheila comes back from the studio/office, you presumably discuss with each other what you've been doing that day. So it's art, art and more art. 
It's an awful lot of art. It's a lot of art. And travel and the grandchildren and the world and the television or something, you know. There are other things but, you know, yes, I think art is our main thing, and your life does shrink a lot as you get older because you don't have the physical energy to do as much as you used to have. I didn't know why they were such layabouts, old people. They need a lot of sleep.
[Q] So you say that twenty years ago now, in a similar position, you'd be itching to get to the studio and now you're more patient about that? 
Yes, I think, probably. Twenty years ago I was doing a lot of work in my... in my garage here at weekends and things. I would go into the garage and... and make more sculptures and so on and I probably don't now so much. And I get up later and so on, yeah.

I don't get sculptor's block. I put it away. I'll... I don't want to look at it for a bit. I'll go on to something else and come back to it. And suddenly... suddenly it comes back and it's clear. ‘Well, why didn't I see that before?’ You know, it's clear. I suppose that's a way of getting over sculptor's block. I don't have much sculptor's block because when you've got people working for you too, you can't afford it very much. You know, you have to sort of... you say, you know, ‘We've got to go on, we've got to do something and see whether... see if it works or not’, you know? You don't just... you don't sort of sit with it. It's very difficult writing, like you've just got to... the white paper and a pen, and we have a thing in front of us to which we can add or take away or turn upside down or change or throw away. But, you know, we've got some... we've got a real thing there to cope with. And also it's... it's awkward and heavy and sometimes it needs the gantry to move it and so on. You can't have half as much block as you... as... as a writer can have but... because we're not in the... in that same lonely position as the writer. The writer's in a terribly lonely place, don't you agree?
[Q] I do, yeah. 
And don't you find that's true with your writing as opposed to your... your interacting with other people?
[Q] Totally. Writing's a much more difficult...
It's a horrid thing. I mean it's very, very tough. And I think, in a way, you know, the fact of other people being involved means you're interacting with another human being who also has an opinion and so on. So, in a way, something's coming in. It's like... it's like figurative sculpture, something's coming in, whether it's good or bad. Something's there. I even... I think the painter has a harder time than we have because he's on his own more. You know he's just there with... with the thing in front of him. I think this is... this is a kind of the other side of the coin about weight. The things are heavy and things are awkward and things... and you do need a hand and so on and... and it's sometimes a good thing, that. Sometimes it's not... it's not a disadvantage; it's an advantage. You've got to cope with that.
[Q] But as you get older you're not tempted to work with the smaller models that Henry Moore did in order to let somebody else scale them up and realise them? 
I'm incredibly lazy and I can... I hate it, actually. I sometimes have a stick and I point with my stick, and I think, must not do that. But, you know, I don't even get dirty now and I say, ‘Would you move that piece to there? No, not that way up, like that. Oh, wait a minute, try it that way up'. You know, you know? It's very lazy but it's the same idea as working with... getting somebody else to... but I don't want other people to come in and make my sculpture bigger, no, and so I don't want that really. I don't want to design it and let somebody else execute it, but I do when it comes to the welding and so on; I don't want to do that – grinding and so on. But I'm very interested in how that sculpture that's been ground and has just come back from the galvaniser, and what it has to be done to it, and when are we going to get it up, and when are we going to get it up are we... which bits are we going to paint and so on. I mean that really... you know, I'm just as concerned with all that as ever I was, so, although I have other people helping me, it's not like sending it out and getting it done. It's very close; it's very... very much in my studio and... and also I know it too. I know that that piece is heavy, and I know it's going to need this sort of thing, and these are the sort of welds I want here. I mean, all that I'm very... I’m close enough to... to be able to take part in but not actually do.

[Q] Which people have had the strongest impact on your life? Who has had the most... the strongest impact on your life? 
Live people – people now, not old-fashioned dead artists?
[Q] Any, a mixture. But let's start with the living and then let's start with the... with the dead, finish with the dead ones. 
Sheila. My parents. In his time, Henry Moore. Kenneth Noland, Jules Olitski, Clement Greenberg, Michael Fried. Those are my contemporaries that I've... that have had the biggest... not my contemporaries but the ones who've been alive for me. Dead: Donatello, Picasso, Matisse... difficult. Masaccio, Bellini, Giotto, Rembrandt. Yeah, I'm just running through in my head names like Rubens and El Greco and people and they're not quite... they're not quite. They're just marvellous but they're not quite.
[Q] What was the first work of art that you remember seeing and noticing and being intrigued by? 
Oh, Stanley Spencer. You know, the "Steel Workers on the Clyde" and that sort of thing. And I... the other day I found myself at Cookham and I went into the museum. He wasn't half bad, he wasn't half bad. He was... he's... he doesn't travel; he's provincial but he's not bad. Oddly enough I don't know why he's less good than Rousseau because Rousseau isn't provincial and Stanley Spencer is. And they're both very alike in some ways. What's your answer to that?
[Q] I think Rousseau is a... is more of a mystery. I think Spencer is... it's clearer. I think we're drawn to Rousseau because of the mystery; we can't work out with Rousseau whether he knows how naive he's being – whether it's an accident or whether he's actually an incredibly sophisticated man who's hiding behind something. 
I really like that mystery, that idea of the word mystery because you don't want such literalness. And the English are inclined to be over literal in their paintings. I mean, you know, you see that when you see Whistler as against Monet and so on. You see it when you see this show of...
[Q] Sickert? 
Sickert and Degas, yeah, you know. And you see it... or you see even somebody, not an Englishman, Tissot. There's no mystery there; it's all there and Caillebotte... it's too much there. I want... I want something I'm not sure about... I'm not sure about, you know... which is, I know, in a way, partly why Manet is such a treasure, or Monet's "Nympheas", you know.
[Q] Where did you see the Spencer when you were young, by the way? Was that in a book or you saw it in a gallery? 
No, I think there was... it was at the National Gallery when there was... all the work was taken away to Wales and hidden and he had done these wartime paintings of people painting in... in... people... people making ships in the Clyde. That's what I remember.
[Q] So you were brought up during the War by your parents to London and saw this thing in the National Gallery? 
Yes. Maybe it was after that and maybe it was when I was in the Navy by that time. But it was... I don't remember which year it was. But, yeah, it was shown there and it had a big impression, a big influence on me. And at that... that time I was very... you know, people like Christopher Wood were big... big... not influences so much, but they were... they were the artists that I was feeling were...were the interesting ones, the new ones.
[Q] Who was the first professional or proper, in inverted commas, artist you ever met? 
Well I met... I met Charles Wheeler because he was a friend of the housemaster... my housemaster at school.
[Q] So you were a teenager then? 
Yeah. And I met him and, for a little while, I think when I was about eighteen, before I went to the Navy, I worked in... in Wheeler's studio and worked and learned a bit, working with his assistant, who was called Chadwick – not Lynn Chadwick, but his name was Chadwick. And I learnt a lot from him, you know. Sorry, I learnt a little bit from him. Being in a studio was very exciting.
[Q] So was that the moment you suddenly thought, yeah, this is the life I want? 
No, I think I'd pretty well decided by then, yeah.

[Q] What did your mother think about the idea of you being an artist? If your father was, broadly speaking, against it and had... had an idea for your career, what did she think? 
I don't know. She... we didn't discuss it. You know, it was my father who was... who was the one who was against it. God, I was prickly. I remember after I'd started... I'd gone to... to art school then and something or other came up in conversation and my father said, ‘Is it the same in your game?’ And I was furious. ‘It's not a game’, you know. I didn't mean that; I didn't mean that, you know. But, you know, I was so determined it was taken as seriously as it could be, you know? And I think I've always taken it that seriously so that, as you said, do I have something to prove? Yes, I do. And it's either a life or nothing and I'm quite taken aback when I see people at art school often who... or past that who are never going to really make it... take it seriously, not because they're not good, because they don't want to enough. And... and that's... that's... that seems to be funny; that seems to be... if you feel like that you should be doing something different.
[Q] Does that mean to say you don't have so much sympathy with or understand people who are painters in their spare time or people who make sculpture in their spare time? 
I have no sympathy with them whatever but good luck to them. Let them have some fun; it's pleasure, it's lovely. It's like me playing squash or tennis or... or you... you surfing or something. It's something... we... we should be allowed to enjoy ourselves and people do enjoy themselves, and it's fine. I cannot take them seriously. I can’t talk to them about art. No, if I'm going to talk to them about art I want somebody... if I'm going to talk to anybody about art I want somebody who takes it as seriously as I do.
[Q] And in order to show that, you've got to devote every possible hour or day to it?
I think so. Yes, I think so. I think it's a life.
[Q] How did you feel when your own son, Paul, made it clear he wanted to be an artist? Because actually it's all very well saying... 
Poor old chap!
[Q] Were you encouraging or did you try and dissuade him? 
No, I... he... he's... I think he's incredibly good. He can draw like... like nobody's business, and he's a good painter too but he... I don't really want to talk about him on the thing because it's not quite fair on him.
[Q] I just meant that whole idea of when he was young though, as a parent, when you... when you realised...  
I think he had a real problem in having a father who was an artist. That is a real problem and I think it's very tough on him, that, very tough. So life is easier in a way for Tim because he's... he's not going to... to have to live down or anything. But all my grandchildren can... can draw and Tim's son, who's fifteen, is a lovely drawer, but in a very sort of literal way. My granddaughter is extraordinary. That's hers up there. I just think that's just marvellous, you know, those three figures as seen from a child of five. It's just lovely.

[Q] In... at the beginnings of Modern Art with a capital M, at the beginnings of the twentieth century, artists like Picasso and…  and others went back to what they saw as the beginnings of art and... and culture in non-Western art, in what was called primitive art. Have you ever had that kind of impulse? Have you ever... do you ever... have you ever felt, as an artist, the idea that you ought to try and get rid of all the baggage of your own work and... and the history of Western Art, if you like, and that feeling of trying to start again? 
I think I did that in the '60s. I think that was so in the '60s. But I really wasn't looking at old art at all. I don't think I feel it now, no; I don't think I feel it. But, on the other hand, I don't want to see that much art. I mean, I think when travelling: where would I would like to go? I would like to go to Cappadocia because they've got those extraordinary sort of pillars of mountains – pillars with people living in the holes, and, you know, it's like a cave in a mountain. I think that's very exciting. India was a knockout for me, knockout. Mexico: I don't know enough, but it... it's... it’s tight, and I go for it and then I go off it a bit.
[Q] What was the attraction of India? Was it its difference, its otherness? 
Well, it's enormous. It's... it's... it feels like we're a tiny part; it's a world, it's a world. Partly the way people live and partly, you know, the variety of what you see and... Have you been to India? Yes, well you know what it's like in Delhi and all these incredible...
[Q] But not travelled across it. 
No, no, but I mean to say just a bit of it. It's just... it's just so... so... it's so rich, it's so incredibly varied and rich and it just knocks you out. The art... some of it's marvellous, do you know? No, no, I mean I'm not hungry to go to places like I used to be, not so hungry to go to places. I enjoy it when I get there and I like... you know, as I say, I would have liked to have gone to Persepolis and...and seen that and, you know... And I've had very good times when going for three weeks to Rome was marvellous when I had a show there. And, oh, you know, all that.
[Q] What do you feel about an artist like Constable who barely travelled further than about 100 miles from where he was born? I mean Suffolk, London, Brighton, I think one trip to the Lake District, and that was the sum total of his experience of the world. And yet he produced extraordinary work. 
Marvellous. But he did go to Dorset too because I know because the cottage I have in Dorset's got the same view. He... I think he's wonderful. I never really... you know, horses for courses. He's... it's fine; it's just fine.
[Q] Horses being the operative word. 
Yes, yes.

I don't know how to put myself into their shoes. And it's a really hard thing. I can tell them about art; I can tell them about the life. The life is something; you've got to be very devoted to art and all that. We've talked about that. But when you say where should they look art-wise and so on or what... you know, which direction should they be, I... I truly don't know. I truly don't know and I.... I think they're in a very, very tough position at the moment; it's not easy. It's not easy at all. I would say always look at the best. Don't look at the second-best; look at the best and learn from the best. But you can say things like that, but you can't really tell them how to cope with 2005 when you... when you’re... when you were living most was in 1960 or 1970, you know. 2005 is too different from that.
[Q] So you don't think the... there are certain universal principles that would have applied to Giotto, that would have applied to Titian, that would have applied to Manet, that apply to you, that would apply to an artist now? 
Making good art but I can't... I can't think of anything more. What would you say?
[Q] I think it's to do with being receptive, isn't it, to what's out there. 
Yes, yes, yes.
[Q] It really is to keep... is to keep an open eye and an open mind. 
Yes, right.
[Q] I think curiosity is the essence of... of a lot of good art, even if you dismiss a lot of it. 
And knowing how to hang on in there and hanging on in there, and not being content with something that's half good and half there. You have to come on ‘til it’s really there, and I must say when I look at a group of artists’ work, the very good people stand out and they stand out really by their kind of... by their... determination is not the word I want; it's... but... but they're so focused, and they keep the pressure on until the thing's finished. And I think that's very important. You can't really tell them about, about the size of their... of their... of the cup that they have. You can only tell them to fill it but you can't tell them about the size of the cup. So, in a sense, that's... that's the thing with the Constable, you know. Constable actually was a great artist but it... but he didn't have a very big variety of where to go and everything. I... it's not easy and... and that's, I think, probably why I don't teach, in that I would be expected to be able to answer that question and say, ‘Where do I look and what do I... what is your advice?’ And I can't give it; I can't give it. And, you know, I could give it fifteen, twenty years ago because I was much more convinced, much more sure of... of where I stood and what I thought then, and I've become less sure of it. The world has changed a lot and, in a way, I've become, I think, more, you know, as Clem used to say, tunnel-visioned. And I think that you do... you shut out that... that sort of openness in a way where you're getting so totally focused. You get so focused that you can't... you know, you haven't got the energy to focus on other people too, or the time or the something; I don't know.

[Q] You could have made elegant, beautiful, graceful, abstract, coloured steel sculptures for decades and been a very successful artist in making those. 
Yeah, I could have gone on. That's when you get suspicious – when it's easy. You know, you can do one or two easy, but watch out, watch out. I don't say you've got to have a problem but you've got to have an issue somewhere. You can't just make more. I think it... it's the most boring thing. It's... it becomes... it becomes a sort of the old gramophone syndrome – it's the same old thing, you know. It's like teaching; you cannot teach when it's... when it's... when you're not thinking of the answer. When you know the answer already it's too easy. You've got to be challenged. If you can't be challenged, then challenge yourself. And I think this is... this answers all sorts of questions like... about going on workshops, or about people saying to you, ‘Will you... will you do something completely different, like the interior of a building or something?’ All these are... are the sort of things that suddenly become worth... worth addressing, or a new sort of sculpture. It's worth addressing those. Don't address something that... that's a walkover, you know. Very like... like tennis or something like that; just like tennis. I'm very interested in the way tennis players behave and their sort of... the way they pace themselves, the way they practise and... and how they come to do it naturally, how they come to forget the strokes that they've practised. But they bring them in. It's very like that, you know. You focus very hard on things that you can almost do them in a practice situation until, in the end, then it's second nature, so that's... that's... then you can... then they come out... come out well.
[Q] How do you practise as an artist? 
Well, doing it a lot. And... and, you know, new materials, new... new problems, new finishes, new places to work with, new lifting gear, I mean, you know. Some very practical, down to earth things and some... some very... and I'm sure that, you know... where the walls are, how big the space you work in, the... you know... Johnny who's working with you. I mean all these things are influencing you and... and changing your touch and... and making you see a little differently. ‘So, okay, let's try it a different way. We've had the sculpture like this while it was before and, now it's made, when you put it together again, let's put it up in a different place.’ So we... we find ourselves focusing on a different side, or we find ourselves seeing it a little differently, and see whether it works then, you know, all that stuff.
