avrion.mitchison

Avrion Mitchison, the British zoologist, is currently Professor Emeritus at University College London and is best known for his work demonstrating the role of lymphocytes in tumour rejection and for the separate and cooperative roles of T- and B-lymphocytes in this and other processes.

I was part of a large immediate family since I had five sibs, although we were a bit short of distant relatives. In part because I suppose we, my parents, came from fairly conservative backgrounds. Not entirely so, but fairly conservative backgrounds, and when they joined the Labour movement, after the '14-'18 war, they either were cut off, or did cut themselves off, from relatives. So, as a child I never felt embedded in a larger family group, but just in this, sort of, nucleus of lefties.

						My father was a- a lawyer, a barrister, who, through my childhood, repeatedly stood for Parliament and never got in. He didn't get in until the 1940, when was it, '45 election or was it '46? Then- and after that he was a Member of Parliament. And- but what were we going on about? Yes, that was in London. And my mother was a writer so she could work anywhere. She was attached- very much attached to Scotland for- for old family reasons and they bought a large house in Scotland in, I think, 1938, and from then on lived mostly there.
					
						Yes, my father, Gilbert Richard, was always called Dick. I've mentioned that he was a friend of Jack, J.B.S, at Eton and Oxford, that they were both in the cast of Nou's play. I guess that was how they got married. She was very young. She got married, I think, at the age of 16, during the war because when your loved one was going off to- to join the war, that was the thing to do; one of the things to do, anyway. And, again, somehow or other, she figures more in the story- that story than he does, because he was sent as a- I suppose as a classicist. He was a good classicist. He could write Latin poetry all his life. And he was sent to liaise with the Italians during the war, and he was badly hurt, actually not in the war, I think but through enemy action, but in a motorcycle accident. My mother, still well under the age of 21, flew off to Italy to nurse him, which she did. So, he- they had a curious relationship. I don't think I want to discuss their relationship with one another. I don't think it's terribly relevant to the story. It was a curious one and an oddball one, but it has been described in various biographies of my mother, so I don't think I need go into that.

Right.

As far as I'm concerned, my father was always supportive, totally supportive. I never for a moment thought he, other than- I think he loved his children equally. I think he probably liked his daughters best of all, but I think he loved everybody equally. To his daughters he referred to his three sons as 'the clergy' in the 19th century tradition of people of- of honourable people pursuing a profession, which was not altogether clear to the rest of the public.
					
						He gave me an interest in the family financial company, providing me with an income of about £400 a year, which in those days was quite enough to live on and made me financially independent. He did that, I don't quite remember when, but I should think probably when I was about 17 or 18. And I realised it was a jolly decent thing to do, and I wish I'd been in a position to do the same for my children.
					
						I was taken to the Hammersmith Birth Control Ball, where we lived- Hammersmith was nearby- at the age of minus a month. I can't say that I remember it, but that was, as far as I was concerned, that was my beginning in Nou's political views, and she was- she was very much writing from that standpoint.  People remember her for her- would only read her these days, for her- I think for her historical novels, particularly for her first novel which is 'The Corn King and the Spring Queen' written about the very early Greek history, pre-classical Greek history. Then she wrote about France, Vercingetorix and the Gauls and  the Romans, and she was very proud of being made a member of the Legion d'honneur for that. She had a little red ribbon. She was very proud of that. And she later wrote about Scottish history, she wrote 'The Bull Calves' about her own family after the '45 but she also wrote more overtly political work, particularly, 'We Have Been Warned', a novel which she published in the late 1930s. She linked herself with the left in Germany, but especially in Austria where the Dollfuss Government was shelling the workers flats in Vienna. And I remember her coming back and telling us about that and how- how terrible that was. She explained how you had to, if you were speaking- making a speech in German you started by saying, Genosse und Genossinen- Genossinen - comrades- male comrades and female comrades, and I was tremendously impressed by that. And when I went to live in Germany myself, much- years later, I said well can I begin my speech by talking- by addressing them as Genosse and Genossinen, and they said, not on any account.
					
						I don't what her very first works were, but when she was- she must have been 15- 14 or 15 in Oxford in her mother's house- she wrote a play which was produced in New College cloisters and there they all are, the cast, with Jack and my father who was a great friend of his, also in New College, and so she had it in the blood. And, she- they had plenty of money, that was very important. You see her family wasn't at all wealthy. They were- they were very comfortably off and her mother had been an heiress, but she didn't have a lot of money, but my father did have a lot of money. Not- he wasn't enormously rich, but he was very comfortably off, and they had servants, and she left things to servants. We were brought up by nurses, by a nurse and nursemaid and occasionally, I think, two nursemaids when there were five little children squawking away

Would she be locked in a room writing?

Yes, she would lock herself in a room.  She- yes, she had a huge desk downstairs at Rivercourt. Rivercourt is now- where she lived is now- belongs to the school there. And later, during the 1930s, an avant-garde architect called John McGregor designed and they had built, a building in the back of the garden which had a squash court for my father, and down below they had a study for my mother and then a garage for the car. And, the- the- what she wanted was peace and quiet, a desk, and bars in the walls for her- I think they were then called Swedish exercises, where you hung from your arms then you swung around, so she did that as well. And, she liked that sort of thing, she was always a keen swimmer.

And what about her African connection?

That was much later. That must be- was that perhaps after my father died even, it might have been, or around that time. She- she'd always been keen on the people of the Empire, so to speak. She inherited part of that from her mother who was a real old Tory and an Imperialist in reality, but who had, you know, thought the British Empire was the greatest possible thing. And of course, my mother hated all that, but at the same time she was completely part of it, in a way. She just didn't want to be bossed around by whites but she thought all these coloured people were lovely. So she- The British Council sent a group of people round from Africa to visit her in Scotland. She was a- she did quite a lot of that. She liked being a hostess, she liked hostessing, and she liked explaining what a great character she was. Terrible show-off. And one of them was the hereditary Chief Elect, I mean, he hadn't inherited yet, but he would be, of the Bagakwa in, what was then, was it, Bechuanaland, or it had been changed by then into Botswana.  And she sort of, kind of, swept him off his feet and said, well, I'm coming to- to visit the tribe now. So, she did that every year for a long time. And she was nice to tribal people, the members the tribes when they came to Britain, as they did to train as nurses or- especially the young women, and she talked to them about birth control, which she thought she knew a lot about. I expect she was a little bit a rusty by then but at any rate, it was- it encouraged them in the right direction, and so on.
					
						My older sister became a great friend of her grandmother's. She lived in the house in Oxford where my mother had been brought up, and she eventually sold the house to Wolfson College, and has a Haldane room still, and she- but she became- she became very close to my grandmother and took her side, in retrospect, in the quarrels with this daughter who was so uppish and didn't, well- both children were uppish and had their own opinions which didn't at all agree with hers. And I knew Maya quite well too, my grandmother. She was- she influenced me a lot. She was a real Victorian lady and she was, as I say, was quite an Imperialist, but she was so right about all the people she met, and she knew. She was terrific. I loved Maya. My younger sister- it's difficult to get a good word about her mother out of her I think of course she- basically she loves her mother deeply. But she did feel she was rather exploited and she was, actually, by Nou, particularly during the war when she was- I was being sent to an expensive school in England, but my little sister was being taught at the local village school and not really learning enough. Then she was being educated in Scotland in a very inadequate way.

That was your mother's choice?

That was my mother's choice. And my younger sister, who ended up as a very good cook, was either doing the cooking that was edible, or having to eat what Nou cooked, which was not.
					
						Most of my childhood I was sent to school in, or near, Reading, at a Quaker school, called Leighton Park School.

And you were a boarder there?

I was a boarder there. And, so through the war I used to travel back and- to and from- to and fro between Reading and- and Scotland.

So how was it in school? Were these good days?

Yes, I think so, on the whole. I mean, what do the boys think about schools generally. There were very bad moments and there are very good moments. I- I found people greatly to admire. I think my school hero was Karel Reisz who became a not undistinguished filmmaker and subsequently- and was a refugee from Czechoslovakia. But there were a lot of other- There were very good people. People- Quaker families- whom I much admired. I've kept sort of distantly in touch with, but not closely.
					
						I knew, quite early on, that for- maybe for family reasons, I had no choice but to become a biologist, and the school was very supportive. I was taught by Richard Schardt, who is still a schoolmaster there, and who was the most encouraging and sweet man that you could ever imagine.

Now, why did you know, or think, you had to be a biologist?

Well, it was a sort of family business. My grandfather was a biologist, J. S. Haldane; my uncle, J.B.S. Haldane was another biologist. My two older brothers were turning into biologists, one of them reading medicine, but still, still a biologist.
					
						My mum was- from my standpoint, not necessarily from my sisters' standpoint, but from my standpoint, she was a wonderful mother. She was always encouraging and she clearly wanted her children to do something worthwhile in the world, and she made that absolutely clear. But through her, through their house, moved a train of, in the 1930s, writers and artists. Wystan Auden, W H. Auden, taught my oldest brother for a while when he needed a job. Wyndam Lewis, the very distinguished painter, was a pretty good family friend, and for a rather unsuccessful time, when I must have been pretty young, I think, like 10 or 12, he tried to teach me to draw. I used to be left in his studio. And there were a load of other interesting people. Then after the war, when the Labour Government began, it was even more exciting  at home in a way, because there were all these politicians. And, politicians are a wonderfully communicative people, that's their job, and it was marvellous to be the sort of junior son of the house in Scotland, and take them up onto the moors or explain to them this and that, how to shoot a hare or something like that.
					
I'm not sure that we- that my parents did see a lot of him. He was a Professor in University College at the time, and I actually don't recall really meeting him or seeing much of him until- probably until I left school.  But I do remember, as a Sixth Former, writing to him and saying, what shall I do to make a life in biology. And, he said- he wrote a very nice letter back saying, well for the time being you better get on with your school work. And that I did. But I was already beginning to look at his books- some of his books. And, of course, his children's stories were very much appreciated in the family, 'My Friend Mr Leaky' and others.

						I was quite young at school. In those days, for one reason or another, I think connected with the war and connected because things hadn't settled down, it was very- then it was much easier than it is now, to get into Oxford or Cambridge. So, in 1944, when I must have been 16, I went to Oxford and said, this is what I wanted to do, come and be a student although not this year. And, Balliol said, no thank you. I think I was going in for a scholarship only, at that time. And, New College said, hello, it's you lot again, is it? Or words to that effect because my grandfather had been a fellow there and J.B.S had been there, and they weren't at all surprised to see me. And they said, yes, of course, you know, no difficulty with that. I remember my interview with them very well. They said, oh, you- I think it must have been a classics Don, because I was, you know, going on already, well, science was what interested me, but they also- I suppose an arts Don, I don't remember who it was who said, oh, you said something in your- You had to write these general essays. You had something in your essays about the Romans on their temples putting stone carvings which represented where the wood had been inserted- wooden pegs had been inserted, the temples were made of wood. Can you tell me more? And I said, no I can't possibly tell you more, I was just showing off about that.
					
Having secured a place, I didn't see the point in staying at school, although that would've been the normal thing, I think. So, I asked my uncle if I could come and work for him in University College, which I did. He said, yes. So that was in the last year of the war and that covers the, whatever it was, from 1944 to 1945. And that was marvellous. I was what was called a Lab Boy then. And I became, and so far as I know I still am, a Life Member of the University College Servants group or society or union, whatever it was. And I found these wonderful characters to attach myself to. To Hans Kalmus who was rescued from the Prague emigration, I suppose, by University College, and probably by Jack in particular, and he was running a little Drosophila the lab there. And I helped him. We were- there was a little publication that was- where we got it wrong. We were trying to find out whether there was the phenomenon of resistance to CO2, and the question was whether it was propagated through the germ line or not, and we thought we'd tested that by transplanting gonads and we didn't know how to transplant gonads. So that was enormous fun. We converted a-  what there was lots of, towards the end of the war, were bits of aeroplanes which were no longer needed. So we'd got to have had this aeroplane altimeter and we would solder that together and reproduce that for injecting these flies. Then, I- Hans Kalmus went on to be a Professor in University College where he was for a long time. And indeed, he was on the Appointments Committee when I went back to- to University College after- whenever it was, 1970 or so.

Michael White- M J. D. White, famous for his, well perhaps, for the book he wrote on animal cytology and evolution and he was interested in chromosomes and how they were distributed. And he was a very interesting person. Like Jack, very well educated. I think he was an old Etonian and I think that I was- from Leighton Park I was always rather impressed by people who came from Eton, and he could chat with Jack about 'The Inferno', they both could read Dante in the original. And like Jack, he was very much on the left. I don't know whether he was a member of the Communist party or not and I don't think that matters very much at that time really. He then- he left University College and went to the University of Texas where he set up a lab, which was going to continue with all his wonderful work. And then, after a year or two, the McCarthy era set in and Michael White was chucked out, and he had to go to Australia. And I think that was a crying shame because he was a terrific scientist, at least I thought he was, well he was a terrific scientist. He's an interesting scientist because he is somebody who you can say what it is that he missed. And what he missed was what Hamilton subsequently discovered, Haplodiploidy and it's connection with the evolution of altruism. What a wonderful piece of evolution. Michael White should've been alive to that and particularly because Jack, his good friend Jack Haldane, was always going on about altruism and it's genetics. Shame he missed out on that. And he- I don't know whether Michael White discovered Haplodiploidy, but I shouldn't think he did, but he certainly- that was all in his book. And, a third person who was a good- a great influence was Wolfgang Kuehne who is a German, who had left, not, I think, because he was Jewish, but because he was a communist. He was a chief technician and he was very Germanic I now know, in retrospect, he was a lovely man to work for. After the war he went back to the DDR and I lost touch with him.

He sat in an office in the Department of Zoology. He was Professor of something else; I think it was Biometry or- I think that's right. And, he had very little in the way of responsibilities, but he did, in fact, teach a course of genetics which I went to. And I thought that was wonderful. I loved it. The first lecture I will never forget. He passed round the skins of cats and asked us to- what- what bits of the cat- why all the cats skins were different from one another, and which bits might be genetic or not. And he also said, you know, he talked about apples and pears and there were Worcester apples and Pippins and different kinds of pear. Then he asked the class, you know, which of these things are within the species and which of them are across species. That was great lecture and it went on like that, so it was super. So, he was a terrific teacher. But there was lots of other entertainment. He sat in his office and, mostly I think, he was even writing, or editing, the journal Genetics, which he had invented and, as he said, that was going to provide for Helen Spurway, who was becoming his wife at that time. And, Helen and Jack were quite touchy about the whole relationship. They didn't want it, sort of, trespassed around, or gossiped, or anything. And well they knew that everybody in the department was terribly interested in this Professor going on with Helen, who was then a graduate student. And, when they finally did become engaged, I recall waltzing up to Helen and giving her a great big kiss, which I thought I was entitled to do, and Jack got absolutely furious about it. What was I doing insulting his- his betrothed- I can't remember what term he used, but anyway, his woman, kissing her in public. And I was- I shivered in my boots because he could be very fierce, and he really- that was one of the things he really liked to do was losing his temper. And nobody took him seriously, because they knew that he was enjoying it, and it all blew over before long. And, around him there were already- well there were always people, as there is with any interesting university teacher, particularly Jim Rendell.

						James Rendell had been his research student. They had- they'd been doing experimental speciation with Drosophila in cages, and Jim, of course, was taken up in the war effort, and at that time he was working for Waddington in Coastal Command, and they were doing what used to be- what was then called Operational Research, that was the fashionable term. Jim said, well, what their achievement was building a schedule of flying Hudson reconnaissance airplanes over the North Atlantic, which would optimally catch U-boats. I think they had a bomb or two with them too for hitting the U-boats. So I- Although Jim was in Operational Research for the war, I used to trundle out to his house in Pinner, which was a long way in those days on the Underground, and he would tell me about the wonderful world of genetics and about genetics. And by the time I left, I knew more genetics, I'm sure, than anybody except one or two specialists in Oxford.
					
He had become involved with the military just before the war in the Thetis disaster. Does that ring a bell with you, Martin? No. That was a British Navy Submarine which sank in quite shallow water, but the crew, I think maybe one or two people escaped, but they were nearly all drowned, or killed by respiratory diseases. So Jack had- in his life, he had done many things but included a bout of respiratory physiology with his father, John Haldane, J. S. Haldane. And so he became, particularly after the Thetis disaster, when he was doing things for- both for the Navy and for C. B. Gorman, who was a company which built diving apparatus and diving locks, testing it out. And, there's somewhere in the library here, there's a graph published from that work of time to convulsions against oxygen  pressure or CO2 pressure, but that kind of work. He loved doing experiments on himself. He was very proud of it. He was particularly proud of having badly damaged his coccyx from bends, from nitrogen bubbles, or so he said. So, wherever he went around, he had this inflatable cushion which he sat down, and it made quite noise as he sat down on it. And everybody was very entertained by that.

He could've been just an uncle, but he wasn't just an uncle. He recognised an avuncular connection up to a point and rather guardedly but he did. But more especially, my mother deeply loved him and she made it clear that, maybe, the saddest part of her life was that he was never quite as nice to her as she wanted him to be.  But she, even though she was a novelist, had an interest in science?  Yes, very much so, yes. You know, Martin, in the 1920s and 1930s there was- I don't know that there was more of a connection between science and fiction than there is now. I think perhaps less even. But there certainly was a very strong one, and particularly through Aldous Huxley, who was, at that time, relatively sane compared to what he- the way he ended up in his life. A very impressive character. So, Julian and Aldous were good family friends, quite close family friends, and although I never talked to Aldous, as I can recall directly, because I think he was leaving and he was out of the picture by the time I was 14 or 15, and could appreciate him. But I read his books and I was tremendously proud of the fact that his major novel, I think is 'Point Counter Point', and my grandfather is there as Lord Edward, a difficult character, which he was. And so, although I hardly knew my grandfather, I acquired a second hand picture of him from Aldous' novel.

						As a third of a trio of brothers, I was accustomed to- to- somehow to guidance, taking the- imitating them all the time. And I've spent the rest of my life like that. I've always been looking for, in one way or another, I looked for an elder brother and, Martin, I have to say, and you probably realise, notice this, that that's what you've been to me. Although the age is the wrong way round, you- from- the first few months after we met, I realised, oh joy, here comes another older brother to teach me what's what.

Well, how kind of you to say so.
					
						It was a large somewhat knocked about, not very well built house. It wasn't a proper Scottish castle, you know, with great stone battlements and all that kind of thing. It was just a large country, basically Victorian house, early Victorian house and it had lots of bedrooms which, mainly my mother I think, although my mother helping my father out- helped out by my father because he wanted to plan his political set there as well. And sometimes his lawyers- his legal friends. Not many of those, but a few legal friends. So, the main thing about Carradale was that there were just hosts of people there.  Physically, it was gradually going downhill all the time we were there. Before the war, when it was owned by other people, it- beautiful gardens had been built and it was very well gardened with a staff of two or three or four gardeners, a head gardener and others. Then that all came to an end, there was- eventually there was one gardener but very important person in the life of a child, a very, very nice man, with his wife and family. As well as my- the difference between London and Scotland for me was that in Scotland my brothers and sisters started bringing their friends, just to- to Scotland, so there were always three or four or five or six interesting friends there. Who do I particularly remember?  Robert Neald, the economist, later jointly with Tommy Balogh a great influence on the Labour Government of the 1960s and '70s. And many others. Some young women, some friends of my sister.
					
						It had been a sporting estate. It had a grouse moor and salmon river, and the gardens. So that was how wealthy people who owned a house like that, lived before the war when they were- easy to employ people. Then all the time we were there, the moor and the river were less looked after and- Of course, they both do need looking after. It was not such great- it wasn't such a great sporting place as it had been, but still, it was- people came there to catch a salmon or to shoot a grouse. And my mother, my immensely energetic mother, decided that her contribution to the war was going to be turning the land to farming, because there was a- much food shortage. Which she did and which, in retrospect, I realise was a fairly amateur way because- partly because she didn't have the labour to do it. There was one- we'd- we'd gone to the Outer Isles- to North Uist before the war for three years and we became attached, very attached to the house which we rented on the Island of Varley, off North Uist, tidal island. And she had made friends, in the way she did, with local people, and she brought from Varllay to Kintyre, Bella the cook and the farm labourer. Oh, God, lovely man who I, as a boy, I admired greatly and did lots of things with, but his name has just slipped my mind. It'll come back. And, so he, with help from, basically with help from my mother, not that she was much direct help, because she was a small woman and she wasn't quite as young as she had been. But there were all these lads or young men, who Murdoch and Danny, my brothers, had brought up to Scotland and they were certainly conscripted into the harvest. So there was lots of that going on.

So this was particularly during the war years? And then stopped after?

Yes. After the war years it took a while, I think, for things to work themselves out. She brought in a tenant on an agricultural lease, which is almost the same as selling the farmland.

I see.

Lachlan, that was the name, sorry, I mustn't forget Lachlan, who just died. He, in his quiet way, taught me a lot, as did Eddy Martindale, the gamekeeper, who also worked on the farm. They taught me not to lose my temper, you know, an 11-year-old or 12-year-old, it's quite easy to do. They taught me how to make a stook, these were- a horse-drawn reaper cut the corn and how you wind a strand of corn around it. They taught me how to build the sheaths into a stook in the field and then eventually I had to load them onto a cart, and so on.
					
						I set up in a corner of the house- there were- there were lots of corners, actually- what I called my lab. And it had an old microscope in it, and the seashore was what interested me. I was collecting things. I was after little hydroids, God, what are they, ophelia in which you have stalks of hydroids growing out of. You can see them waving their tentacles and there're lots of gamarus and other shrimps. I suppose I had a fair idea of, you know, the laminarial belt at the bottom and the fucus built up above it. I liked all that.

Were your brothers involved in any of these things? Was there anyone teaching you?

That's a good question. By example. Murdoch was into birds. He was a very competent field ornithologist. My older brother, Danny, was starting to do the things which medical students do. He had- I remember him dissecting a dogfish which started as a nice fresh dogfish and it got more and more stinky as the time passed.
					
						When I was working for Michael White, his great interest was the midge Miastor. Very interesting midge in terms of its chromosome cycle which is what interested him. It has lots of chromosomes, nearly all of which it sheds in its- it has a somatic cell life. The midge grows- the larvae grow from eggs laid on dead elm trees by flies and, as Michael White said, it was remarkable how often he had been out at Hyde Park at night, there were all these branches of elm trees lying around, which he would come back for- for them back later and harvest the Miastor.
					
						I used to go back to University College and it was always a hoot. He- I remember going back in- I went back to spend a summer in London, not going- not going to Carradale, working in the Natural History Museum, which was kind enough to take me on as a- I suppose what would now be called a volunteer. There was no system for it in those days, but I had turned up- or I wrote to them and I said I wanted to go, and they said, oh that's all right. And so that was nice. And then- I used to call in a lot on Jack in those days, and what I remember from that time, was the drosophila lab which Jim Rendell had been working in and Hans Kalmus had been working in, was petering on but also petering out, actually. There weren't many people still working there. But they had all these- the flies were kept in small glass milk bottles which had an air porous stopper. And they, the drosophila crawl up- they have at the bottom, they have a layer of agar with nutrients and they crawl up the side of the bottle and they pupate and at the end of this, the milk bottles are absolutely filthy because it leaves all this larvae stuck to the side. So there was Jack, they had a rather sort of Victorian bottle washing machine and he was washing the bottles and complaining vigorously about doing- having to do so. Complaining very much. So I said to him, I was a little more confident already in those days, and I said, oh Jack go away and I will do this. So he stomped out. But he was getting crosser and crosser that I was doing it, because he'd lost his opportunity to lose his temper about having to do so.
					
He, I think, never did experi- really- he did- long, long ago he may have done in the first part of his life, he may have done a little bit of biochemistry, but he was interested in enzyme kinetics. He was always interested in the theoretical side rather than the practical side. Then in the physiology, I think he participated only as a planner and occasionally with the experiments, doing- being the subject of the experiments. He was never the person who twisted the knobs on the oxygen  Did he have a group? Were there people working for him?  So, he had a little, a tiny little group, Helen Spurway, Jim. During the war they had plans to build a larger group, but it never came to anything. I think he was profoundly not a group leader, actually. He was- he wasn't that supportive of other people, I don't think. Well- much his most distinguished student was Maynard Smith, but I don't think John Maynard Smith ever did an experiment with him. That wasn't their style. I think they were more interested in the natural world-  He was a graduate student of J.B.S's?  A graduate student, yes. Well he was an exceptional graduate student, Maynard Smith, because he had been- during the war he'd been an engineer during the war- a mathematical engineer- as a stress man for an aircraft company. I don't actually know exactly how he fitted in with Jack, but they were very close friends. You know, two Etonians again.

He went to India, but I don't really remember when. Perhaps around, in the middle 1950s, or maybe like towards the end of the '50s. And nobody exactly knew why he went to India. But I think there were probably positive and negative feelings, and it was probably that the negative feeling was that science was getting organised into groups and laboratories and all that, and he didn't quite fit into that picture. He was more somebody who liked to move around in science and look at what was going on. And, to begin with, people were very interested and, in the mathematical biology and the genetics people still were. He was a serious figure in- in population genetics. But perhaps more of the 1930s than the 1940s. So there were- his sort of science was drifting away. He had, I was told, he never explained this to me, that he had very warm memories of India from the time of the '14-'18 war- he'd spent time there and he'd loved the colours and the warmth. He was a bit rheumaticky. So that was an attraction. And, I think above all, the Indians made it clear that they'd really like to have him, particularly his friend, Mahalanobis, who was running the ISI, the Indian Science Institute in Calcutta, which he'd invented. And India, at that time, was a sort of socialist dream. Nehru, first of all, you know, the colonial power had been thrown out and it was replaced by a Government which wasn't going to fall into the clutches of the Soviet Union. It was going to lead a life of its own, but they were going to be Socialists and they were going to have their five-year plans which they went on to have. I don't know whether India still has five-year plans. I think they've given up that nonsense. It was very much part of part of it at the time and Mahalanobis was a friend of Nehru, and I'm sure he told Jack that that could be influential in the development of India. Which perhaps it was, up to a point. Up to a point. But, I think what he really liked doing was going around Indian- talking to Indian scientists and being appreciated by them, and well, going on the ways sort of professors do.

His other big thing, besides looking at papers within general genetics and doing his own mathematics, was writing popular science and he did that in semi-popular books- 'Quarters of Evolution' is a semi-popular book. But his- his big thing was writing a column for the Daily Worker. And Jack always said that he learned how to write English- I'm sure he learned most of it while he was a schoolboy at Eton- but after that he learnt how to write succinct English by being edited by William Rust, the Editor of the Daily Worker.  What were the subject matters?  Science.  Always-?  It was always popular science with a, wherever possible, a left wing cast.

						I loved Oxford. I thought it was, at that time and I hope it still is, a place where whatever you bring to Oxford, Oxford returns it to you double. I was- I had the very good fortune to be sent by New College where I was a student, to be tutored outside the college, because they didn't have a biologist, they had an aged physiologist who was- who did try to teach me for a term actually, a very nice guy, Crum, but he- he was really grinding out medical students, I think. I didn't fit into his spectrum. So I was sent to- to Peter Medawar, and boy, was that a shock and a wonder. This- well, you know Peter as well as I do, but for the record, I did know him a little bit before you did, he was quite young then, was he 30 at the time he was tutoring me? If so, only just. He had started as a general biologist actually, with an interest in embryos and development, rather in a slightly old fashioned way of growth and form of embryos. But he had been sucked, through the war effort, into transplantation where he had had, for him, the very good fortune of being asked to look into skin grafting, which at the time was a very urgent matter for- particularly for pilots or aircraft crew who got badly burned. And they often survived but with their- much of their skin destroyed and then they might die of that. Or, the surgeons did their best to repair it. There was a very important surgical unit near Brighton that performed that service for the fighter pilots during the Battle of Britain. So, Peter Medawar hooked up with a young surgeon called Gibson in Glasgow, and between them, they established that skin homografts, as they were called, transplants from another donor, was rejected, was always rejected. Although it might be- it might be a transient benefit or just a dressing for the skin. But it wasn't- they- I think it's clear that that wasn't really known. I think- there was quite a lot of prior work during the 1930s which made that likely, but it wasn't definitively known. And in particular, Peter and Gibson did a- one crucial experiment which was to show that, after a person who'd rejected skin from one donor, if he was given a second piece of skin from the same donor, little patches of skin they used to test, they were rejected more quickly. So there was heightened- following graft rejection there was heightened resistance and that smelled very much like an  immune response and immunity, and Peter had worked- at the time I was there he was going on to do the same sort of experimentation like that in rabbits and then in guinea pigs. The first time I saw- I met him, I went into his room, and I wonder, still wonder if there was, sort of, a little bit of scene-setting by him, but there was an anaesthetised rabbit laid out. And he was about to transplant its skin.
					
						Tutorials- that was once a week for one hour, person to person. About seven times a term, eight-week term, well first week didn't count very much and maybe not the last week so maybe six, something like six tutorials a year, 24 a year, and that was my education.

This was one on one?

One on one.

For three years?

For three years- no, it wasn't for three years, it was for two years. But that was enough. That fixed- that fixed me as- well, he was- like I said, I always needed an older brother and there was Peter, quite as good as either of my brothers.

So what did he do in these tutorials? How would they work?

He would set an essay for me- for his students to write, and they then- would then use what information they had accumulated in lectures, because they were going to lectures at the same time, and indeed doing practical classes at the same time. But those were, intellectually I think, quite minor compared with the impact of the tutorial. Basically, we went off to the science library, which was the Radcliffe South Library. Lovely place. And we would have fun there. We would try to find journals which the library didn't have and chat up the librarians who were these charming young ladies. Sometimes we would hide walnuts behind the books for others to find, and so on and so forth, test each other. But there were always a group of us. Very competitive among ourselves. But I was a leg up on everybody else because, when we'd talked enough about and- Peter wasn't terribly interested in the lectures he was setting. I mean, I remember his setting an essay on The Specialisation of the Benthos, the marine animals that live at the bottom of the sea, you know, they can travel anywhere radically symmetrical but stop moving around although they do have a lively larvae, all that kind of thing, but you could see his heart wasn't in it at all. But you can imagine, he'd just discovered the homographs reaction. And I lectured to him, I'm sure in a most improper way, about genetics, which he didn't know all that much about. And I certainly knew more about it than he did. And he was quite willing to accept that and we were sort of exploring genetics together. That was great. Very old-fashioned genetics, but still, genetics.

But he would set an essay, you would write the essay?

I would write the essay.

Then you'd discuss it the next time. Is that how it works?

Yes. Or you would read the essay to him.

I see.

And then he would say, well, all this reading is bit of a waste of time, why don't give me a lecture on an essay in advance. You knew he'd never read it anyway. I don't think I terribly minded whether he listened to the essay or not. He just wanted to talk.
					
						His big hobby, almost, a subject which he kept coming back to during his- the whole of his life, was the scientific method. I do remember he talked to the- there were all these societies around and he talked to the- the Science Society or the Biology Society. I think it's probably called the Science Society, about the scientific method, and he told us about the creation of hypotheses. It was all rather- we- in retrospect, it was very much Popperish. But he was friend of Popper's, and I don't quite know if all the trade was from Popper to Peter or if there was something perhaps going the other way. The creation of hypotheses, the act of creation, and then the- the testing, the establishment of theory, and then the relationship between theory and meta-theory. I thought that was lovely. That absolutely confirmed one wanting to be a scientist.
					
						Peter's father was of Lebanese extraction, but had migrated to Brazil where he engaged in- no, excuse me, I take that back. To the Argentine, but he was- his work was on the Argentine/Brazilian border. I'm not actually sure actually if it was between Brazil and the Argentine where he established. But he married an English woman there. So Peter's mother was English and they lived in Buenos Aires I think. But his father was-made his money by collecting stones, some precious stones, some semi-precious stones, like agate, on the Brazilian/Argentine border. And there was a big export trade of that and he became, I think not very wealthy, but quite wealthy enough to send his son, no doubt at his wife's insistence, or between the husband and wife, sent their son to Marlborough School, which was a big influence on Peter. He had- he was taught by a master whose name I've forgotten, but it came up in his tutorials. He talked about his master a bit; the schoolmaster who'd influenced him. And that was an old fashioned Public School, as distinct from a Quaker school. And he then went on to take a degree in zoology.

At Oxford?

At Oxford. He did not take a Ph.D., D. Phil it would've been at Oxford. He didn't particularly encourage me actually. You don't need to take a D Phil. If you don't want to. He was out of date about that- you did need to by the time I was taking it but he hadn't done so. He had started, as I say, as an embryologist. The- the smartest thing that Peter Medawar ever did was not just start working with Gibson on the homograph reaction, but to marry Jean, his wife. At the time I first knew her, a stunningly good-looking young woman. Already with a flock of little children. I suppose sort of fell in love with her completely at the time and I always- I always think- I have the greatest admiration for her. She managed Peter's life successfully and she turned it into a- helped turn him into a respectable English professor, British professor, and by the time I finished in Oxford, he'd already been away for a year, taking his first Chair as Professor of Zoology in Birmingham. And he went on and he came back to University College. He completed- was going on working homograph reaction and he, with his colleagues, Billing and Brent discovered immunological tolerance, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize. But that was terrific research. And then he went on to become Director of the National Institute of Medical Research.
					
						I don't know exactly what his relationship was with Magdalen College. He was a Fellow there. First of all I think he was a Prize Fellow, but then, by the time I knew him, he was full Fellow. He didn't teach in college. He did tutorial work for- no doubt for students in Magdalen but that wasn't enough. The whole class of biologists was quite small, it was about 20 or so. He would've taught from one or two other colleges and did- did tutorial work. So he would've been probably teaching these one to one tutorials, I guess six hours a week, perhaps, and that's quite a bit.

That's a lot.

And, he, in his own autobiography, has written very, very warmly about Magdalen College, about how it taught him not to be afraid of any subject that he felt that by the time you'd been hanging around in Magdalen College for a while, you could tackle any intellectual problem. I think perhaps except mathematics, I think. But outside that, that was- could do. And when I followed in his footsteps later on and became, not a Tutorial Fellow but a Prize Fellow in Magdalen, which is a limited tenure thing for three years, all that was still true. Magdalen had an enormously distinguished collection of Dons. It had C. S. Lewis, it had A. J. P. Taylor, it had Gilbert Ryle, it had others, Tom Stevens the classics Don. They were- they were noisy and a somewhat closed group. No- not much time for women.  A. J. P. Taylor was having a rotten time with his wife at the time, who was having it off with that Welsh poet, and- but by and large, there was a- I wouldn't say exactly a homosexual atmosphere there, but slightly homosexual, and the whole of Oxford had a pervasively somewhat misogynous, somewhat homosexual atmosphere to it. And that was no doubt why later on I got on so very well with- with Tony Richardson.
					
						It was pretty misogynist. I don't think I was- I was ever, in fact, to be honest, I don't think I was homosexual at all, but, as I say, the common room, with all these people who I knew and loved and admired, very strong tinge. Probably very little practice. And then, there was the theatre world which I drifted into through, I suppose, through- maybe it was- I think it was through my younger sister, Val, who had arrived in Oxford a couple of years later. And she was a very pretty girl and there were lots of people at her feet, and she sort of swanned  through it. She didn't actually do anything in the way of acting, but she was- she knew all those people. And, I was, of course, there were these lovely girls. And my- the peak of my success there was appearing in 'The Duchess of Malfi' not only in Oxford but also when it transferred to Paris. That was fun. Tony and I became great friends and I believe now, in retrospect, Tony's died now- he died of AIDS- that there was probably, you know, this sort of ambiguous feeling. But, in fact, what happened was- in fact what happened was that there was a girl called Ming Craig from London who started as a friend of Tony's, and I fell very much in love with her towards the end of my life in Oxford. Then I moved to America, as we'll come to in a minute. And, I thought I was going to lose touch with everybody, but Tony came over and we spent- I can't remember, quite a long time- six weeks or so on a huge drive through America together. And before I'd left, I'd had a sort of resolution talk with Tony, and he said, you can attach yourself to Ming as far as I'm concerned. I think I should have realised at that point that, although I was pretty naïve, that there were boys and girls and different tastes involved. The tragedy was that Ming contracted leukemia soon after I had parted company and she died while I was away, and I never saw her again. But I can't even really recall what she looked like. I can just recall driving in an ancient Austin, whatever it was, six or seven or something like that- tiny crummy old pre-war car, it didn't have a petrol pump, it was a gravity feed inside under the bonnet- with Ming and Tony, and being in love and, well that was part of my youth.
					
Part of having- part of the lovely terms on which the Commonwealth Fund Fellowship was awarded was that you had to spend- can't remember what it was- three months travelling across America, so- and I certainly wanted company doing that, so I asked Tony if he'd like to come and he said yes. So that was great. I also asked Alton Pickens, who was an artist in the distinguished Arts Faculty in Indiana University to come too, and he and Tony eventually got on very badly and I don't know whether that was a threesome which should have been a twosome quarrelling, or whether it was that Alton Pickens was pretty much an unreconstructed Marxist, so what he had to say about everything was a bit, had got a bit predictable, whereas Tony's speciality was being completely unpredictable, you know. The sights of Reno, Nevada glowed on the horizon and all Tony- then it turns out that Tony had been absolutely longing to gamble, so off he set off into the casino to gamble while Alton and I, I think, were behaving like stuffy old chumps in a motel. And so we went across America and we went to California, and then we went down to Mexico and we reached Mexico City, and I hope I was staying friendly with both of them but those two were really making trouble. But Tony was a brilliant person to travel with because he knew what was interesting and exciting in his world in different places. When we were in California we had to visit Charles Eames and his wife and sit in- both of the, I mean serially in both of the wonderful chairs, and Charles Eames and his wife- I can't remember who took responsibility- showed us the film that they'd made about communication, and it was about, you know, it had the waves beating on the Pacific shore, communicating the news and the weather in the middle of the Pacific, and then I don't know what else, it probably had these chairs in it as well, modern architecture. Anyway, that was- what a treat, what a privilege to visit like that. And then as we went down to Mexico City, Tony knew the art to see there and that art was- was of course, it was- was- was the art of the- I don't remember exactly what they are, what are the great Mexican painters of the 1920s and 1930s- were all, called themselves communists or called themselves socialists, I don't quite remember - but he had, you know, the right take on that, so again, that was enormous fun, and I think he managed to dig up some contacts who were sort of show us around, so that was all very nice. What else can I say? We came home- I got, when I got married, once or twice Lorna and I called on Tony, but I think, well I am sure that actually in retrospect, that Tony was a bit in love with me, so having a third chap there was a bit off, and when we visited him sometimes he was on his own and sometimes he was with his wife, living in St Peter's Square, and the relationship was- had changed and, alas, I drifted apart, we drifted apart. I am proud to say that Tony's autobiography has nothing but nice things to say about me though they are not very- they're not very lengthy, I'm a pretty minor figure in his life. He was a much bigger figure in my life- through him I learnt about the theatre, I became interested in the theatre, and that stayed with me absolutely.

						I was given a little award which was actually enough to live on, which at the time, being- having all these left wing principles- I remember I didn't take the money. I said I could support myself. And, then I said to the Oxford authorities, and of course I want to work with Peter Medawar, look at all this wonderful work he's doing and what a wonderful character he is. And, of course, they were other Dons, they weren't Peter Medawar, so they had to listen to all this guff, and they said, well, we've got somebody doing, sort of, something like that who was- what was his name? In Florey's department, Mandelsteim? But it was actually very interesting work on priming for cancer. If you- if you gave mice a chemical carcinogen there are molecules which you could give before, or after, the treatment with the carcinogen which would accentuate the development of cancer. And they said, well, why don't you work on that. And I burst into tears, I remember doing that, when confronted by whoever it was, and actually it was a very nice biochemist. He said, no, no, and then they said, oh, alright if that's what you do, you can come and be a student here. And that, of course, was not a great- that was a very good idea as far as working with Peter was concerned. It wasn't quite such a good idea in other ways, because the Pathology Department, where they suggested I would work in, had been built by Florey and by his predecessors, into a great centre of medical research, and Jim Gowans was streets ahead of me in, I think- I'm not sure about conceptually, but in- certainly in the technology which-because it was all there. He could just eat into.

Was he a contemporary?

Yes. I got to know him after, I think, I'd been there for about a year. But then we became very good friends.

Right.

Whereas, in the old Zoology Department, they said, come, of course come and work here, and there's your bench, and what do you want to do? And I said, I want to study transplantation and I- There was one thing which I realised then, which was actually; I was a little bit ahead of Peter I think, which was- mice were things to work on because of the genetics, you know, all these inbred mice. So I wanted to keep all these mice. They said, that's fine and how are you going to keep them? I said, well I think you're supposed to put them in cages. And they said, oh fine. And if you're happy, actually we've got a room actually waiting where you could put cages in when you've got them, but I didn't have ay cages. And it wasn't quite so easy in 1948 to acquire cages. And eventually, with my friend Donald Michie who was also starting up mouse work, but not on immunology, but on other things, on coat colour, we solved the problem up to a point by buying a load of refrigerator trays, enameled refrigerator trays from pressed steel in Cowley, whose main business was making motor cars for Lord Nuffield, but I think they were an off-shot of the motor because they'd also started making refrigerators. So they had these refrigerator trays and they weren't ideal for putting mice into, but they did. Eventually they all rusted through and the mice ran out and ran around the room. But since they were, in my opinion, since they were all inbred mice and all more or less the same it didn't matter which cage they went back into.
					
						I'd heard a student of Peter's called Darcy Wilson. He was just- a Canadian- he was just leading in Oxford the time that I started. And he gave a talk on the homograph reaction from the point of view of what it looks like. And he'd be cutting sections. And he had noticed that-

This wasn't Darcy Wilson, this was Darcy somebody else.

No, no, sorry. Did I say Darcy Wilson?

Yes.  But you meant-

Sorry I'm getting the name muddled up.  He was Darcy-

Darcy Hart?

No.

A different Darcy.

He disappeared from- he's not- I could probably find out his name.

No, it's okay.

But at any rate, he had observed that skins grafts filled up with lymphocytes at the time of rejection, so it was a reasonable guess that the lymphocytes have something to do with it. So I set out to try to test that idea. And, not wanting to do it all with skin grafts, partly because actually I wanted to cut out a little bit of territory for myself apart from the- this very strong grouping, in Birmingham. So I thought that the way to do it would be by transplanting tumors. That wasn't an entirely original idea, not at all. Because, in particular, a scientist called William Woglom in America had published papers on tumor transplantation and had noticed that, in mice, they grew for a bit and then they shrunk with about the same timing, as we by that time you knew the skin was being rejected. So that seemed a more- an easier assay. So I used to- I got a hold of a tumor which would be transplanted in one strain of mice, and I learned to mince up the tumor with- Peter told me that. I said, I had this great lump, what shall I do with it? Oh well, get a pair of iris scissors, that's scissors which have a half-curve in them, and just go on chopping until you've got a mince which you can take out in a cannula, which is what I did. And then you push the cannula under- under the mouse's skin, and lo and behold, in about six days you get a little lump, and if it's the same inbred strain that turns, by day 10, to quite a big lump. But if you put it into a foreign mouse strain, you can see the same little lump there at day 6, but by 10, day 10, there's nothing- it's been rejected. So using that as an assay, I then tried transferring blood and blood cells and that didn't work. I learnt how to- I went to visit Peter Gorer in London who had been, himself, a kind of- I don't think he was labelled a student of Jack's, but he'd been close to Jack, partly sharing the same political opinions and partly because Jack had encouraged him and that was his, Gorer's, entry into science to- to try to test the idea that blood groups were-  the word- the term used then was primary gene products. They were close to what the- the gene made. And in particular, you had two different genes, or two different blood groups, human or animal, would express both of them. And, the rules of transplantation that had been worked out by- in America, by people in the Jackson Lab in America, and particularly by its founder, the rules of transplantation between hybrids and parents supported that view. So, at Jack's- with Jack's encouragement- And Jack, I think, first proposed the hypothesis that these were primary gene products; Gorer had set out to test it by making antibodies and he'd done that. He verified that, and that went on to- that was the beginning of the definition of the H2 locus. It's now called the histocompatibility locus of mice, and he had done that by- Gorer had done that by going to Bar Harbour and one, doing a great experiment, two, getting married to, I think, the personal assistant of C. C. Little, the founder. And that made him a more humane person. So, where was I? Yes. He taught to bleed mice and I thought, well, if he's right there should the antibodies there. But that didn't work, so-

There were no antibodies.

Well, there were antibodies that Gorer had shown.

Right.

You could show the antibodies with some difficulty. It was not very easy text, but you could show there were antibodies. But if you transferred the serum that didn't work.

Didn't speed up the rejection. Right.

And then I went on to make the same minces I'd been making with tumors. I was making minces out of lymph nodes and those did transfer immunity.
					
						Donald had, like me, had secured a classics scholarship to up to Balliol and that was a most distinguished way of coming to Oxford. You couldn't do better than a classics scholarship to- to Balliol. That's what British Prime Ministers, one after another, the liberal Prime Ministers, rather that the Tories, had had for years past. That was what Benjamin Jowett, the great Father of Oxford University, 'my name is Benjamin Jowett  there's nothing that is, but I know it, and I'm the Master of this College and what I don't know isn't knowledge'. So, Donald was in the middle of that tradition. But then, during the war, he was sucked off to Bletchley, famous Bletchley, the Code Breakers, where he met and admired these- the great mathematicians, Turing above all of course, but  Alexander and other mathematicians. Alexander was a Don back in Oxford after the war. And Donald gave up classics and decided that genetics was the thing. He- he kind of in parallel with me. I don't remember now what degree he took in Oxford. Was it in classics finally? Probably not. It was something else but I don't actually remember what it was. So we sort of started at the same time, and he decided to do this coat colours which was a very respectable thing to do in mice in those days and we built the cages together. But mostly he took me through left wing politics from a different standpoint. He was a very close friend of, and got married to an exact contemporary of mine, who is Anne McLaren. And I'm glad I remembered to mention her because she was another big influence in Oxford, Anne. I think there will personal archive- personal archive on Anne, here, won't there? So perhaps I don't need to say very much about that. She also was somebody, since we were contemporaries or since she was a beautiful young woman, I was deeply touched by her, although, as she was the first person to tell me eventually, I never said a word to her. She was- I was impossible to talk to, and I didn't know how to talk to girls. I had to come back from America before I had learned to do that. But I didn't know how to talk to girls. Not even to Ming. Yes, it was alright when there were three of us. And she knew perfectly well what was going on, but I didn't know how to talk to girls.

I see.

Anyway, so Anne- I think Anne had converted Donald from being- he'd never been a stuffy classic, but he could've been a stuffy classic, to being a lively minded left wing geneticist at that time. But still with his real interest, I think, in sort of mathematics, on the mathematical side.
					
						My older brother, Murdoch, was at Cambridge at the time. He also was doing a degree in Zoology and was doing a Ph.D. in it. He'd been in the war. He'd- In my eyes he was a total hero, although I don't think he ever actually did anything terribly dangerous during the war, because he was also in Operational Research. But he was finding out in Italy how much mud it took to stop a tank. He did lots of other things too, I'm sure, but that was something.  Anyway, so he was there and he was in the Cambridge Zoology Department. And the Cambridge Zoology Department in those days was quite, quite different from Oxford. It had a terrific workshop. It was, kind of, the Department hovered round this workshop and students were encouraged to make things. So the whole thing was oriented to towards animal physiology where you needed devices to measure the twitch of grasshopper legs, or whatever. And in his case, he and Michael Swan and Victor Rothchild who was an earlier figure there, all decided to look at a sea urchin development to see- to find out about the changes which took place at fertilisation, the blocked block too polyspermy in the egg, and other things. And Murdoch's part of that was to make a sucker which could be applied to the surface of a cell, and you could suck it and see how much it was deformed, and you got some idea about its strengths. And he made one, in what could've been a notable discovery, but somehow it was years and years before its time, which was that you could only explain the rigidity of the red cell membrane by knowing that in the bi-concave shape, the two sides of the concave disk probably touched, and that strengthened the- the- the shape of the cell. So, anyway, Murdoch was in Trinity, was he a Fellow there at the time? Maybe. I can't actually remember that. And he had become- he made friends, as any person- any thoughtful biologist was bound to do, with the founders of molecular biology, who were the so-called Cavendish Group in Cambridge, because there was a Medical Research Council unit in Cambridge. And that had Crick and Watson in it, it had John Kendrew who was Murdoch's close friend, and other- a small number of other very, very clever people who were laying the foundations of modern molecular biology. Although they were somewhat doing it indirectly because they were concerned with structure mainly. But as part of the study of structure Jim Watson had arrived as a kind of refugee from a lab in Cambridge which was- sorry, in Copenhagen, which was run by a lovely man, Ole Møle who used to show up every now and then. He wasn't- didn't hold it against Jim that Jim had moved on because he wasn't- couldn't provide what Jim wanted. Jim had been a student of Luria's in the United States, and had come to realise that DNA was the most interesting molecule anybody could work on, and there was Francis Crick trying to establish its structure by an entirely new procedure, which was to work in a group of crystallographers where the natural thing would've been to make crystals and look at them. Or make threads which- structured threads and look at them. This is all, you know, part of history now. Everybody knows this. In fact, the structural work was, you know, done by Rosalind Franklin in London and Crick and Watson did something totally original which was to do it by model building. And Jim, at the time, was, I realise now in retrospect, was a rather lonely American and so- I'd learnt by then that the best part of science, in a way, was making friends with- with other people who were doing interesting things. And of course, it was a help in one's own career, it was bound to be. But I didn't quite realise that at the time. Mostly, I just liked making friends, basically because I was looking for these elder brothers. And Jim was exactly the same age as me, but that was no bar to him being an elder brother. And he used to- we made friends and he used to come over to Oxford and I went over to Cambridge. And he behaved like an older brother and gave me lectures on how I should conduct my life, and he's gone on doing that ever since. And sometimes, occasionally, I would say something to him, and you've heard me blowing up at him in the past. But still, I think we've remained friends. But the great success in Jim's life was not me, but my mother. I brought him to Carradale and my mother, who by then was an absolute expert at scooping- recognising talent and scooping it up, she scooped up Jim like nobody's business and again it's a matter of history, it's partly- it's all in his 'The Double Helix', in his book. He used to go on holidays with my mother in South of France, where they were really attached. He'd lost his own mum at the time, and I think she- she filled the gap. And of course, she loved it. Having that book dedicated to her was one of her big moments, no doubt about that.
					
						We talked a lot while he was still a scientist in Oxford. Sadly, after he became Secretary of the MRC, it isn't that one- that I felt any cooler as a friend, but I did feel, like everybody does, just slightly awkward because he was in such a very powerful position. We connected again at the beginning of the AIDS epidemic, when we talked about it and we both recognised it as a major challenge to medical research, and I asked him whether I should do anything for him. I said, I was at your disposal if you want me to. And he said, no, he was going to do it himself. And I thought that was probably the right decision for him to make, actually. And he ran the AIDS programme, not for a very long time, for one or two or three years. It may be that I was well out of it because it looked an easy challenge, you know, build a vaccine, like the salt vaccine, and that would be the end of the problem, but it didn't work out like that, did it.
					
I opted right out of immunology for one year, on the advice of Jim Watson. He said- I- he said to me, I've had a wonderful time- he had a wonderful time- in Indiana University, which had some very interesting people in it at that time, why don't you go there and why not work for Tracy Sonneborn, which I did, on the paramecium aurelia. And, actually the- I followed that. I wrote to Sonneborn. I got a funny letter back from him, I remember, saying, you know, I'm touched that you should think of wanting to work with me. Could you please tell me who you are, and I think I'd written some- probably fairly, by modern standards impersonal letter. I didn't realise that I'd better send people CVs or anything like that. So then I- But I had got a Fellowship. I'd- I'd already applied- or was it before? I can't remember what timing it was. I got a Commonwealth Fund Fellowship for which I'm eternally grateful to the American Commonwealth Fund, which facilitated young Brits going to America. And they didn't have to be scientists, they could be architects or artists or cinematographers or whatever. But they were kind enough to do that. And they gave me a one very well paid Fellowship. I think I got $2,000 a year the first year and maybe $3,000 the second year. Even in those days that was not a- a huge amount, but that was enough to live on, and it was wonderful.

						There was a feeling in genetics in the- in that time, at the end of the 1950s, sorry, at the end of the 1940s and the beginning, the early 1950s, that Mendelian genetics was not enough. There was something else going on. And the feeling about that was pretty muddled. Peter Medawar was very interested in cellular inheritance, most notably in the skin, where he had shown, he with his colleagues, had shown that if you take the different components of the surface there of the skin, the epidermis, and transplant them to another site on the body, if you took, for example, the cornea and put it onto the flank skin, or sole of foot and put it onto flank, it would continue to be- manifest its sole of foot or corneal properties and it remained transparent. And nowadays that is actually quite commonplace and it's accepted as being due to the control of gene expression which is- turns out to be heritable over long periods of time. I was so thrilled by that work that I transplanted a little piece of sole of foot there, and it's still there, just detectable, whatever it is now, 50 years later. But I didn't- I wasn't in the nature of an experiment. I don't know what it was. I didn't- I didn't make much of a distinction between heroic actions calculated to build you up in the eyes of your boss and a real scientific experiment. So, what else could there be? Could there be inheritance in cells outside the nucleus and Peter Medawar wrote, and I co-signed, I don't know if it's in my CV, but if I wasn't actually a co-signer, I think I was- no. I think he acknowledged the help of his students- his undergraduate students there, so maybe it's not there, on this topic. So when Watson said, Jim Watson said, why not try Indiana, and what about Tracy Sonneborn, he's an extremely nice guy and interested in alternatives to Mendelian inheritance, that all figured. I also had, at the back of my mind, that it would be- that I was interested in an idea that my uncle had put forward about the inheritance of paramecium in which that concerns senescence. Like other protozoa, some paramecia, not all of them, I think most paramecia but not all protozoa, have a life cycle where they go through binary fissions for a month or two in the case of paramecium, more than that, two or three months, and at the end of that they die unless they go through sex and the sex could be with other paramecia, or it can be with themselves, they can- they can undergo myosis, and gametes can fuse all inside the same organism. And Jack had suggested- he made millions of interesting suggestions that that might be because mutations accumulated in the macronucleus, and that eventually kills the organism unless it replaced its macronucleus. So- so that all seemed fine. Tracy Sonneborn was a wonderful man. I don't know how he had the patience to put up with me, because for the first six months, I was absolutely miserable in Indiana, simply because it wasn't Oxford, and particularly his dear wife, Ruth. She found a very- a lovely girl, one of the Benesh family. I think she might have been the daughter of the President of Czechoslovakia who'd been deposed by the Nazis, and I remember meeting her in her house and just being- not rising to the occasion. I thought she was very attractive, but could I do anything about it, no I couldn't.  But at any rate because what I was doing was looking after these cultures of paramecium and making sure they didn't have sex with themselves. You have to check on them every day, stain a few of them, and you can see if they- if they did it they were discarded, and then the other ones developed, did senesce. And to cut a long story short, I was able to satisfy myself that it wasn't- the problem was not as the organism old, it wasn't that they accumulated mutations in the macronucleus, because they died as soon as they started to reorganise their micronuclei which were making the gametes. Myosis was some kind of- something too difficult for an old cell to cope with. I never knew anything about the biochemistry, but that's just a piece of biology and I spent a year doing that.
					
						I listened enthralled to Tracy Sonneborn developing the argument with his students that, particularly the famous kappa particles, or the genes which encoded them, might be part of the paramecium and it was somehow a model for cellular differentiation in the human body.  And at the end of the year, I was leaving Indiana and it was still all up in the air. Delbruck at Cold Spring Harbour had proposed to Tracy that all his work on the killer particles and on the related project of- there was variants in the cilia. The proteins are make up cilia which behaved in roughly the same way, could be not cytoplasmic inheritance, but rather stable circuits of genes being turned on and turned off, and the turning off turned on, ultimately worked round to stabilise cellular inheritance. And, in fact, Delbruck was proposing what now everybody thought. Tracy was shaken to the core by that and he talked about it with us very frankly and he said, I don't have a good argument against Delbruck, but I want to go on- I'm going to go on, for the time being, looking for cytoplasmic inheritance, and then I left. Sadly, within a very short time, two or three years, Ruth Dipple turned up DNA in the kappa particles  so there was no doubt from then on that those were bacterial contaminants inside the paramecium. Well, that's biology. Things don't work out the way you'd expected it. What I- I liked Sonneborn enormously and I know that he found me difficult and he didn't quite understand what I was trying to do. But he let me write a paper on my own. And later, when I came- he was very- quite soon he became very ill and died. But I met him once more in Europe, in England actually, and he did two things. He brought me a present from America of a nice tie. I wasn't much into wearing ties, but I was touched to the core by that, being given a present. I don't think he'd ever given a present to anybody before. And the second thing, he then made his own speech, and he said, that what I had been talking to him about was what was now the main thing in his mind. So I don't think that- I think he was probably exaggerating a lot, but I thought- I was touched to the core when he said that I'd been an influence on him, because he was an older man and I deeply respected him.
					
						I slept in the graduate student's men's dorm in a sort of bunk bed. I think I was the only classicist in the room. I ate with them. In the morning I was confronted when I- Britain was still pretty short of food- by a bucket of fried eggs, two feet deep, these farm boys and farm girls tucked into their fried eggs. You walked across the campus and instead of in the Oxford tradition, keeping yourself very much to yourself and perhaps raising your hat, they said, Hi! they said. I- eventually I was absolutely- I loved that and at the end I really did find a farm girl, daughter of a farm girl, who, again, I was very much attracted to, and I think she liked me. And she went off then to work in Caltech.  A year later we were travelling around and we went out to supper together and I remember driving along one of those Los Angeles freeways, and I just remember both of us feeling great affection and knowing that at the end of the evening, I was going to get into an aeroplane and fly off somewhere else, and God knows what happened to her. I don't even remember her name. I do remember the straw hat she used to wear.
					
						I went for a year to Bar Harbor, I wrote another of these squiffy letters to- to George Snell. I mean these days I don't- it would be found in the wastepaper basket I doubt not. And I proposed to George Snell how it would be possible to study histocompatibility genes. Not realising- I actually don't know how much he published at the time, but he was right in the middle of the project. So he said, sure come to- to Bar Harbor.  You're bringing your own money, so that's no problem. You can have as many mice as you like, which was what- I was certainly keen on that. And, I'm going off to Texas to- for a sabbatical year to write my book on ethics. So that's what happened. And George Snell was a perfect New England gent and he made me welcome, then he said good bye, then he came back, I think, once or twice during the year. At the end of the year he said, well, what have you been doing, and I showed him what I'd been doing, and he said, oh that's terrific.  We'll go and tell Prexy Little.  So he ushered me in to Prexy Little's, C. C. Little's, office. I sort of vaguely knew that I- I think I didn't know so clearly at the time that Little and Jack, J. B. S. Haldane were- had been such friends. I don't know that they were close friends, but intellectual they were close and so that was wonderful. And Bar Harbor had people who- a group of scientists who remained life- long friends, Will Silver, the man who did more about coat colour genetics than anybody else, in the long run, and many other fields too.  Darcy Wilson was there who became a very distinguished geneticist eventually. He was a- I think he was almost a volunteer or a beginner there. It was really nice in Bar Harbor. The- George Snell was still- I remember at the time when- I remember- He wouldn't talk about antigens in the H2 complex.  He called them transplantation factors. So I took it on myself to try to strengthen the evidence that they were factors-  I was really following up what I'd been doing in Oxford, returning to the old- my old ground.
					
						I had the honour of writing George Snell's biographical memoir in the PNAS last year, so I'm pretty familiar- I became familiar with his work. And he was approaching the H2 complex from a rather different angle. He was interested in transplantation factors. He had worked with Gorer defining antigens associated in the MHC in, I would say, using his terminology, within the H2 complex. But he knew that the H2 complex was multigene. He knew that, quite soon, from purely genetical experiments. And, we now know that the antigens which Gorer had looked at were what would now be called MHC class 1 genes and they're not the only genes involved in rejecting tumors. It all was getting quite complicated, and George was sorting it out.
					
						George never did any immunology on his own. He did have people, like me and others later, who did immunological experiments within his group. And what I was doing was- I can't really remember what was so special about that time. I think, perhaps, the most important single thing was showing that when you transferred immunity by these minces of cells, that immunity lasted forever. So it couldn't be, or would be extremely unlikely to be, any molecule.  It had to be something- the cells themselves had to be surviving. And I think we went some way to proving that, did we? I'm not quite sure.
					
						The question which we wanted to answer was whether neonatal tolerance was there once and for all, or whether it depended on some persistent antigenic stimulus. It was difficult to do that with tissue cells because, well for obvious reasons, they do colonise the body. Lymphocytes colonise the body, so you couldn't do it with them. The avian red cell is nucleated so it's got the antigens, or most of the antigens, which you're interested in, but it has a limited life span. So, I discovered that you could label chicken red cells with chromium, radio chromium- no surprise about that- but that told you that you could follow the decay of the red cells, and you could show that if you transplanted- sorry, if you injected labelled cells from one chicken into an unrelated chicken, they got rejected in a very nice immunological way, rather like the old skin grafts and the tumour grafts. The red cells circulated perfectly for four days or so and then they got cleared and chromium disappeared from the blood, so that was a good way of monitoring whether the host was tolerant or not. And I discovered two things. One was that so long as you kept reintroducing red cells into a bird with which you started when the bird was an embryo, so you'd have to inject the egg, they would never recover. But as soon as you stopped giving red cells, then they began to recover from tolerance. They started making this elimination response. Perhaps the most interesting part of that was that the speed of recovery depended on how old the chicken was when you stopped the infusion of antigen, and when the chicken was- when you stopped after, say, three weeks, the chicken would recover reactivity, after about three weeks. If you stopped it after three months, it would take something more like three months to recover. And I certainly didn't understand exactly what was going on, but I guessed, and I think that guess has been substantiated, probably not in this particular system, but in other systems. But that's because the recovery is the result of new cells being fed out of the thymus and the thymus atrophies as the bird gets older, just as it does in men or mice.
					
						I did one mouse experiment which was- I- had something to do with the future. It was good. Which was to show that if you irradiated mice, you got a better transferred response. What was the response? I've actually forgotten, but some immune  response. They- the irradiation helped a lot. And that led me to go and spend a couple of months in- in Harwell, in the Atomic Energy Research establishment where there was a Medical Research Council unit led by John Lightet and I did work in parallel with work which was done there by Ford who showed- they showed that in an irradiated animal you could re-colonise the spleen as judged by chromosome markers. And I showed that if you irradiated an animal you could re-colonise the spleen as judged by transplantation antigens. It was an all transplantation antigen tests, which was almost all anyone knew about apart from these chromium plated red cells, and they 
both get the same result

This was with bone marrow?

This was with bone marrow, or spleen, there was enough hematopoietic cells in spleen to do it.
					
						What we always said to one another was that you would get anything in "Nature" if you pinned a note to the manuscript saying, the reviewers want this manuscript published immediately. The editorial office run, I think, by Brimble at the time, was held to be- I've no idea if this is true or not - was held to be a terrible mess and Brimble would publish anything. That can't have been true, but it was much easier to publish then than it is now.

Right.

My goodness.

Did you ever have a paper rejected in those early years in your career?

I tried to think if I've really- I've had papers, or I've had one paper, rejected twice, the same paper, in the last year, and it was a bit of a shock. I don't think I'd ever had one before.

Lucky you.

For a long time I used to publish all my work in the "European Journal of Immunology", but since I was the Chief Editor there and then would short-circuit that was cheating wasn't it.
					
						There are a few old buffers like me who five or ten years ago were saying to one another, so and so puts his name on his students' papers, and isn't that shocking. Brian Clark, I think, the distinguished Nottingham geneticist. But we knew the times were changing. I - if you want me to dilate on the subject, let me just express a view. My view in those days was, when it was a question of putting- somebody else putting their names- name on my paper, never. But, fairly recently, within the last 10, 15 years, I've changed my views. It isn't so much a question of my putting my name- or at least perhaps it is- on other people's papers, but it's the feeling that, in those days the scientific world was quite small and everybody really did know one another, and it wasn't too difficult to find your way around. Nowadays, biology is 10 times as big, and without the terminal author who tells whoever work was done, it's even more difficult to find your way round. By looking at papers which have Raff at the end of the paper, I know that they come from a respectable laboratory, but above all, I know about the intellectual- the background.
					
						In the field of immunological tolerance, Milan Hasek had made an important discovery with parabiotic eggs. If you join two eggs together then the chickens which hatched from them would accept one another's skin grafts or tissue. And, you know, he's one of the penumbra of people around any Nobel Prize who had a claim, but he certainly got himself into a mess by putting down a lot of stuff about the parabiotic and vegetative hybridization, and the baleful influence of Lysenko on Eastern science. Now for me, that baleful influence was perhaps more an attraction than- than a despicable toadyism. I wondered if, behind all that- I was still- I hadn't accepted fully that Delbruck was opposed to the Sonneborn feel about cellular inheritance, and I just worry- still wondered if there was something there. So that was two reasons for wanting to go. Another reason for wanting to go was to find out about, you know, Europe and the rest of the world, and it would be nice to- I'm sure I thought it would be great to- if really good science was done outside of the USA and outside Britain.

So how was that period? Was it useful, productive?

Scientifically no I don't think so. I don't really think I got very much done there. Oh, I remember. I published a paper, which was supposed to show vegetative hybridisation. It was a big mistake, big error. That's a little story, if we've got plenty of time for me to tell it to you. My idea was that we would make vegetative hybrids in birds by transplanting pieces of spleen from turkeys onto the egg membranes of chickens and vice versa. And that we would then- we would have antibodies which would recognise chicken cells and antibodies which would recognise turkey cells. And so- In Milan's lab I did that experiment.  And lo and behold, when you looked at the cells of the embryos, their red cells reacted with both of the antibodies. Both anti-chicken and anti-turkey. Whoopee!  Vegetative hybridization. So that was published with an English and a Russian abstract at the end, as was the custom then, in the "Journal of the Czech Academy of Sciences"- "Folia Biologica", and I think probably just as soon as it appeared, Morten Siemensen turned up in Edinburgh, the great Danish transplantation- student of transplantation biology, and became a very close friend in the long run, very wonderful man. And he discovered the graft versus host reaction. So very quickly, I was able to show that the antibodies which had been made by immunising chicken cells with- sorry, immunising chickens with turkey cells and vice versa, the red cells hadn't been washed perfectly, I don't know, they'd been done three times, but they contained antibodies of, eventually, immunoglobulins  against the antibodies of the other one. So what I was recognising on these chickens cells was chicken antigens, and with the anti-turkey cells, I was recognising, actually, chicken antibodies sitting on the- the foreign cells, graft-versus-host  reaction. So that wasn't a great production.
					
						He came to Edinburgh and looked around and said, this won't do. Come and try Harvard. So I did. And- but I wasn't there for very long. I taught for one semester, a course in embryology there, in the old bio labs, which were no better equipped than the Edinburgh Zoology Department, actually, for my sort of thing. So I slipped over the Charles River to work in Al Coons' lab in the Medical School. Al Coons was another perfect- he was rather- something in common, actually, with George Snell come to think of it, both perfect East Coast gents, without a lot to say, but they could be, in their own way, very encouraging and he was. I was already thrilled by what you could do in the way of injecting proteins into mice, and it didn't really fit with what was going on in his lab, so that didn't work out very well. But more importantly, by that time, I was- I think I was married to- to Lorna, whom you know. She'd been a student in Edinburgh. We got married, and Jim was our best man. And that was all wonderful, and I was very grateful to him.  And I was actually living in Harvard in a flat which he and Albert Tissier had- an apartment they'd rented, or a house they borrowed, actually, from somebody in Divinity Road.  And Lorna came and looked around and went for a walk along the banks of the Charles River, and she said, this is not for me. So then I decided to come home. And I've never regretted that. Nor have I ever thought, for a moment, that had I stayed in America, the science wouldn't have been- it wouldn't be a wonderful place for science.
					
						I read a paper on this to, probably, in those days it was before the Immunological Society, it would have been to the Society of Experimental Biology in Britain, and I was talking about it afterwards to Robin Coombs, and of course, what I'd been seeing was really the Coombs reaction, because his great claim to fame was the recognising antibodies stuck to red cells. And he said to me in a rather snooty way, well that just shows that you can never do science without clean reagents, and of course he was quite right- my feelings were just a tiny bit hurt by that. And then a little bit later, I was elected to the Royal Society and Coombs- I remember Coombs congratulating me beforehand, making it very clear in his congratulations, that he'd actually supported my candidature, which he shouldn't have done, but he did. So I was very touched by that.
					
						I was starting work on what's now called peripheral tolerance, on making animals tolerant of antigens which are injected and reach cells after they've left the thymus.

Right.

What's now called T-cell after they've left the thymus. And that was part of what I'm sure was the best work in my life, over the next 10 years. And that was made possible because, having been- having messed around with this radio chromium in chickens in Edinburgh in a way which I would be sent to prison if I did now. I mean the chickens were running around and God knows what's happening to the chicken shit at the end of all this. I arrived in Mill Hill where there was a radiation safety officer who was actually extremely helpful and gave lots of good advice. And under his, sort of, with help from him, and especially with help from Rosalind Pitt-Rivers, I was able, along with other people, Americans and many other people in the world, particularly from the group then in Pittsburgh. Bill Weigle was a working- was a main workman, but they also had introduced the use of isotopes for detecting antibodies and if you want to work with mice, working the way that Peter Gorer had done before, with antibodies against red cells, where you need a special media and reagents to test then, wasn't at all attractive. Starting work with protein became much easier. I actually- Now I come to think of it, that work had started before in Edinburgh where my first research student, David Dresser had discovered that if you injected radio iodine labelled proteins- foreign immunoglobulin into a mouse, that was- that could do one of two things. It could either be eliminated in the way that the cells had been eliminated, that's to say that the protein circulated in the mouse for three or four days without being eliminated, then it would quickly clear, apparently by antibody, or it could also be given radioactivity and the radioactivity would survive forever.  And that depended on whether adjuvants had been given. If the protein was given without adjuvants, then it induced tolerance in an adult mouse, but if it was given with adjuvants, then you got this-

That's what we now know as a microbial molecule that stimulates the immune system.

The adjuvant-

The adjuvant. Right.

Right. Right.

No adjuvant, no immune response, basically.

Exactly.

But if you give it without it then you tolerise the mice.  And that began a very productive 10, 15 years.

That's right. That's right.
					
						There is a statue of Isaac Newton at the other end of the building on the staircase, and as Polly Matzinger, who in her opinion, introduced the notion that bacterial products were essential to simulate the immune response, past the statue, she said, yes. Isaac Newton and me.
					
						Peter had taken on the Directorship of Mill Hill. He was planning to move. He moved to University College from Birmingham and he was moving to the National Institute of Medical Research. I remember-  no, I won't talk about that, about his motives for the- doesn't concern the story. He'd offered the job to another bloke in Birmingham who had so much money of his own that he had decided, for taxation reasons, to return to the Channel Islands, so he was left without somebody to head the department which had been engaged in reproductive biology. But he saw would make a good place for him to work, so he wanted somebody to run a small outfit in which he would fit. And, I was- so he invited me to come down and join him. And I was thrilled to do that, because you've only got to look at the National Institute of Medial Research at that time, probably still today, to see that it is a fantastic place for doing research.

But now, you were to build this division of experimental biology into an immunology division.  How did that- what were you recruited to do there?

Nobody ever said anything much about that. You could do what you liked. But I think they, kind of, assumed that I would build it into a- into an immunology division.

Because there was an immunology division.

That's right. There was an immunology division run by John Humphrey. A very nice man. A very good friend. And the last thing I wanted to do was to compete with John or make life difficult for him. And I suppose if I'd thought about it, I would've realised that perhaps it wouldn't have been that easy, but on the other hand, since we were good friends and since, at that time, immunology was hopping, as it is, still is today, having two divisions working on it didn't seem to be a grave error. In any case, as you may remember, because you came there, there was a bit of the old division, the old reproductive biology left over then. Bob Edwards was still- stayed on for a year or two, and he, of course, was doing work, which I certainly at the time, didn't realise quite what an important part it would have in the future, when he became the guru of-

IVF.

Yes. Of IVF, yes.
					
						If you think about the times, you know, you have to think about what was happening to immunology and why those times didn't last. In a way, that was the last hoorah of the people who were not biochemists, didn't do molecular genetics, and didn't even handle immunologically active cells in vitro. I think you were the first person who started really looking at cells out of the- out of the immune system. Was there- I don't think there was probably a decent microscope there until you arrived.

No there wasn't. That's right.

So, immunology was changing drastically, and I was in the, I think, in the last phase before it did so.

I mean, in a way, there was the biochemical approach with Peter asking us and Allan Williamson and-

Well Rodney Porter above all

And started with Porter.

Yes.

So there was a molecular and a cellular-

That's true.

arm to this.

That's true. But the biochemistry of those days was difficult, enormously large-scale. I mean, Rod Porter, when he was working on immunoglobulin, used a suite of rooms to do what would now be done on, you know, a couple of gel plates.

Yes.

It was very different and very much more demanding. And therefore, more separated from the older biological approach, which John Humphrey and I were both taking.
					
						I mentioned the Dressler experiment of injecting purified protein into a mouse and showing that it became subsequently unable to eliminate the protein immunologically. And that experiment was rapidly, but definitely later, confirmed by Bill Weigle and the Pittsburgh group. So, then I- Dresser had come round to NIMR, National Institute for Medical Research, but he actually had stopped working on tolerance at that stage. I don't quite know what was going on between me and David at that time, because I think I ended up getting a lot of credit which perhaps should've gone to him, but perhaps it shouldn't have gone to him, because I think, he's a moody guy and I think he stopped working on tolerance in part in protest because I started working on it. I don't really know the truth about that. We'd have to ask David. And we wouldn't get a straight answer from him anyway. So, the antigens which David had been using were, and Bill Weigle, were using were foreign immunoglobulins, so I thought I don't want to do exactly the same thing, so I started working with foreign serum albumin. The reason for using these serum proteins was then that  was mainly that those were the proteins which you could buy cheaply in bulk. I also worked a little bit with more or less all the other proteins I could lay my hands on, such as lysosime, bacterial lysosime, egg white, ova albumin and so on. And I started in the way that one does, just trying to quantitatively delineate this tolerance, and discovered something which I, at the time, I still think, was pretty interesting. And that was that the amount of protein you needed to give to induce tolerance was pretty much the same for all these different proteins. It was all around one microgram per mouse. With immunoglobulins one microgram into a mouse between one and ten micrograms, was enough to make it tolerant for a long time. But with these other proteins which were eliminated more quickly from the mouse, you had to go on giving them. But that didn't seem to be a very fundamental distinction, so I went on exploring that. So, that discovery was called low-zone tolerance. I called it low-zone tolerance. In contrast to what happened if you gave larger amounts of proteins. If you gave larger amounts of proteins, some of these proteins you can never get tolerance at all, but sometimes, for example, with bovine serum albumin, if you went on injecting it for a time, then the animal would also become tolerant, but you had to give quite a large dosage. It wasn't a matter of doubling or trebling the one microgram, you had to go up tenfold or a hundred-fold, or a thousand-fold. I suppose I wasn't, at the time, very clear what that means. Perhaps I'm still not very clear. But I think that the way to look at that, in retrospect, is that the one microgram doses were tolerising  fine, the larger doses were probably turning on the immune response in the same way that the adjuvants had been in David's hands, and then later on in my hands. And, you just needed to give a lot more antigen, for reasons which are not clear, nor I think every will be. There was a lot of argument at the time about what was going on here. Were we looking at what was already suspected, though not securely demonstrated to go on in the thymus, that is the elimination of immunolgically reactive cells or were we generating some kind of suppressor population- and there were people around even at that early time and they became much more numerous in the 1970s, who were in favour of suppression. And I tried to argue against that by showing things like- if you took- and this was actually Roger Taylor's experiment, if you took mice and you made them tolerant with a low dose of protein, then when you look at their recovery, it absolutely depended on the thymus. You had to have a thymus there for them to recover. So we said, well, it can't be suppression, it must be something to do with production of new cells, and that fits the idea of clone elimination.
Well, fast forward, if you like, to, what are we, 2004, when Harald von Boehmer has just published a paper showing that if you inject these small doses of protein, not by needle, but by putting in a pump, one of the osmotic pumps which feeds it much slowly, you generate suppression cells very effectively. So, the issue is still open.
					
						The next step forward in our understanding of tolerance, very much involves TB collaboration and the role of thymus derive cells on the one hand, and bone marrow's derive cells on the other, T-cells and B-cells. And, I'd just like to back over what we had touched on so far, which is that there is no doubt that the end of the 1960s, and in particular 1969, was the decisive- you know, when TB co-operation was discovered and worked out, mostly worked out, that the elements which were needed for that were the discovery that T-cells, a separate population of cells, comes out of the thymus called T-cells, and that's the work of Jacques Miller and to an extent which I'm not quite clear about, contemporary work done by Bob Goode and his colleagues in America. One mainly on mice and the other mainly on humans, but some overlap.
					
						So the role of the thymus, the ability to do serology, and I think I should add to serology the ability to detect platforming cells, that was a technique used by Miller for his work on TB co-operation and it's important to know. And then adopted transfer, the ability to transfer lymphocytes and get them to perform in another mouse, but we've already talked about that. So, I think that's sort of the three groups. Would you agree?

Yes.  Yes.  Yes.

So, then there were, world-wide, four groups became interested in the relationship between these T-cells and the cells which make antibody, which were known to be derived from bone marrow. One group, and probably the first group to become interested in that, was the Benacerraf group, with a lot of input from Phillip Jell from Birmingham, who used to go over and work with Benasarref.  A second group was Jacques Miller and his colleagues in Melbourne in the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute there. The third group was us, that's you and me, Martin, in NIMR, National Institute of Medical Research, and the fourth was Klaus Rajewsky and his colleagues in Cologne. So I think we have to, sort of, look at the work in those four streams. Benacerraf and Jale had shown that, in the cellular response, and their example of cellular response wasn't transplantation, it was skin hypersensitivity, different parts of a protein are recognised by antibody. So, there were two kinds of antigens, those which turned on T-cell responses, and those which turned on B-cell responses, and Benacerraf became attached to the idea that what was special about the T-cell was that it might have a receptor which saw not the little bit of a protein which an antibody saw, but the whole of the molecule, or a large part of the molecule. So it saw- When you looked at a guinea pig showing delayed hypersensitivity to the dinitrophenol group because that was an experiment he was fond of, he and Jale were very fond of, the T-cells were recognising not the dinitrophenol group, but the dinitrophenol group plus the local environment on the protein when it was found. So that type of hypothesis got to be called the local environment hypothesis. Jacques Miller was studying the contribution of the thymus, and he showed that thymectomised mice didn't make an antibody response using this platforming cell, PSC assay, that I mentioned, the spleen didn't have cells which could be enumerated by their ability to make a antibody against sheep red cells. Cut out the spleen, that didn't happen. But he then showed, by transfer experiments, that-

Sorry, just to back up, you cut out the thymus and that didn't happen?

It didn't happen. Right. That what was missing was not the cells which were making antibodies themselves, but cells derived from a thymus which helped those cells to make antibodies. And he did that by a number of ingenious experiments. Perhaps the best was to take cells from the thymus, put them into one mouse, immunise them there, and then transplant them into a third mouse, also irradiated, where they had B-cells to help them, and he could show that the antibody was then being made by the B-cells, but the cells which- priming the thymus cells, that made them better able to co-operate with B-cells.
					
						The experiments which you and I did were to take- we didn't use thymectomy to identify T-cells, we just took cells and immunised them against a protein- T-cells against a protein- in, fundamentally, the same way as Benacerraf and Jale had done, and show that, although these cells would not themselves make a bigger response to the dinitrophenol group, if it was attached to the same protein, they would help bone marrow-derived cells to make that response. So, it was a matter of combining primed T-cells with primed B-cells and then they would get the together and co-operate. And you had to do that all in mice which had the same- which were histocompatible which wouldn't reject other cells. Klaus Rejewsky experiment almost takes too long to explain that here, I think. It was a very important experiment at the time. It involved a tetrameric protein, lactic dehydrogenase and by assembling different subunits of this protein, he could show essentially the same things that we'd shown in London. And the work in London went ahead very fast when Klaus Rejewsky arrive to work with us, didn't it. Our- I think our special contribution there was to show, for the first time, that T-cells could be recognised, not only by their origin, by taking thymus cells and injecting them into another part  of the mouse and messing around with them there, but it all must be thymus-derived cells. You could take them from the normal mouse and recognise them by an antibody, and the antibody was one which Arnold Reif had discovered a little bit before, and he called- The antigen was Thy-1, and it turned out that this particular self-protein was present on lymphocytes only on T-derived cells, thymus-derived cells. And then you could do all these transfer experiments. You could use that antibody to- if you showed to-  It's ridiculous that I'm telling you about this, but I'm speaking to the camera.

You're not telling me. Yes, exactly.

That antibody could be used to stop the thymus-derived cells working, but- and thus showing that without them the B-cells wouldn't work.
					
						We thought, the idea- the blame for that idea actually goes to Klaus because he was the first person- Rejewsky- he was the first person to propose it, was that there was an antigen bridge between T- and B-cell. T-cell recognised one part of a protein. B-cell recognised the other part. And when you worked with hapten protein conjugates, B-cells recognised the hapten and T-cells recognised the protein. Now, the fact that they recognised different determinants in that way, is very well established, and was originally discovered by Jale and Benacerraf, and has never been checked. And that's true. It was the bridge which- where we made a mistake. Quite an excusable mistake because- and it didn't take long, very long, to rectify.  It turned out that T-cells and B-cells saw antigen, didn't see antigen in that way, that the B-cell which was making antibody against the DNP, against dinitrophenol group or potentially they they were taking up, would take up antigen. But instead of making a bridge with the T-cell with the DNP protein, it broke the protein up inside the cell and other bits of the protein then got exposed on the surface bound by MHC molecules, bound by Class 2 molecules, MHC Class 2 molecules which are the antigen presenting proteins which T-cells recognise.
					
						The way you tell the story about you and I did these things, there's no way in history that anyone can connect you and I to any part of that story because you didn't put your name on the papers I published. Even though you'd begun the experiments, all the conceptual framework for it was yours and so on and so forth. How do you think of that now?

Well, as I was saying earlier, I think at the time I thought that was the only right and proper way to- to behave. I didn't appreciate the very point that you're making. That it makes it very difficult for people in the future to work out who does what. I would, however, raise the following- make the following point. That what the hell are people at future doing working out who did what? First of all, it should be dead boring for them, secondly it doesn't matter at all. Why worry?

Well-  So, I would argue that there's right here. There's a principle, and the principle is that people who made important contributions should be recognised in the literature for making those contributions. Here's an example where your contribution is simply not recognised and it's just not right. So-

Well it's nice of you to say so, and now it's on record. 

Yes. 

On this film.

But it's a principle that you, over the years, it would be nice to hear your views looking back now, that you did over and over again, where you wouldn't put your name on the papers of your students and post docs, even when you did make a very large contribution to it. So it was a matter of principle, but is it the right principle?

Well, we could debate the principles. We could debate the princ-  I mean that's not the only principle involved. Another principle involved is that the junior partner should have his or her career advanced as much as possible, and so on and so forth. But for me the overwhelming principle is whether you should make life- make reading the literature easy for other people. And that's why I think I was wrong.
					
						You could see that Rejewsky and you collaborating was an enormous boon to the whole field, and it didn't work that way with the other laboratories. And I suspect that probably was a little-

It very nearly did with one bit of the American group when Max Cooper turned up, not very long afterwards, and made great friends with us all. I think, you know, courtesy of Max, I've never felt any distance from the Goode group. I think Benacerraf was a somewhat awkward customer.

And John?

So, in his own way, was Jacques Miller.

Yes.

They were a little bit less outgoing, but not much. I certainly as far as- I have no grounds for complaints. Acknowledgements were made at the time and due acknowledgements on both sides- on all sides.

So one of the things that-

Can I just make- sorry, excuse me interrupting. I reread for this article, for the "Nature" article, the paper which I wrote for a Dutch symposium, and I used- you and I used to discuss that article and you said- well, why don't you publish it properly. And I said- oh well it's just sitting there, I'm waiting till I'm finished this piece of research. When I looked at the Dutch- that Dutch article and I thought, as I looked at it, that I would- when I first looked at it I though, oh well this was done before Miller's paper had been published. But in that article I say, I'd heard from Melbourne about it, and that was why I was putting, you know, T-cells in the crucial figure in the way I did. So, the co-operation wasn't- the competition wasn't that bad.
					
						There were meetings galore when I started but they were meetings dominated by surgeons. Any- well not any day of the week, but any year, every few months, I could've gone to a surgically oriented meeting and heard about progress in transplantation. When I first went to Edinburgh Roy Kahn showed up. Roy Kahn, the very distinguished transplantation surgeon, later Professor of Surgery in Cambridge, and he was, in the way that surgeons are, he was open-minded, breezy, impressed, wanted to talk about it all. And that was lovely. It's a bit different from talking from- to another professional, but certainly that was going on. And perhaps that's always around medical science. There's always penumbra of doctors and surgeons who really need the results. They- they need to sort out their own ideas in the light of those results, and the biggest, maybe, the biggest meetings, I'm not sure that they're the most successful ones, often have that element very strongly represented.
					
						After I- I left the National Institute and moved to University College, I did two things. One of them, I was running quite a large group of immunologists and in the course of trying to make ourselves useful to- to cancer, we got fairly far into viral immunology. I think that was not entirely a good thing because I think viruses have turned out to be less important in cancer than was thought at the time, not necessarily by everybody, but some people thought it was more important, and various other things.  But at the same time, I jumped ship up to a point, and started working for WHO and I had no regrets about that. Why- why should I? I very much enjoyed working for- first for the tropical disease research in WHO, and then in their contraceptive vaccine programme. But if you get sucked into WHO, what do they call them? WHO, World Holidays Organisation. It certainly takes you around the world. Where before I knew only 10 immunologists, then I started to know hundreds and then a thousand, and many of them have dark faces, and those dark faces are among the best scientists I've ever known.

So the vaccine approaches to contraception haven't really taken off. Do you think they will?

Possibly. I certainly think that they haven't been excluded. I think the- there- it was a programme which made sense. It was one devised by various people. From my point of view, Pran Talwar in Delhi was the man who was pushing it hardest, so he ran a contraceptive trial which was more or less successful in the sense that a large number of women were protected against conception for a period of some months. It ran into the problem that only 80% of the women did make antibodies, enough antibodies to protect themselves against pregnancy by recognising their own human gonadotropin. That set the work back, but they were- that's a trivial problem really in the- in the history of immunology.  We've learnt how to make better antibodies and there are recipes being tested for making antibodies now.
					
						I wanted to go to University College because I had reservations about working in a research institute. And those reservations were pretty muddled, actually, in my own head. I do feel that Universities- research should go on in Universities. I do feel that often research institutes can do things better, and even more cheaply, than Universities because they can focus interest and redeploy and all that, and Universities waste money in all sorts of different ways. But, basically I wanted to keep- do my bit for the British University system. And there's another reason for wanting to work in Universities, which is, what about the next generation?

It wasn't a matter of going home?

And of course it was a matter of going home as well.  Of course.
					
						I'd known Josh Lederberg a little bit for several years, and while he was still in Wisconsin, I think. I visited him there and there was an odd misunderstanding because I thought I was coming to visit Josh Lederberg and, you know, hear about his wonderful science and all that, and the first morning he said, well you have got to be there at- this is the Mid-West, you see- you have got to be there at 7 o'clock, and at 7 o'clock the Faculty was lined up down a long table and it became clear that this was a job interview. I actually was not terribly interested in a job in Wisconsin, much as I was impressed by the University and all this and all that, so that did not come to anything. But Josh then became a sort of friend, and- remember he came to Carradale once and made himself very agreeable, which he can do. In fact, I think he is always agreeable although a bit self-centred, I suppose. So anyway, he then went to- to Stanford, and Stanford was great fun because he was trying to- he was very open, he always has been open to branches of science outside his immediate interests and he thought that immunology was interesting, although he certainly was going to go on with his own microbial genetics, wonderful microbial genetics, so he had brought in Gus Nossal temporarily, he brought in Len Hertzenberg, at that time temporarily, and he said well, come and be a third, which I did, and I asked him if he had any views about what I should do and he said no, of course not, that is up to you, he said, but don't you think that there are possibilities of looking at individual cells in the immune system now, and their activities, more than they have been in the past- have you thought about- there's a hint of sort of retrospective, I am not sure if he put it as clearly as this- but he said, what about looking at cells making anti- sheep red cell antibodies, to see if they would make a plaque. And I brushed that aside, stupid me, and was plugging on, because I was so pleased with being able to put- look- to look at peripheral tolerance of proteins, protein antigens, with the new serology which was developed, so I just more or less went on doing that. What a mistake. Had- had I taken that up I would have been competing directly with Jerne and his plaques. Who would have got there first, I do not know. Very likely, Nils Jerne but it might have been me.
					
						To begin with there were these meetings with noisy people like me and Len Herzenberg and Gus Nossal talking away from the platform, and some very meek and mild biotech company people sitting at the back having paid a handsome fee to come into the meeting. Very different now, it's- there are huge areas of research, cytokine research, for example, where it is inconceivable to have a big meeting without platform presentations from the biotech companies, and some of the very best work being done there, notably, I think, by the Little Group in California which pushed cytokine of research along so far. So, my own involvement was pretty much by chance. I was invited to join the Celltech Science Council, and I was also invited by Bob Lewinsky to join Genetic Systems Corporation in Seattle, in both cases as an advisor. The- Celltech has had a long and not altogether happy history, as a kind of flagship of biotech development in the UK, but it was started jointly between the MRC and industry. As soon as it showed any signs of standing on its own feet, the MRC pulled out, rightly, and left bio- Celltech, to get on as best it could. As the years passed Celltech became known as a company which did have the largest research group in bio-technology in the UK but did not have products, and it has been very slow to bring products to market. It has brought one or two along and it now has quite a promising development, but you cannot say more than that. But eventually it has been sold to- to a Belgian pharmaceutical company in the last few months. I- I enjoyed my contact with Celltech, both in the Science Council and personally, and I recall these days with great pleasure the Celltech annual dinner, where the founders, the scientific founders of Celltech, had been employed in an American pharmaceutical branch, they had a research branch, near London, and that branch had been closed down by one Donald Rumsfeld when he became the- the CEO, and so Celltech- there was- basically their after dinner conversation was about the dreadfulness of Donald Rumsfeld. Did not mean much to me at the time, it does- it means more now. Anyway, what has Celltech done for science and has it benefited science or has it benefited British industry? I think- I am afraid the jury is still out on that. It tried all sorts of things, it should have been in on- or it was in very early on, TNF, Tumour Necrosis Factor, antibodies to TNF. It was known that antibodies to TNF were likely to do something dramatic because they did so in mice, particularly in cerebral malaria in mice. Celltech made a mistake, it got locked up in a- with a large pharmaceutical company, Bayer, who thought that, well between them they thought- we could not put all the blame on Bayer's shoulders- that septic shock would be a good target for anti TNF therapy, so after expensive clinical trials it was abandoned although in certain forms of septic shock as a TNF treatment probably is effective although not very effective. When Mark Feldman and Tiny Maini got together, particularly Mark Feldman, with their proposition that anti TNF therapy might be effective in chronic inflammatory disease in man, particularly in rheumatoid arthritis, Celltech may have made a terrible mistake- well it did make objectively a terrible mistake  in saying well we have got our own ideas of anti TNF, and so we won't support you. What a mistake, because the anti TNF therapy did work in rheumatoid arthritis, it has been an enormous success worldwide, made a lot of money for Centrecore, and TNF missed out on that. Still, that's the way industry works.

How about Genetic Systems?

Genetic Systems is a somewhat different matter. Lewinsky was a real entrepreneur, and he thought things could be done with monoclonal antibodies, various things, and I think at the end of the day, none of them worked out, but he was a much smarter businessman than Celltech and he had different aims, he wanted to a) make a lot of money, so all his Science Council made quite a lot of money out of it- I did, a lot less than a million dollars, but a not insubstantial sum.
					
						There is a bad side and a good side. The good side is that universities can benefit enormously from- from co-operation. In this- the very late phase of my scientific life, just in the last year or two, we in University College- and that is Rene Creusot who is the chap who did the work, and Benny Chain who did most of the intellectual input, but together with me, did what we think is a pretty definitive experiment on co-operation between T-cells and the autonomous nature of the cluster of lymphocytes around the T-cells, around the dendritic cells, the regulatory unit- and we may talk about that later- but there's no doubt that that project would not have- have got through without the help and input, intellectual and financial, of GSK. GSK backed the project, we got some support from the Wellcome Foundation but not enough to carry it through, and GSK was an enormous help, and the post doc who was doing the work was to-ing and fro-ing between GSK and University College. You know, on a very small scale that was a model of how- how it should work. And it's also- you know, it provides insights into the way the pharmaceutical industry works, because that whole group which were hard at work on regulatory mechanisms in- within the immune system, have been switched right out of that in the last few months and they are now told to spend their time making monoclonal antibodies because GSK have decided that regulatory intervention isn't the way to do it. That, of course, is a problem for people in industry - they are doing something interesting and then a few months later it turns out that they may be doing something else interesting, but they are not doing what- what they were interested in to begin with.

What about the different rules of the game in industry in terms of secrecy and freedom of expression of new results, and so on? Is that a problem?

I have not noticed that conspicuously. I think that Dnax, the Californian company which did so much for cytokine research set a very good example of minimal secrecy and maximum interchange with universities for people going in on post docs and coming out again, and I don't think they ever took graduate students, but short of taking graduate students they were, I would say, perhaps better participants in- in the progress of science than some research institutes in- in Europe which run pretty much on their own. So I think a good American biotech company with information flowing in and out sets a pretty good example.

Suppose you were on the advisory board of a company and learned something very important under the conditions of secrecy that you were working under as an advisory board that affected a student or post doc project in your own laboratories, what do you do then?

Fair question. I think it depends on the level of the information. If it is something of a- if it's really important, it is probably a pretty general piece of information and the company will know that it's not practical to hold people very tightly to secrecy, they- well, I expect- I think one should not disclose what one has learned directly from the company but there's bound to be-whatever the company knows will be overtaken by somebody else within a matter of months, perhaps weeks even. If it's a minor technical part- point, I have never come across in my interactions with biotech have any difficulty in disclosing them. You know GSK were, in the projects that Benny Chain and I were interested in, knew things about- knew things about how to use a gene gun that other people did not, they knew things about how to run ELISA single cell counts- cytocount scales better than we did but they said, oh, come and use our facilities if that is what you want to do.
					
						The zoo had been run by Solly Zuckerman for years and years and years. He had a council, he had officers that- he was a dominant figure. When he left they looked around, the council looked around and they invited me to become- to follow Solly as president, and it immediately became clear that the zoo was in deep financial trouble. It had expenses that it had taken on over the years. It was running its own little research institute, although it was getting a lot of help from outside to do that, some funds, some money was going into that, and money was going into sustaining a much larger number of animals than it was- than are present now. They were in the thousands and they fell eventually to less than a thousand different species. So that was- it had- it had a lot of expenditure, and the dynamic treasurer of the time, who was putting much more time into it than I was, decided that the zoo should be closed down in London, in Regent's Park, and everything transferred to Whipsnade. That was what he proposed, and he had been a Conservative Minister and he worked through consultants which he brought in, who cost money. Then there came a showdown with critics of the council and particularly with the idea that the- that the zoo, the London branch, the Regent's Park site should be closed down, and the officers of the council were thrown out in one dramatic meeting and the policy was changed, reducing the scale of scientific effort and the scale, vastly decreasing the scale of curatorship- there were many fewer animals. And the zoo has survived and I believe that is the right thing to do actually, but I was one of the officers who were thrown out, so my tenure was very short. But I must say that by then anyway I would have had to resign because I had taken a job in Germany and they said, oh, you can come in once a week or once a month, but by that time it was pretty clear that you couldn't, and the officers were all falling out with one another, also the treasurer, me the president and the scientific secretary, were quarreling.
					
						I think it is a deeply loved part of London life, I think there are children, like me, who are attracted into biology in part because we went to- were taken to the zoo as children, and I think that is its job- is to present animals- the diversity of animals, to the public. Alas, it doesn't happen like it did in the old days when you could take animals out of their cages and you could feed them and even in the case of Lorna with my tiny little children- the tapir was sort of behind a stockade and you could feed it, but it was very- it was covered with saliva, so first she wiped the noses of her little children and then she wiped the nose of the tapir. You can't do that any more. So it had a- a- wonderful past which isn't there any more, but it is carrying on as a showcase for biodiversity. It also makes a case for itself as actually preserving biodiversity and I am in favour of that up to a point, although I am afraid of the- of the thousands of species which it used to curate, many of whom were humble insects. the- the attention of the public is limited to a small number of mammals with beautiful brown eyes like ours- like our own, who are sort of child friendly.
					
						Almost the first generation of biologists in the Weizmann Institute included two eminent immunologists, Michael Sela and Michael Feldman, and they were- they have been around in immunology for as long as I have. I found them extraordinarily attractive and interesting people, very communicative, very interesting in ideas and they were one of the reasons why, I think-  there's a kind of a special contribution to science from Judaism, which is to do with- perhaps it is to do with the Talmud as my uncle JBS thought, which teaches you whatever the question is you have to turn it over and look at the other side, so theories, all theories, are up for grabs. So they were- it was lovely having Michael Sayer and Michael Feldman around and meeting them at meetings and talking to them a lot. So then, you know, I happened to be around in the Weizmann Institute for- I used to visit when there were- there were some people from the UK end of the Weizmann Foundation in Britain who were there and they said, well, perhaps you would like to- I think I offered myself to them, I said I would love to help in any way I could and they said oh, well, come and join our- join our committee, which I did, and I have been a member of it ever since. And whatever you think about Israel and its place in the world, in science its contribution is quite disproportionate to its size. Its scientific community has always tried to reach out to and include Arabs in the Arab component of Israel and the rest of the Arab world. Politics has got in the way of that and the contributions which one feels that Israeli science should be making to, for example, the biology of arid zones, it can't make because of the politics.

How important has the Weizmann been for the politics of Israel in general, has it had an impact, do you think?

I can't answer that question. I have never met an Israeli who isn't proud of the Weizmann Institute. It's possible that that shows the sort of Israelis that I know rather than the state of public opinion in Israel.
					
						I think they- science has to set part of the agenda, I think that is the most important thing that science can do. And obviously, in the world as it is at present, the Middle East is a part-  place where science has relatively little to offer. I think the- the great problems of the day are in climate change and its consequences, and that if politicians find themselves unable to listen to the scientific community and they prefer to listen to the oil lobby, then humanity is in trouble.

And what about religion and science, do you feel that scientists have a responsibility to fight irrationalism wherever they find it, including religion?

Yes, but I- I think the contribution of religion to irrationalism is small. I think, as a scientist, I think that the question of the day is about the Muslim religion, isn't it, and that's a question which we are all interested in, and my opinion- somewhat second hand from other people whose opinions I respect- is that Muslim- the Muslim religion is not irrational, nor is it anti-Christian, nor is it a religion of combat with- with other faiths. The Mullahs are another matter. There are Mullahs, who choose to interpret their religion in a way which I consider outrageous, particularly in respect of the position of women in the world. But I could say exactly the same thing about Christians religion also. There are Christian sects whose practitioners, whose preachers I have no patience with at all, but that does not apply to Christianity.

But what about stem cells and the role of religion in slowing progress-

The Pro Life lobby?

Yes. Should scientists respond to that kind of thing?

Well, at the risk of chauvinism, I think the UK has handled it pretty well, and the reason it has handled it pretty well, in my opinion, is because it's relied so largely on the advice of Anne McLaren whom we talked about earlier, and she has done- she's done wonderful science, but surely the most important thing that she has done is to keep thinking- the ideas about- the ideas of the Pro Life lobby, under some sort of- exclude them from- from the responsible public.

It is a different matter in Europe than America because the Pro Life lobby in America is so much stronger. Do you see a paradox that America, that is the most religious of countries, are yet the most enthusiastic about science and technology in terms of investment and thoughts for the future and so on?

Yes. Yes, I suppose America suffers from the special value it has placed on liberty, and liberty is taken to include the ownership of guns and by some people, the use of those guns to fire them at people who are running birth control clinics or abortion clinics. I think- I think liberty in its extreme has terrible consequences.
					
						I was very fortunate. Leaving Mill Hill, I had- took the Chair of Zoology- Zoology and Comparative Anatomy in University College, with no- initially, with no secure source of funding at all, but in the course of the next few months the Imperial Council Research Fund, ICRF, offered to found, to finance an immunology unit, a tumour immunology unit, in University College, which I thought would be great for- for my mates and I, and independently the MRC decided to support the research of you, Martin. I think that happened a little slightly later, but not- not very much- more or less the same time. So I would like to say a few words about what we did during those 20 years, and I would like to make it clear at the beginning that that research was not- it was in a sense world level research, but it wasn't as sparkling as the preceding five years in the National Institute for Medical Research, and I will explain why I think that was the case later. But what did we do We looked much more carefully at whether T-cells or B-cells, or both of them, are responsible for low zone tolerance. We chose to do that, and by we, I really mean here Mike Iverson who was an American who came over and worked first as an assistant and then as a research student, and did very well indeed. We chose to look at a naturally occurring protein called F-liver protein, secreted by the liver, where the body is clearly immunologically tolerant of its own protein but can react against foreign proteins- the allelic form of the same proteins, the foreign form of the same protein - and we were able to show that that was strictly a matter of T-cells. The body had B-cells which could react against self but they didn't do so, the tolerance in that situation was entirely guided by T-cells.  And we thought that that was a paradigm for the whole of self tolerance, and I think that is the way things have worked out, so I think that was a- that was a useful thing to have done.
					
						There was very much a question of the day, whether the immune system is- how it comes to be- become tolerant of the parts, the variable parts of an antibody molecule, because antibody molecules occur in all sorts of new varieties all the time and the immune system basically shouldn't react against them, but it can do under some circumstances, and that, connected up with an idea of the time about the network, the idiotypic network of the Nils Jerner, so we contributed a little bit to that. We worked on co-operation between T-cells, between cytotoxic T-cells, the T helper cells, and that ended up as the last hurrah of what could be done by adoptive transfers without really doing very much in vitro. It was actually a huge experiment which could have been conducted very much more easily in vitro, but rightly or wrongly, I thought it was important that it should be done in vivo, and we did it and we showed that- demonstrated that form of co-operation [of Bs], a combination sometimes called the three cell cluster theory, where one dendritic cell has two different T-cells which get together in its mesh. We worked quite hard to show that the famous bridge which we were talking about just now, the connection between the T- and the B-cell, did not need to be, to involve, a single molecule. It could involve a set of proteins, or antigens, which were co-processed in the immune system. The B-cell could take up a portion of a bacterium or a portion of a foreign cell, and could drive B-cells- could drive the response of helper T-cells which recognised only one part of it, and the antibody recognised some unrelated molecule. All that was needed was they should be physically linked, and that has become eventually the basis of a new form of vaccination. The contribution which we made to that may have been slight but I think it was actually quite near the- the basis of conjugate vaccination, and conjugate vaccination is when you are trying to immunise a child against a bacterium that has a polysaccharide cell wall, for example, haemophillus influenza. You can drive that response much more effectively if the extracted polysaccharide, you extract the polysaccharide. That can be used for many years as a vaccine, immunogen as a vaccine, but it wasn't a very good vaccine, it did not make antibodies very well and particularly children- were not protected for a long time. But if the carbohydrate was conjugated to another protein which was recognised by T-cells, it became much more effective, and those conjugate vaccines are used now world-wide for these encapsulated bacteria. Meningococci are another group which are being tackled in the same way.
					
						We put a lot of work into viruses, because the retro viruses were coming into prominence at that time as causal agents of cancer, and so was the small DNA viruses SV40 and its related viruses. The connection with cancer certainly wasn't clear at that time and we had two hopes. One was that the immunology might contribute to the understanding of how these viruses caused cancer, that was one contribution that we could make, and vice versa, that the anti-viral response would provide a useful probe into the immune system. And I think, roughly speaking, the upshot was that both of those views had- well, they led- they were in the right direction, that's the way things worked out. The contributions which we managed to make to them were quite small but you know, there was a small flourishing community of- of viral immunologists.
					
						Why wasn't a group like that, like us, which was well supported, well resourced by ICRF, able to participate more in the great developments which were taking place in immunology world-wide? And I think, in a nutshell, we were slow to do two things. One of them was to take the immune system apart and do it all in vitro, and the other was to contribute to- which we did not do- to the molecular understanding of the immune system, how the immunoglobulin genes worked, how, more importantly, because we were really T-cell people, how the T-cell receptor worked, how MHC molecules presented antigens to T-cells. Those were all great developments. Restriction, and the essential need to- for T-cells to recognise the MHC molecules as well as the peptide, for which a Nobel Prize was given during that time, we were kind of left out there. I have asked myself why we weren't more successful. As far as the- the in vitro work is concerned, that developed in a way- things- projects have a life of their own in a research group- and it developed in really an unfortunate way. Mark Feldman, just as we were coming to University College, Mark Feldman came from- he was a student of Gus Nossal in Australia, and Gus sent him to me to join the group, and Mark Feldman was a pretty impressive scientist, he set to work very hard. And he set up-  of course he'd been- in Melbourne, he had got all the in vitro stuff working- he set up all that at University College, he organised us to get the hoods which were needed and so on and so forth, the reagents, but his research took a somewhat unexpected direction. He became interested in, perhaps I should say obsessed by, immune suppression, the regulatory part of the immune system which prevents reactions, prevents auto immunity, which makes- drives the immune system to make responses to viruses or bacteria in an appropriate way. And what went wrong with Mark's research I really don't know but over, I think it must have been well over ten years, he worked on suppression and on factors which he thought were mediating suppression, and it kind of all blew over. He wasn't the- it wasn't- it wasn't the only place in the world which was working on that, Benacerraf who I mentioned earlier, his group in America developed the same focus and I suspect that there was a bit of- bit of- each group was leading the other up the garden path. The experiments weren't done as critically as they should have been done. Certainly, as leader of the group I bear responsibility for that, some responsibility for that, and Mark eventually left the the tumour immunology group and moved over to rheumatology in the Kennedy Institute in London, where he made this fabulously important contribution that I have already mentioned, of developing anti TNF therapy. The suppressor factors and suppressor activity is still a murky area but nobody still knows whether there was not some truth somewhere in that but where it was I don't know. I became also interested in suppression. I was not- I didn't think it was right that a group of our size should- should stand apart from those important developments in T-cells and became interested in a different aspect from what Mark was doing and that was in the way certain MHC molecules seem to encourage the development of suppressive activity, and you could- we, I would say sort of developed, perhaps perfected I hope, a particular kind of experiment where you combine a suppressive MHC molecule with a non-suppressive MHC molecule or rather a suppressive gene and all the molecules which it encodes, with an activated gene and all the molecules which it encodes scattered around the immune system. And the suppressive one can win, it can turn off the activity of the active one, and there is no doubt about that as a scientific finding, that has been found again and again. But I- it was not until later, when I left to go to Berlin, that I got anywhere near the root of the mechanism involved there, and I think I did eventually.
					
						Other groups there which perhaps I should have mentioned, which developed their own immunology, sometimes quite transiently, because the people involved moved on and I should have mentioned Mel Greaves and his important work on antigens as markers on leukaemia and typing of leukaemic cells. He started that in University College, very good work there, and because he was doing very good work there he was offered his own unit in the Chester Beatty which he took, and which he has run ever since, and he has done a wonderful job. John Owen did the same for the thymus. He did, while he was in University College, and beforehand, while he was in Oxford- did great works on thymus virology, but then, as happens, he was offered a Chair elsewhere, in Newcastle, and he moved on. And then, of course, there was your own work, which- very important work on the development of B-cells and how the immune system could be used, how to probe the- the activity of the receptor antibodies were expressed on the surface of B-cells.
					
At the time that I started the... the tumour immunology unit in University College, the dominant idea was immune surveillance. The idea was I think actually proposed by Burnett, that what we see in the way of cancer development is the tip of the iceberg and underneath there is a huge number of malignant transformations which occur in the body which are then obliterated, defended against by the immune system which eliminates them. That idea may still have a grain of truth in it, and it certainly does for viral cancer where the defence is against the viral antigens, but in a general way it sunk without trace when the genetic immune suppression came to be used. Immune suppression could be produced in a mouse by all sorts of mutants and in man it occurs spontaneously but rarely, and the genetic... genetically immunosuppressed individuals, be they mice or be they man, did not develop the sea, the raft of cancers which the immune surveillance theory predicted. And that was more or less the end of that theory, and I think the timing of that I remember quite accurately because it was work... the work in man was... immunocompromised  individuals in man, became quite clear by 1980, and that left tumour immunology wondering what their agenda was and should have been. I did one smart thing.

I did one smart thing to bring Hans Stauss to the University College from... he was a German who had been post-doccing in Chicago and I think he wanted to get back to Europe, and he was in tune with the times. He thought that progress would only be made by identifying particular peptides which might be important in cancer rejection. And that is what has happened worldwide. A famous group with Thierry Boon in Brussels identified a whole raft of well-defined peptides against which it was possible to raise cytotoxic T-cells where... and that is where the hope for immunotherapy of cancer still lies, and Hans Stauss is right in the middle of that with his own particular raft of peptides and trying to immunise against them. I have to say that, what, where are we now, at the beginning of the next century, that move took place in the 1990s, started in the 1990s, and it's the wave which has built up since and there are all sorts of new wrinkles, there is hope in the air, there are numerous clinical trials under way and the jury is out. There- certainly the results with the peptide antigens has not been quite as encouraging as we hoped but at least that whole approach is in much better shape than immune surveillance ever was.

						I am an old man in immunology, so I ought to have wise words to say about all those. I don't think I do. I am very impressed by the quality of science which is going into AIDS research, is going into malaria research, but success is still pretty elusive in those directions. There was a malaria research supported over the years by the American Military. They- there has been a big investment there and really very little to show for it, but it's certainly something which is too, far too important a problem to be abandoned. In contrast, there are new effective agents which turn up and in fact effective vaccine is developed in double quick time, and SARS, you see, is a conspicuous example of that. Now I know that the new SARS vaccine hasn't been fully authenticated, but it looks a very promising vaccine. I don't think- I think we will do with SARS at least as well as we have done with influenza.So what is the difference between those infectious diseases that are resistant to vaccination and those that are not? Is it simply rapid variation or is there something we are missing?Oh, it's so easy to sit in armchair and say, the problem is, as you say, rapid variation, certainly that is the major problem with HIV. Complexity- that's a problem with malaria- we don't know the malarial organism codes, a large number of genes- some of which are highly variable, but those aren't the only possible targets, and malaria research as it has progressed is now in the middle of an a maze of antigens. What will come out of that maze, I don't know.
					
						I'm an immunologist and I'll defend immunology to my- to my last breath, but it is true that if the successes in AIDS control in Africa have been through education and spreading the use of protection rather than- physical barriers, condoms- rather than through immunology, and that turns out on a mass scale to be actually a lot cheaper than vaccination, so well, I think it's obvious that there are- that at any one time there are plenty of options. Some options are better than others, more likely to work than others, but we should push on with- with whatever we can. In the field of tuberculosis research, which is a bigger killer than HIV, it's probably true that at this moment there's vastly more to be done with the development of new antibiotics and their application and their testing than ever there is with immunology. It does not mean we should give up on trying to build an anti-microbacterial vaccine, set of vaccines.
					
						I would like to say just a little bit about the so-called asthma epidemic- allergy. It is true that as the infectious diseases have been conquered one by one, very largely by antibiotics, the other- the immunological diseases have come to the fore and top of the list is the- the increasing incidence of asthma. Very difficult area. There are grave problems with ascertainment bias about asthma. When new treatments come in and are found to be effective then many people come forward and say that they have got asthma too, so those who talk in a facile way about the asthma epidemic had better be careful. But I think there is something there and I think that that's an enormous challenge to immunology and I think it is a particular challenge to immunology in the field which I have been most interested in, which is regulation. When the body becomes hypersensitive to pollen and the myriad other agents, molecules, which it does become allergic to, there is some sort of failure of regulation going on. Or perhaps it is fairer to say, in justice to regulation, the immune system is having to- is being confronted with an array of foreign material which it didn't evolve to cope with, it was evolved to cope with perhaps a more limited range and- and it is having to do new things now. And I think there is something in the hygiene hypothesis that we don't encounter in the First World now, in the UK and Europe and America, the range of infections which we used to, and that may be bad for the development of the immune system. So, that is a great area, it's not one which I've participated in directly but I think it's a very important topic for the next decade in immunology.
					
						The best student I ever had in University College who, when I arrived there in 1970, said, I want to come and be a student in your department, and I said well, we don't really want to have University College students here, we want to see if we can attract people from outside. And he said to me, nonsense, I'm coming to be your student, and- so I thought that was great. And his name was David Lane, now Sir David Lane, who has had a meteoric career in biochemistry and in business in Britain. He is- I am sure he was knighted as much because he started a promising, large promising biotech outfit in Fife, in Dundee, as for the brilliance of his science, although he was a very good scientist, was and is a very good scientist. Anyway, when he came to be a student he got slightly neglected, I think, by me, because I think I was- there was a lot of fuss over the move and with one thing and another I neglected him. But that was all right because he fell into a very productive partnership with Donald Silver who had arrived from America with his own ideas, and Donald Silver was a charming man, very clever bloke. He is the only bloke who I've ever come across who, arriving in London, instead of enquiring about children- schools for his children and that kind of thing, wanted to know where he could carry on with his ballet class. And I said I don't really know about that but perhaps you should try in the Covent Garden direction. But anyway, his ballet class worked out okay and he took on the guidance, well it was I think very much actually a one-to-one affair, with- with David Lane, and they chose to investigate a- the phenomenon which I think we have already mentioned, which is what happens when you bring a suppressive gene together with a positive MHC gene. And they did that- they started us- they started me doing that at University College, there is no question about that, it was brought by Don Silver from work that he had been doing before in Boston. So that was- that was David Lane. David Lane didn't- didn't stick with immunology, he moved on to become the discoverer, or the co-discoverer of P53, an extremely important molecule in cancer, when he moved for a post-doctoral period to ICRF, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund.
					
						I have been kind of living with this phenomenon of cross-suppression for years and years and years, and finding out more about the phenomena but not really understanding the underlying mechanism, but at that time in 1990 when I moved or was planning to move, the importance of cytokines had just emerged and in particular, the suppressive genes, which I had been studying, looked- began to look very much like regulation through cytokines, what is now called TH1/TH2 balance. So TH1/TH2, the division of T-cells like that had been discovered by a Canadian working, if I remember correctly, in the United States at the time, but I thought well that was likely to be very important to the disease, and it would also explain this cross-activation you would have. One of the alleles that would turn on a TH2 response which would suppress the response to the TH1 allele and that might be useful as a model for the treatment of the disease. So, I was very uncertain about whether I wanted to move to Germany or not. I dithered like anything, I said no to begin with, and then two persuasive gentlemen arrived at University College and I had by that time more or less decided that I would move. I thought it was time that the ICRF unit should close down. Mark Feldman, who was the other strong scientist there, had moved away, Hans Stauss was ready to move to a more clinical environment. Peter Beverley, who had done terrific work on T-cell subsets in man, had already moved to a semi-autonomous unit in another part of University College. So it was getting thin on the ground and I detected considerable reluctance in ICRF- they never said they were going to close you down but I think they would have done before very long unless something pretty drastic had been done. So I moved, I decided to move.
					
						For quite a long time actually, probably almost as long as I had been in immunology, I had learned slowly but surely that Germany was a great place for science and that the new generation of Germans were very active, very devoted to science, and that Germany which had perhaps particularly, well certainly at that time, much to be ashamed of, had something that it did not need to be ashamed of, which was its record of science, and that permeated, I think, every aspect of German life, the media, the government, you know. The President of the Republic, the Bundesrepublik, was only too pleased to be on film in the presence of eminent scientists. Very international, Germany was the least national- nationalistic country I think in Europe, at the time, probably still is. They could be from Germany or they could be abroad, and he would listen to what scientists had to say, and the German university system picked up and was returning to many of its former glories. So I was delighted to take part in that. I also knew that Germany was a place which would make a bargain with you if you came in to do something, and that bargain would not be broken. That's- I wish that that was equally true of the UK and America, and I think it is not true to quite the same extent. At that time, Berlin was still on the end of a money pump from Bonn, from Federal Government, which wanted to keep West Berlin afloat as a going enterprise, as a model, as a challenge, to the DDR, so all sorts of cultural and scientific activities started up in Germany, started up in Berlin. The opera was well supported, but then equally well supported were jazz groups coming in. They had started a heart centre; why not a rheumatism centre, which is what had come to the mind of the Staatssekretär, Hasinger. Herr Hasinger was a man of vision in the health department of the Berlin Land Government and he wanted to make his mark or make the mark for Berlin in areas of medical research, and having started with the heart he wanted to go on to rheumatism, and he had a crew of other scientists and doctors in Berlin who were very supportive. So, I went over there part time for three years and stayed there until I retired in, I think, '97, or was in '96? I retired rather slowly actually there, because I was going part time to my final job in America which was in the National Institute of Health at Bethesda, where they had a scheme for fitting scientists late on in their careers, a small number of them, to come into NIH and do anything they liked, it was a liberal and I think productive enterprise on their part.
					
						My plan was to build- first of all to build a research group which would be well placed to survive my retirement- obviously I was only a caretaker for the few years left to me- by then I was in my sixties and had a limited time, and that placed a certain constraint on what I could do because I could not attract, try to attract a senior German, which would have been the logical thing to do, because that would be seen as a commitment for the future of my job as Director, Scientific Director, and the- my trustees rightly did not want that, they wanted to be able to make a free choice. And- but nevertheless a group of us gathered together. You could- I think that you could set up your- your stand anywhere in Germany that you liked, in any city, and provided you had the money and you had good science to do, you would find people who would come and join you, and sure enough, a group of terrific students came along, and we set out to investigate this cross suppression, cross regulation between T-cells that Don Silver and David Lane had started and we thought that that would be mediated by cytokines. And to cut a long story short, I think we were able very substantially to strengthen that hypothesis. It is still something of a hypothesis but I think it is increasingly clearly true- partly in the clinical field. The best last student that I'd had in London was a German young woman, Katya Simon and she had been working on this cross suppression with me in London as a, what the Germans call a Diplomarbeit, that is a pre-PhD student, and she came to be a PhD student in Germany and I thought it was the best chance if it was going to be a cytokine balance which was regulating disease, would be to tuck her into real diseases. And she, jointly with Joachim Zieper, who was a clinician whom she worked with, and Harald Stein, who was a brilliant pathologist, really histopathologist, in Berlin, but with very wide perspectives, plenty of 'Vision' in Harald Stein, in fact decided to investigate two related diseases which are rheumatoid arthritis and reactive arthritis. Once the arthritis has developed it is pretty hard to tell them apart, but they are triggered in different ways. Reactive arthritis seems to be triggered by a bacterial infection. Rheumatoid arthritis is a true auto immunity without any known triggers, it looks like pure defective regulation.
					
						Katya and Zieper discovered that the cytokine regulation was quite different in the two diseases. Rheumatoid arthritis, within the limits of the data that they collected, was a TH1 disease, which is what is expected of a auto immune disease. Reactive arthritis seemed to be mainly a TH2 disease, but in both cases you could say that the chronic inflammation was the result of cytokine imbalance. And with other students I pursued the same work in- in the setting of mouse model diseases, collagen induced arthritis and I think we were able to substantiate that same disease. The critical point was the breakthrough on mechanism, and I'm still not sure whether it is a real breakthrough or not, but I jolly well hope it is and I believe that the case is getting steadily stronger, and that is that the difference between MHC allele which drives TH1 differentiation and one which drives the opposing TH2 differentiation, is a matter of, or at least substantially a matter of the level of expression. A strong signal, high expression, TH1 differentiation; low expression, low signal, allows TH2 differentiation. And that view has- the strength of signal view has been steadily- I think the case for that has been steadily building up, notably from the work of DNAX, in DNAX, which I mentioned where the strength of signal was adjusted by the DNAX Group, not by changing the level of expression of MHC molecules but by changing the concentration of peptide. They were not the only people to do that, indeed they were not the only people to discover it, but they were the biotech group which pursued the matter with the greatest determination. It led, of course, on to work on other drugs which could- might affect signalling, particularly the signalling inhibitors, and they too seemed to bear out this view. Now, I am giving a rather optimistic point of view because it is not universally accepted. But if you do accept that view, what really matters in the MHC molecules, not only the molecule itself, it binds a peptide and presents the peptide to the B-cell or other cells in the course of regulation, but the level that it is expressed, and that is a matter not of the structural coding sequences but of the promoters. So, at last I was able to- to join in the great rush to molecular genetics. I was delighted with that and I could do so only because Roland Lauster came to join us in Berlin from Basel, The Basel Institute of Immunology where he had been around for a while- he was looking for a job in Germany and he felt able to take this rather temporary sounding, rather uncertain and poor lab facilities still, a budding group rather than an established group, but he took the job there and I am jolly glad he did because he did a number of very good things. But from this point of view, the best thing that he did was he attracted a young Polish scientist who wanted to do molecular genetics, and between them they started sequencing MHC promoters and looking at making substitutions and they were looking at their functional consequences, and bingo, out came what seemed to me like a perfect solution to the findings made two decades before by Lane and Silver. I do not think David Lane understands that at all. I tried once to explain it to him not so long ago and he was completely lost, because his mind is on other things now. But I think we have a molecular understanding of that cross suppression, and I think that is an important part of regulation in the immune system. It's not- it is very unlikely to be the most important part but it is an essential part.
					
						I'll tell you about MHC. It is not really my- it is my field now but it's not- I was not a pioneer in it. There was a flurry of interest in MHC Class 2 promoters in the middle '90s, and that flurry left little doubt that there were functional consequences. The known substitution in- particularly in the human MHC2 promoters, did change the level of expression in the way which would be expected to impact on TH1s and TH2s. So the natural course for the work in humans to take, because it is very hard to- it would have been very hard to press that home other than in the mouse model, you could not do it in man, was to look for disease associations. And sure enough disease associations were found with promoter polymorphisms in MHC2 with a number of diseases, for example juvenile arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, but the problem with that has been and still is that there is so much linkage disequilibrium in this human MHC that it's impossible- it has not been possible to sort out whether the disease associations are truly with the promoters or truly with coding sequences. Perhaps I should explain that in another way. Linkage disequilibrium is a very off-putting term. What it means is that the coding sequences and the regulatory sequences go tightly together in inheritance and because they go tightly together you can't sort out which one is to blame.
					
						I believe that some of the most productive work in the world, particularly in Europe, is being done in German laboratories, and I think that is because the German system somehow allows groups to build up in which the interactions are- from the outside people think that the boss is bossing things around because there usually is one strong leader there, but in truth, I know that in the large groups which built up around, notably around Rajewsky and the university in Cologne, or around Hemeling in the German Cancer Research Centre, the boss, although he was- he always seemed quite willing to you know, discuss anything with students, and I think they probably don't really like to hear- to find out that major developments are going on without them being told, that the productive interactions are among the post-docs and the PhD students, those groups have been and are, still are, immensely productive. And in fact the best scientists- well not- most of the best scientists, and they were only a handful anyway, two or three of them, who came to the Rheuma Centre, came from Cologne where as I mentioned before, Rajewsky over the years has become a very close friend. And my successor in Berlin was Andreas Radbruch, and he was a product of the Rajewsky School and I am perfectly willing to claim, because I believe it to be true, that I was responsible for bringing Andreas to Berlin. He might have come otherwise of course, because he was a very, very good man, but I thought we need somebody of Andreas' calibre, somebody with that background of knowing the large or relatively large university group in which these strong interactions could take place, and I think he's been tremendously successful in that.
					
						Now Berlin in the '90s was a very interesting place to- to live, to make friends, and to work. It was interesting for- for many reasons. As far as the Rheumatism Centre was concerned, Berlin's priorities in health and scientific education, scientific research, changed drastically with the- with unification. The- the main change was that the money pump from Bonn dried up and the priorities for expenditure changed also as a consequence of unification. Between the two, science and culture were set to suffer, and they have suffered, but not very much, not many of the promises made have been broken. Andreas, I think, has seen his budget cut by two or three percent, but really, not really very much. It is much worse on the music scene where one opera company, they tried to close it down, the City, but didn't manage to, Berliners stopped that, but it is on the brink of closing down and may yet do so. So all those institutions, culture and science, were in danger because, well, the first thing the City had to do was to throw out the Hungarian buses which had been transporting the citizens of Berlin around in a rather unreliable, rattly way, by various smooth, new Mercedes buses- and that was terrific for the citizens of Berlin but it cost quite a lot of money. Some people said that the character of Berlin changed for the worse after unification because beforehand they had been somehow never as short of resources for anything interesting, and that attracted adventurous people and I think perhaps especially on the cultural front. People who were willing, wanted to- to try new ideas in the theatre, in film making, in everything, and after unifi- and they- it was partly the money pump and it was partly the fact it was a compressed city. The next largest city in Germany I think is Munich, and Munich- the whole history of Munich is one that is a cultural centre, very strong, very strong science in that cultural centre, but people you know, spend their weekends in sunshine on the lakes, finger lakes going out of Munich, or in the wonderful of the Bavarian countryside, or looking at Baroque churches in the little towns around. None of that in Berlin because there was a wall all the way round the West and whether- the wall came late but it had- since the wall, since the Russian occupation, it had been totally cut off and that was good and bad. Of course, that has been written about by many people and I don't think I've anything particularly to add to the many books and novels and poems which have been written about life in Berlin in those days. But, as far as I was concerned, there was still a rich cultural scene where you kept bumping into interesting people. The city government was much more open and I think it attracted a much stronger calibre of civil servant than I had ever seen in London. They were- or at least I don't know if they were really of stronger calibre but they went to the- you know, if you went to a party in Berlin, at somebody's apartment, you would find a bunch of scientists who would be your mates, you'd find some musicians, sometimes they married one another, but you would also find a few civil servants who were- who were absolutely part of the scene. And well do I remember arriving in Berlin, having travelled with my driving licence, it had to be- it took- it had to be verified in some sort of way and it was going to take six months, so the secretary who I was working with was absolutely incensed, she said it was outrageous that foreigners coming to Berlin can't start driving around straight away. And so we went to see- we went to see the man who actually ran that licensing section and instead of a civil servant who might have said, well, you know, we have our regulations and you have to stick by them, he started going on about the wonders of the Berlin S-Bahn and the Berlin U-Bahn and how you put a bicycle on them, and anyway if you didn't go through Berlin on a bicycle, what a lot you were missing. So I went back with my tail between my legs to go on my bicycle, and I was very glad that I did so.
					
						The great joy was the opening to the East. Most of the senior positions in the Rheuma Institute, which as I say was only a handful, were taken by Wessies but we made, I made at least one long-term appointment of a statistician from the East- he seems to have been a success. But as the years progressed one learnt more and more about what was going on in the East and what a lot of frustrated scientific talent there was there and what enormous fun it was to get to know them. I got to know, for example, Jan Gimsa the biophysicist in Humboldt University on the Eastern side, and he was a joy to know. First of all he was a charming, very friendly man, and really I like him enormously. He's visited our place in Scotland, you know, that's a test of whether he's a real friend, but he showed how East German science worked because he had a room full of cupboards and drawers and these cupboards and drawers were absolutely stuffed with beautiful pieces of machinery, optical machinery and mechanical machinery which was how the East German science ran, you had to have all the bits and pieces yourself and you didn't let anything leave the place. Every- associated with every enterprising department or bloke there was his own private museum. But that's a person who came to work with us and I am still very friendly with him, and so on and so forth. And the- some of the Wessies which I brought in there have moved to university positions now in the East, so unification is a real thing. I don't, again, have anything to add to what you read in the newspapers- unemployment is still high in the East, the Rechtsradikaler are stronger in the East than they are in the West, but what the Wessies feared from the East has not happened, that they would bring in totalitarian values and the liberty which West Germans had come to treasure would not be properly appreciated. It hasn't worked out like that, at least I don't think so- I don't really know.
					
						After a year spent intermittently in NIH learning lots of new things but really not doing anything- something substantial myself, I came back to University College which has very kindly allowed me to sit at a desk in their old department, and the main part of my life has been to- and a total joy it has been- has been to get to know and to a limited extent to work with Järgen Roes who is a product of the Rajewsky School, so we start with a common background and Järgen is a terrific molecular geneticist, and I've very much enjoyed being a sort of loose attachment in his group, and to occupy myself- and actually occupying quite fully- I have been sequencing more mouse promoters, The work from Roland and his students in Berlin ended up with three- six- nine- twelve- promoter sequences. It is now up to- I've taken it up to- about a hundred or so altogether, maybe a little bit more, and that has been partly thanks to Jan Klein, a great man who I could have mentioned earlier, who- one of his great activities has been to rescue mouse MHC genes from wild mice and cross them on to laboratory strains so the mice can breed easily, and he gave me the collection of DNA that I needed for- to expand or to help expand this collection of promoters. And they have been brought into order and I hope that that has set the scene for a possible- for functional testing- this well organised group of MHC2 promoters and perhaps the TH1/TH2 theory will survive or perhaps it won't, we'll see.
					
						I mentioned that- how much I am indebted to Jan Klein, for the material that he has just provided and I want to say a word about Jan Klein himself because that takes me back to my Prague connection. I have mentioned that Milan Hasek was a meteoric figure in science in Prague and I think responsible for holding the fort for decent science in the Czech Academy of Sciences, through his position in the Czech Academy of Sciences, in the dark years of Prague. The Velvet Revolution took place in 1968 and at that time, some Czech scientists who had been abroad stayed abroad, some of them stayed in Prague. Milan Hasek was uncertain about what to do, I remember him- I very well remember him sitting in our kitchen in Mill Hill- National Institute- where we lived near the National Institute of Medical Research, and we spent an afternoon, Lorna and I, talking with Milan about his plans, and he- we, of course, said to him if he wanted to stay in the West, in Britain or America, it would be easy for him to find a position in which he could go on working, but we both urged him to go back to- to Prague. Well what were our motives? I don't think that only we were thinking about his well-being at all, I think we were thinking about the well-being of science and the well-being of personal, intellectual endeavour in a totalitarian- under a totalitarian regime. Just a- a little cross mention here- during my time in Prague the most sympathetic character- well, Milan was a very sympathetic character in his own way but he was a big boss then, he had other things to do. The most sympathetic person was Miroslav Holub, who is well known now in the West as a poet, less well known as an immunologist, but he was working for Milan or in Milan's section, and we became good friends, and it became clear to me that his- he was just as interested in poetry as he was in science. Very unusual, I didn't- never met anybody else with those interests, and I am very proud of having become a friend of his there. Maybe the best time I ever had in Czechoslovakia was going on a holiday with him and his girlfriend through the Nízke Tatry, the Low Tatra Mountains, where you could walk for days through the fields of- with black fruit growing in them and one's trousers became stained purple from the bilberries. Anyway, Milan's being- sorry, Miroslav was going on about the realities of totalitarian life, and his girlfriend who was no more sympathetic to the regime than he was, but kept telling him, reminding him, that there were positive parts of the communist regime in Prague, and of course there were. If only the Russians had kept their noses out, Czechoslovakia would have had a left wing, or might have had, a decent left wing government in which all good things could happen. Anyway, in 1968 that looked like a real possibility under Dubcek. The Russian presence diminished, but then the Warsaw tanks moved in and crushed the Velvet Revolution, so Milan- I don't think it was- I don't think it was our fault that he went back- but he did go back and within a few years he was miserable and he was drinking and eventually he drank himself to death. But others stayed out, Juraj Ivani and his wife Leda, who had very positive scientific careers in Britain- they've done- they made very useful contributions to the development of immunology in Britain. And I think they would all agree that the top of the heap was Jan Klein, who moved to America, first to Michigan where he collected his wild mice, and then to other places in America. And then, too, he was invited back to Europe to be Scientific Director of a Max Planck Institute in Täbingen Abteilung Immunogenetik. Very successful that has been too in sorting out the mouse MHC properly, and in a way the best relic for me in my Prague connection is to be a friend of Jan Klein's and just in the last few years he has turned up trumps through- with his wild mice MHC genes.
					
						The work in the 1970s in two fields, not unrelated but somewhat distinct, and those are the T-cell receptor, long referred to in those days as IGT or sometimes IGX, and thought to be related to the immunoglobulins, and that led a number of groups up the garden path and they got that wrong. And I certainly thought it the most- the best guess would be that the T-cell receptor would turn out to be something like immunoglobulin. I did have a reservation about that, I think, all the way along- I hope I am not reading retrospectively in my favour- which was the- the earlier work, the Benacerraf gel work that I mentioned, which showed that T-cells- the structures which T-cells recognise are very different from the structures which antibodies recognise. And if that is true then it makes it that much less likely that the two kinds of molecule are the same or very closely related, but certainly in the- in that period, in the 1970s, many people thought that the isotypes, the immunoglobulin isotypes, which were just being- being worked out at the time so that it wasn't that there was one antibody gene, there was a string of antibody genes running along one particular chromosome, that that string would simply be lengthened and somewhere further along the same chromosome, the same area, a T-cell receptor would turn up. And that just turned out to be wrong and one can ask why so many good labs got it wrong, and that is an interesting question, and perhaps that's worth discussing. And I've just- but before doing so, I'd like to mention the second area which I think is distinct, which is suppression. The work on suppressor factors and on contra-suppression, Gershon's term, got things so unrepeatable and so badly wrong that I think that work is wholly discredited. But again we can ask why so many people were misled, and I think, I do think that is worth discussing. Let me mention one piece of backlash, a personal backlash so to speak. I wrote a paper, maybe with Katya Simon, I don't remember who the co-author was, in- published probably on- sometime into the early 1980s, or mid 1980s- which was about suppression in the context which I have mentioned of mediated by a particular MHC alleles, and I got a review back from the Journal saying- this is both very flattering, it's almost unrepeatable because it is so flattering, but it shows the tenor of the time, it said- it's intolerable that people should be writing papers about suppressor cells because they don't exist, The- however I think we should publish this paper because it is so clearly written. And that- that was the tenor of the time. So why did things go so badly wrong? And how could- how can they be prevented from going so badly wrong in the future? I think it has something to do with labs growing in size but without their responsibility being made clear. I think that the- you could well argue that the mistakes made about suppression in the Benacerraf lab, and possibly by Mark- probably by Mark Feldman in my own lab, were instances where the work was credited and because people thought that the senior people concerned, Benacerraf and in University College, myself, were directly responsible for the work, and I think that was amply justified in the case of Benacerraf lab because he did put his name on those papers, although I honestly don't think that he- I don't think he should have done. I think that he did not look at the data carefully and didn't ask about the controls, and all this and all that. And I didn't put my name on it, but nevertheless I am pretty sure that those- that work gained credibility because it was- because it came from places where work was trusted. And once that starts happening, it spreads. If it- if work gains credibility because it comes from a credible centre, then less- other groups with a- without much of a track record come jumping in and work which would seem confirmatory gets published.
					
						It is hard to think of another field where there, in a relatively short time, has been such major dead ends with so many senior people going down them. Is there something about-Is that really true? I don't know, I don't know. What are the other great subjects of the day, for example, the advances in cosmology? I have the impression there that when I listen to, you know, all the television programmes on progress in cosmology- wonderful subject for television because you have all these computer models of the universe- it's- I think you get the feeling that in, let's say the 1980s, there was a view taken about the universe, for example, was it expanding or was it in steady state, and for a time it looked as though the steady state people were absolutely ruling the roost. And then, a few years later, after the principal exponent had died- of the steady state universe, the big bang came in with a big bang and those older theories were discredited. Is that so different from what happened in immunology?
					
						If an individual who is- has the mutation damaging the Fox P3 transcription factor, those individuals come out with multiple auto immunity, so that is very strong confirmation that these suppressor factors are real and do play a role in auto immunity. Although I should add, in the way that one always does in immunology, that does not mean that other mechanisms aren't also very important in preventing auto immunity and I have no doubt in my own mind that the most important factors are to do with deletion in the thymus and also deletion in the periphery. And there again there's a human disease which bears that out when the gene which regulates the AIRE gene, which regulates expression in the thymus, mutates in man. You get the same- not exactly the same, but you again, you get a lot of diverse auto immunities showing up. Yes, so why, why does- have we- when, when suppressor factors were thrown out, should we have been more careful at that time in recognising the existence of suppressor cells? Well, that- I think that has partly to do with TH1/TH2 balance because at the- at the moment suppressor cells fell out of fashion, they were replaced by the TH1/TH2 polarisation which certainly does have suppressing effects. And I think a lot of people- I for one, certainly- kind of hoped that at that point that was the end of the question of suppressor cells. Little did I realise then how- that I was totally wrong, there was this other whole group of suppressor cells. Just how important those T-regs are in the day-to-day regulation of the immune system and how they will rate up in the end compared with TH1/TH2 polarisation and the older deletion mechanisms, deletion- at present, nobody knows. I'm- I believe fairly confidently that the immune system will encompass all those different regulatory activities.
					
						Let's talk about the role of model building, mathematical models, in immunology. Certainly it isn't the first area of immunology you would choose to say has become deeply indebted to model building. I am sure that model building matters, has mattered much more in ecology, epidemiology, questions of evolution, which as I understand it- can now- you really can't discuss them, these matters, without taking account of the models so the whole science system is based like that. And I certainly remember sometime, probably I think in the late 1980s, Robert May and another bloke whose name slips my mind, sitting in my office in University College and asking my opinion about whether they should put a substantial amount of their effort into the immune system and I think I dissuaded them, and over- over the years there have been other occasions when I have heard model builders being discouraged by the experimentalists. A more recent example is discussing with a couple of model builders of my- two friends of mine, when I was in the National Institute- in- in- sorry, National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, these model builders coming on, and I said well, if you want to talk about the real problems in model building go and talk to Ron Germain, and they came back from Ron Germain very discouraged. Ron Germain said to them- immunology is far too- the immune system is far too difficult for you, I advise you to turn your attention to drosophila development. I strongly suspect that drosophila development- that was a- that wasn't a positive, it was a negative suggestion- is just as difficult as the immune system to systematise in the way that it would repay model building. So, have there been real achievements in model building? I think at this stage one has to say no. People have built models. Franco Celada for example, collaborated with a distinguished scientist, now dead, who was in the IBM theoretical- theoretical section, famous- what's his name? Thomas- who's the IBM, the big shot in IBM, Thomas something Institute anyway in- over in New Jersey, from New York. And they built an automaton model which you could certainly fiddle around with. And I think they could justly claim that experimentalists could test out their ideas rather quickly to see if they were even feasible, in their model. And in particular they had one, well, I thought rather spectacular achievement- and they were certainly very pleased with themselves- in predicting correctly, retrospectively predicting, the number of MHC genes which they said in man should be- I think I remember- between four and six in class two, and I think it's, it is actually six of which a couple are pretty inactive, so it's- the four to six estimate was pretty good for- for their model. I don't think that their models had actually had much impact. I do believe that the models are getting better, rapidly, and that they're more easily manipulated. And I do believe that as the cytokine interactions become better understood and also some of the other molecular interactions within the immune system, particularly adhesion molecules, that modelling will become more important. So, in short, promising but not yet proven.
					
						The big gap is therapy, isn't it? Anything from removing the barrier to organ transplantation, cell transplantation, through to making, allowing free transplantation of stem cells, overcoming- overcoming the old homographed reaction as it used to be called; science-based treatment of auto immune disease rather than empirical treatments. The real scientific basis for the therapy of auto immune disease I think isn't there but is on the way. Allergy, again, a somewhat neglected field, badly needs to be put on to, I think on to a scientific basis. So I certainly don't think that we're all the way there. Will there be really major developments? I think, I guess that there will be, I think for example, you can ask about suppressor cells. Okay, there's one- there's one transcription factor which seems to be enormously important, we know nothing about its downstream activity. That's bound to be relevant to therapy I would have thought, and bound to be relevant to our understand of the way the immune system works. And I think, of course I think that the field that I am particularly interested in, which is non-coding DNA, regulatory DNA, is- it's a fantastic field, there is an enormous amount of miscellaneous information, it's absolutely not generalisable or subject to general laws. Nobody knows how to predict transcription factor binding sites accurately yet, there's so much sliding on DNA and so much uncertainty about the exact nature of transcription factor binding sites. And certainly the assembly of the enhanceosome the whole complex of transcription factors and other proteins which bind to them, the assembly of that lump, critical lump which contacts polymerase II and starts transcription, you can write about. The great text book of- current text book of molecular cell biology does write about it at some length but there is no hint in that of a- in that presentation, of a general theory of a kind which could be used for example in the design of drugs of intervention. At this moment it is thought that the- the statins may act, at least in part, by targeting one particular enhanceosome of the Class 2 transactivator. It is uncertain whether that, how important that is in vivo, and it's most certainly an important- and unknown how important that is in understanding the beneficial- the widespread beneficial effects of statins. So I think that's a whole area which will be- in 500 years we will know much more about, and I bet we will know more about it within five years.
					
						If I wanted to look for new cells now, and there are plenty of people who are looking for new cells, I would look at it in a much more specialised way, I would look for it in some of the epithelia and particularly in association with epithelia, where there's already hints of something interesting going on. For example, the nasal epithelium which in animals, if you contact it, it seems to be a brilliant way of generating suppression- and just how that operates is completely. But I think we would love- like to know more about that- that epithelium, but we would also like to know about the lungs, we'd like to know about the gut, inflammatory bowel disease. I think there's a lot more there- to come there. And in the course of that I think we'll find, we will find unique populations of cells. How unique they will be nobody knows, because after all we don't really know whether these famous T-regs which people are talking about just now, really how distinct they are from cells which are cytokine polarised to make IL-10. There's- there's a lot of confusion about them.
					
						Personal motivations change, don't they, they change- I find they change even almost in a few minutes conversation with somebody, a person with real insight. You can see a relationship between a medical problem and a problem in biochemistry or genetics which you sort of may have been partly aware of, but these ideas sort of crystallise as you go along. That's a very wishy-washy answer, isn't it, and I don't think I can really- but I don't think I do have a clear answer to that.Do you think you moved more towards medical when you moved to Germany and in the later part of your scientific life, is that a sequence you recognise?Yes, well I think I can say I moved in a medical direction almost when I left Edinburgh. I started- you see, my- my- I think my own life has been one of moving in medical direction. Funny, I remember talking to my brother, Murdoch, just when I was leaving Edinburgh when I'd decided to go to the National Institute of Medical Research and he tried to dissuade me, and I remember him saying, he said if you go there you will leave science and you will become a servant of medical research- and I think he was right, and something's lost and something is gained when one transits like that.
					
						I do suppose that having at least one mammalian genome is well worthwhile. I think having the human genome was an enormously expensive enterprise involving big science and I just don't know anybody who isn't directly or indirectly benefiting from it, and what's more I think that the benefits are growing, mainly because the new browsers are so much better than the old ones, I think that anybody who has used Ensembl feels gratitude to the people who went to the trouble of building it. What about the- the issue of big science? To some extent that's an issue between universities, which are- historically and still- places with small science, at least in a British university. Very hard to build a large group, and by a large group I mean more than, let's say, eight or ten people. But even eight or ten people working at the same problem, historically, is a large number and it has grown over the years, and that compares with the institutes of biomedical research which assemble hundreds of scientists. Now, I am sure that people defending those institutes will say, well, if they still function in practice as small teams, and the fact that they are tucked under the same roof just makes it easier to collaborate and access other people's equipment, and more importantly to access other people's ideas. I don't buy that argument entirely. I think that biological research deeply needs university groups. It needs them to keep up the flow of scientists, young scientists, into what is financially a very unattractive profession. The example of an inspiring university teacher still exists and I think that the university teacher is still the great recruiting sergeant for science, for biology, but I am sure for the other sciences as well. So I would- I would hate to see British science turned out- developing into the- what is often called the Soviet model, where the research is all done in scientific centres and the universities are left as pure teaching institutions. I would- I would be very sorry to see that, and as far as I personally am concerned, all the- my traditions in my family, which I went on about earlier argue against that- so I stand, side shoulder to shoulder with my ancestors in defence of the universities. And there is no doubt that there is- I have also sat on many funding committees and there is always a push for science to relocate itself away from universities into research institutes because, when you measure them side by side, you know, person to person, research institutes come out better. But that's a different- somehow it's a different question.
					
						I think- I think in science you can count on making a career now if you're- if you're competent. When I was in Oxford, an old don in Christ Church said to me, that's all right, you can go on in science but nobody without a private income should do so. That's not the case any more.There's a lot more pressure on young people. Do you not think it is harder for young people starting in their careers in science to see their way ahead?I don't quite see why. Why is it more difficult now than it was then? Are you thinking that- is one thinking that science is- requires resources, now requires resources which are so large that a young recruit can't be entrusted with the- free access to the resources which are needed now? I don't see that, I've been- in the laboratory which I have been working for the past few years and run by Järgen Roes, there's a hell of a lot of problems in Järgen Roes lab which he would be the first person to recognise but I have seen competent young people coming in and building things for themselves, building their piece of science for themselves, and I think that's the most charming and the most- that's the wave of the future, in a way that setting up a big group of researchers can't do.So you don't see a problem in the future of attracting our best young people into science?Well, fundamentally I don't, because you know, unless the whole development, economic development, of the world in which we live changes radically, I mean we may all get frozen in the next ice age or we may get boiled in the next climate- during the course of the next climate wave or Western Europe may stop having children altogether and if we have to survive at all in Western Europe we would have to do it with immigrants. There are problems in that direction that I think that really the direction of change- we are getting richer, wealthier, and the wealthier society is, the more it can spend on cultural activity in the larger sense. And cultural activity without science is inconceivable, it's an integral part of- of the culture of the developed world.
					
						British science has always been very close to American science but how do chaps like Jan Klein, coming out of Prague which was- was a scientific centre in its own way though on a much smaller scale than anything in England, or any of larger of the institutions in Britain, he can settle in America completely, with complete ease, and I think within a year or two he'll be able to move back to Eastern Europe if that- probably getting a bit old to do that now- but his children as they grow up in America will be able to move back to Prague, and I hope that he is making sure that his children learn Czech.It has been said that in America they are less- they put less value in ideas and are more interested in people who show something, you know, prove an idea is right or wrong. Europe puts more value in ideas.Yes, well there are- there is a lot of after dinner conversation of that sort, isn't there. I remember- when I went to Harvard, I remember the senior- a senior figure in the bio labs telling me, oh, he did admire British science because it was like using a rifle, people sighted carefully and then they shot the bullet right into the heart of the matter. I thought that was- the Americans are remarkably pro-European. Considering that their investment is so much bigger, I think they are very kind, actually very kind about Europe and maybe about Britain in particular, because they are after all mostly English in America aren't they, or they were mostly English, it's an English offshoot culturally and no, I don't think there are big differences, are there? I think there are enormous differences within America, that's another problem in saying it all, can't talk about 'the Americans'. The whole atmosphere of science in Harvard is different from the atmosphere in the other universities, big mid-Western universities. Big mid-Western universities are really expected to work hard and start early in the morning in a way that you're not necessarily expected in Harvard and you are also not expected to have such a uniquely high opinion of your own colleagues.
					
						I am not sure that public opinion has changed very much. I think vivisection has been a question that the educated public have wondered about and the less educated public has developed strong feelings about, really for a very long time, I think right over the last century. The big change as I see it in the last few years, is that animal experimentation is now much more tightly regulated than it used to be and that has good aspects and bad aspects. The good aspects obviously are that certain kinds of experimentation, certain examples of experimentation are, we hope, more or less excluded now. The rabbit which recovers from its anaesthetic in the middle of the operation as the operation proceeds, I hope that that is no longer there, and I actually believe that it isn't there, but I don't believe that that ever really was a very big problem in the past. I think some of the regulation is quite misplaced. To take one example, I think it's hard to- for me to imagine any reasonable procedure as they say, form of injection or treatment of a mouse which is- makes the mouse more miserable, and keeping a mouse by itself in a cage- mice are colonial animals and they- they like to live in groups, and I think the- some of the regulation which even limits the number of animals which could be kept together is, again, quite misplaced. Mice, if you look at mice in a transparent cage, you have four mice, they don't sit in the four corners they sit in one corner, in tactile relationship with one another and there is every reason for thinking that's what they like. So I am afraid that much of the regulation- not much of the regulation, but an alarming slice of the regulation- is misconceived. I can understand why it has been put in place, it has been put in place in response to changing public opinion.Now I ought to add that, I must add that the agitators in the Animal Liberation Movement are a real pain and they are a real pain not because, not so much because of the threat that they pose to- from the point of view of society they are a threat not so much because they make hell of the lives of some individual scientists or because they make safety testing as carried out in the Huntingdon Laboratories very difficult and really force it to go- sometimes to move abroad to less regulated climates where the desirable regulation is not implemented so I think there are some very bad things there; but it is much more to do with cruelty to their fellow human beings. In my opinion, those who demand animal liberation should- should not only not take modern medicine themselves, they should not benefit from modern medicine themselves, but they should be persuading their fathers and mothers and uncles and aunts to die early and gracefully rather than benefit from medicine.
					
						I profoundly believe that humans come first and animals come second and that-Why do you believe that?I just do. I think that's a part of being a human being. But if you were a mouse you would think mice come first.Well I think mice aren't clever enough to think about it in that way. But it isn't, we have a moral-No. Also, from what I know about mice, they aren't as nice to one another as humans are. I think altruism is relatively rare, is a less important factor in animals than it is in man, even in the higher apes I think that's true.There are some places one has question about people being nice to other people.Oh, God, yes, I mean that's also true that I've never heard of a mouse holocaust.
					
						I think fraud is a problem, it's not a major problem it's a minor problem, but it's particularly bad because it's- because of its discrediting effect- if one fraud discredits a far wider area than it damages directly, no doubt about that. I'm doubtful about the need for enhanced regulation or scrutiny in science from that particular angle, because the history of science shows that it's- it is self-correcting. You know, if you take the errors which we have been discussing, the errors in the IGT and the errors of suppressor factors, there may even have been an element of fraud there, but science was quite rapidly self-correcting there over the course of five years, perhaps ten years. I think the errors were corrected and perhaps over-corrected as we discussed, so I think self-correction is major. I think the, of course, that peer review is a very powerful part of that correcting element, editorial- to have good editors working on journals I think is- is very important. We could discuss, if you like, the new player in that area, which is public access, publications- that's a new factor, but in the meanwhile, as it stands, I think a good editor can do a lot more about fraud than the reviewing system does. So I think- I think external review, you'd have to be very cautious about bringing in more regulation in that direction. In general, we don't want regulation which is unnecessary. But isn't it a problem that there is not much incentive to correct something that is error and fraud from one's own laboratory because who is going to do it? Therefore the simple thing to do is just move on, and it's not that common that things that are known to be wrong are actually retracted, they usually stay in the literature, so is that a problem?That's true. Well, it's only partly true. I think things that are known to be wrong and known, especially when they are known outside the group which is doing them, I think they get corrected fairly quickly. I think things which are wrong but debatable, which turn out to be wrong and have a long area of being debatable, I think there isn't much you can do about that, is there? If science cut off all its dubious bits, it would be losing too many of the green shoots.How do you feel about scientists investigating other scientists where fraud has been suspected? Is it like the police investigating the police?Gets quite close to it. And because it is such a distasteful job it may be that career fraud police are part of the future of science. I certainly hope that they're not. They are in America on a rather small scale, almost amateur scale you could say, in America, but they do exist. I don't think they exist in Europe. The Max Planck Gesellschaft was in, you and I were- sorry about that- were on the periphery of that and we saw how they coped, and with every case of fraud they learn a bit more about how to be prepared for it and what to do.
					
No useful purpose at all was served by all the hoohah which went on. Baltimore suffered inappropriately. He didn't suffer all that badly anyway, but if he did suffer from- and that was a case where it was a sort of the aftermath, wasn't it, part of the aftermath of Järgen's network, that was a kind of prediction the network made which was- had been verified it was thought in Rajewsky lab, and then the person concerned moved to America and it all came into- she continued the work there in Baltimore's lab, and Baltimore, in the American style, put his name on the paper. And one has to remember, you now, in his- in defence of Baltimore, it's very easy for a European to say oh, big mistake, he should not have put his name on the paper, but probably the whole funding, which is so important in- certainly for him in running a big laboratory, made it almost, made it impossible for him not to put his name on the paper. If he didn't have his name on the paper he wouldn't get credit for it the next time his grant turned up for evaluation, so I'm pretty sympathetic to Baltimore in that case. I am not convinced that there wasn't something there, there might have been something there, but I am certainly not convinced that there was fraud.
[Q] How would you feel about sitting on a committee to evaluate the possibility of fraud among one of your colleagues?
Well, I would say these days I am far too old for that, and ten years ago I would have tried like anything to shuffle out of it, and I would have said that there are senior people in my group, among my friends, who seem to be more interested in fraud than I am and that they should do the job.

						Is the network dead? No, I doubt it. I think that there is- are network effects, particularly in very young mice, in baby mice, which have been quite carefully described and where immunoglobulins have been put in, and they constantly put in immunoglobulin- become evident- and somehow the immune system recognises that. Whether it matters- if network- if the idiotypic network matters at all, I suspect that it matters mainly or perhaps exclusively in establishment of the early repertoire, the range of antibodies which the body makes, the immune system makes, and it's fairly unimportant in the context of disease, unless the structure of the repertoire is impacting seriously on disease susceptibility, which it may do. I wouldn't say more than that.
					
						At first sight, open access publishing is very attractive and the money paid out by Reed Elsevier to its shareholders is very unattractive, that's a given. But I am prepared to believe, I am ready to believe that publishers do a lot more than earn money for their shareholders. I don't question that they do it- whatever they do they do it with shareholders' interests somehow at heart, but they have to find clever and honest editors with the special, the admirable character- characteristics which a good editor has in the ability to see something which is really worthwhile, even when referees are doubtful- there's a lot to being a good- good editor and I've seen- I know enough about editing journals I think now, to know that those individuals- their talents should be respected. Now, it seems to me that a good editor is needed every bit as much in public, in public open access journalism as it is in capitalist journalism and that paying editors is- doesn't come cheap, money is needed for that, and so public access will have to demand high fees and if- if somehow or other through the magic of capitalism those fees are paid by shareholders rather than by us as scientists, so much the better. So I'm a bit muddled about the whole thing, I'm not a convert to it, to open access, because I think the job has to be done and has to be paid for, and how it is paid for, I'm less certain.But the principle that primary research should be freely available to everybody as an advantage to science, to scientists, to the funders of science. If you started from that, would you agree with- that that's a goal worthy of trying to get to and trying to figure out how to get there.That's a goal, yes, certainly, certainly. But, to be honest- I think that that's an important principle- I would rate it less important than having competent editing. I think that's the most important thing because I think for all that one might think about the importance of referees, what the editor does is crucially important in evaluating science and that's if there's any danger of that being imperilled by open access publishing, then I would go for good editing.
					
						I'm not sure that I have- that I have much of a style, I don't particularly believe in other people's styles either. I think you can see people going off the rails in different directions, and when they go off the rails, that is clearly identifiable, but so long as the ship is sailing along in a reasonably- reasonable fashion, I am not so sure about style. I can tell you what I have been told by perceptive American women, and they say we quite like you, they say, because you have your own style and that style is what we think the way a European aristocrat behaves, that they can do and say anything they like without having to think about the consequences. The rest of us aren't like that and we do have to think about the consequences, so they say good luck to you, but you are different. I don't buy that, I mean who on earth would buy that about themselves anyway? I am not a European aristocrat, I do have to think about the consequences all the time. It's possible, that like some people wear bow ties, I wear an attitude of- I don't know what to say- nonchalance? No, that's the wrong- wrong word, but of less cares about what other people think and what other people do, but I think- I don't think it's more than skin deep. I hope it's not more than skin deep too, for I think it's- I don't want to be- to be different in that way.
					
						I love sharing ideas. I think the biggest treat in science is to share an idea and that's not something which disappears with age, I get- it grows with age I think, actually. I love talking to a young scientist and say, well, as a matter of fact I have read your last paper quite carefully and doesn't that suggest this or that, and they then begin to disclose further aims. So I think a lot of sharing is not really to do with- with high principles, it's more to do with person-to-person interactions and what you get pleasure out of- and the biggest pleasure for my- me is interacting with other scientists, I love that. Of course I love my wife and I love my children and I love my grandchildren and all that, but it still is not quite at the same level as being able to discuss a new idea with one of our- with one of my mates.Have you ever been hurt by giving away an idea or a reagent or-No, no, no, and I don't believe people who say that they have been. Time and time again people have said well, you know I don't want to talk about that because it is somehow in the pipeline, and then you wheedle out of them what they're going on about, and then it turns out that the competition which they fear is- it is competition in a way- but they are all- people very seldom have exactly the same idea about what to do, I think.Most people tend to be a little concerned about being scooped- have you ever been concerned?I don't think so, no. I honestly don't think- well I don't know, maybe I have or maybe I suppressed it, but what I am sure about is that the- the- the sadness of being scooped is not commensurate at all with the pleasure of intellectual intercourse.
					
						Do you think that there is ever a conflict between the mentor and the student in post-doc in the sense that you want to set the student in post-doc free to make their own discoveries but the mentor has to get their grants, as you've just said, and therefore they need a project to move along lines proposed in a grant?Yes, I think there is- I think that- that sort of constructive tension is inescapable. It is to do with, as you say, with resources, finding resources. A student who doesn't notice that and isn't aware of that and doesn't make allowances for that, is a second-rate student. Any competent student knows about those problems and makes allowances, I think.What about the mentor giving the student freedom to make their own discoveries?Well, there is a balance, I absolutely agree, and there- that balance, no doubt like all balances, there's a sort of perfect equilibrium, and in real life we aren't- we aren't at that point. Perhaps sometimes students are left on their own too much, perhaps sometimes they- they're are pushed too hard. Well, what can I say about myself?I think it's clear that from the discussion which I have been having, that I take a fairly rosy view of my own life, I don't feel now that, you know, that there was a black period when I was lost for something to do or our resources just weren't there to do something that I wanted to do passionately, or I'd been let down by people, I just- I don't have that. And I don't actually think that's got much to do with the realities of my life, it's certainly got a lot to do with, you know, what sort of person you are, some people are a bit more pessimistic than others and sometimes with very good reason. So I can't recall an occasion in my own life where I think a student has been badly mistreated. Funny, working with my very good friend Järgen Roes, I observed students being very badly treated, and I cringe inside, but I think that sometimes the things which make me cringe I realise a week or two later, that's a matter of style, not of reality.Do you think you can motivate a student or post-doc that's not internally motivated?No, I don't think so. I'm just wondering what kind of motivation they could be plied with- wine, women, song? None of them seem quite- quite the right thing. Money? No.
					
						I used to be rather, you know, sort of ultra democratic and rather against honours and prizes and things, but I now think that they're terrific. The reason that they're terrific is that the public and the media and perhaps ordinary people too, other people too- just citizens in their every day life, need heroes, they need figures- or heroines- figures who they can admire and respect and whose opinions they'll listen to. And I think that the- the various honour systems, from Nobel Prize down, serves to identify a group of people who are to be trusted and relied on and so on and so forth and whose opinions are worth hearing and are expected to respond to the press. So I think they serve a useful purpose.
					
[Q] The scientific enterprise is probably a hundred times larger now than it was when you started, but the number of people admitted to, for example, the Royal Society, is not very different.
Yes. I think that's a shame. I have no doubt at all that the room in which we're sitting which happens to be in the Royal Society, that the corridors of the Royal Society are emptier than they should be, far emptier than they should be. The fact that they are so empty makes a disproportionately large number of people pretty unhappy, so I think that- I am strongly in favour of that. I don't think the Royal Society, by the way, is unique, I think that the Brandenburg Academy of Sciences in Berlin could well expand. There are too many- it too is too empty.

						What are the key qualities of a scientist? I think one could put that question in a different way, and say if you have ten scientists in the room, ten scientists, you know, like me, towards the end of their careers, and you ask them what makes a good scientist, what are the qualities needed, would they be very different from one another? And I think not. I think I've sat on enough appointments committees in enough different countries to- to believe that there is a kind of universal currency in science quality which doesn't vary very much from person to person or place to place. So what are the things which are needed? Well, I mentioned 'Vision' as in the German connotation, vision, I think that's perhaps the most important quality and it is closely, obviously closely allied to imagination, but it must- it's also tempered with realism, a vision which is somehow out of focus or in the wrong direction, is no use to anybody, it has got to- there's got to be a perception of what has been done before. I think, I seem to remember a long, long time ago I wrote- read a book or looked at a book, written I think by an Australian author, in which it said how to do science. It started with, you know, you have to read up everything which has been done before, and I don't think that at all, I think you have to pick an intellectual thread running through what has been done before and try to identify what's missing. I think that's terribly important. Do I have anything original to say on this subject of what makes a good scientist? I think not.Is there anything original to say about anything?Well, there are- yes. If you are too much of a Pollyanna, which perhaps I am, you- you- you- I agree, that there's- I would like to say something deep about good qualities.
					
						You are part of a dynasty of a pretty unusually deep family tradition in science that one suspects may not go on forever. What gives rise to a dynasty, how much do you think is genetic, how much do you think is environment?I think- I know that the question of genes or environment is totally unanswerable in that context. People discuss- it's more often discussed in the context of- I think of musicians or mathematicians where somehow the quality of work seems more kind of separated from the rest of humanity, and I suppose rather reluctantly, I think, that the genetic component of being a great musician or being a great mathematician may be larger than it is in the biological sciences. In the biological sciences, I think environment is very important. I think to have had past- the previous generation committed to science and there as an example is tremendous, and I am extremely sceptical about any genetic component. I think- I think that there are probably other things besides- besides mathematics and music where genetics is important but I don't really know what they are.So there are those musicians and artists and so on who would say, you know, you scientists aren't really being imaginative because all you are doing is kind of scraping and discovering what is already there, we are the creatives because we are creating what wasn't there before. Do you feel they have a point?Not much of a point, no. It seems just a different sort of creativity that they have. It's almost a question about language, that, really, isn't it because what do you mean by creativity? And of course there is a sense in which you could use the term to describe what mathematicians or musicians do and experimentalists don't do, and you are welcome to use the term in that way, but I- I do think that that's more a linguistic question than a real one.
					
						Well I have watched lots of- a fair number of- of young scientists setting out and I don't think it's very different. I think the nose-to-the-grindstone is pretty important. If anything is neglected in the present younger generation, they're a little bit easy on- on the nose-to-the-grindstone perhaps. I think that among the graduate students I see at work I do detect signs of wanting to take time off at the weekend or some sort of nonsense like that, but they'll grow out of it, I suppose. Taking a weekend off- my goodness me.But if you were starting a career in science now, would you be an immunologist?Oh. In the state that immunology is in at present? I might be. I might be. I don't- I don't know what I'd be actually. I think immunology is still pretty attractive. But I think other things- I think neuroscience is enormously attractive, I think the genome has thrown up challenges which have to be met, will be met- I think being part of that effort will be tremendous fun. The intro- the application of mathematical modelling I think is- is a great area. No, I could be- what you are really asking is what are- what are the areas and attractions to young scientists now?Yeah.I think there are many- developmental biology. Indeed I find it a little hard to think of areas which are so boring that there will be- I would try to dissuade anybody from going into them, you know. People used to say well, you know, systematics is so boring, but systematics has been changed so much by DNA that it's not boring any more.
					
						I think the big challenge is climate and climate change, and it's a challenge so enormous that I get really pissed off with- when the public thinks that it's a problem with the same dimensions as GM food, for example. I happen to bump into Michael Meacher every now and then, who used to be the great environmentalist minister, because his lovely daughter is married to a nephew of mine. I sometimes see him and we have a word about it. And I used to think what is Michael- what are you doing going on about GM food, so it is with great relief that I see he is now writing in The Guardian about climate change. That's a real problem which GM food absolutely isn't.So what's going to solve this problem?Climate change?Yeah.I am no expert on the subject. I suppose that the changes that are being contemplated are in the right direction. I think it's enormously difficult- I am sympathetic with the current American government to the extent of believing that counter measures of energy conservation and reducing CO2 emissions, are themselves a threat in the short term demands. There maybe a threat to long term progress in those areas because CO2 emissions and such problems, the control waste disposal, are matters where- which can be very, very expensive and the expense may be holding up the development of the world economy to a level where it can cope with- equably over the whole globe, with climate change. So I think there is an economic balance to be struck there between expensive measures which may be highly detrimental to a developed economy, and things which are affordable within the scope of- I am not saying anything which hasn't been said in newspapers a hundred times and with greater authority than I can offer.But you are not optimistic that this can all be done in time to avoid catastrophe?Well, I don't see any alternative to trying to strike- strike the right balance. Is there an alternative?No.Right.It says that if you have the majority of the people on the planet uninformed and uneducated you are going to be asking a lot of them.Absolutely.And-And I think good science has a role to play in that. It's not the- I don't believe that science has as much to offer- for example, in Indian education, some Indians think- I've heard Professor Bhargava arguing that the most important thing for science, for India, is an understanding of science and I've heard the leading UNDP economist for the Middle East saying that what the Arab States need above all is research and development. And I can go along with that, I think that's a little bit different from- I think you can put too much value on the need for summer schools which will teach everybody else immunology. I think- I think- I think I don't say that they're a bad idea, I've participated in them, in many of them myself, but I do think that the education of the world is the big problem, actually probably a lot bigger than climate change anyway, but so closely linked to it that it's- it's the same thing.And the role of the scientists in educating the public, do you think we should all be more aggressive in trying to get our message to the public or should there be intermediates?I don't think that's a pressing problem, I mean, I think it's to some extent a problem that's better dealt with by the expositors of science than by the practitioners of science. I think Richard Dawkins or the other popularisers of Darwinian scientists do a very important job and I think they probably do it better than the like of- I'll do my bit and I will do so, I mean you know in the course of next year I have definite plans to get at science teaching, for example, through the new Darwinism Centre at Down House, that I'll- I'll do my bit, that's all I can offer.
					